ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis has been recast to reflect the Strategic Realignment described in this Form 10-K and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We connect people and places with technology that reimagines the business of travel. We operate our business and present our results through two business segments: (i) Travel Solutions, our global business-to-business travel marketplace for travel suppliers and travel buyers, including a broad portfolio of software technology products and solutions for airlines, and (ii) Hospitality Solutions, an extensive suite of leading software solutions for hoteliers. All revenue and expenses previously assigned to the Travel Network and Airline Solutions business segments have been consolidated into a unified revenue and expense structure now reported as the Travel Solutions business segment. There have been no changes to the historical Hospitality Solutions reporting segment.
A significant portion of our revenue is generated through transaction-based fees that we charge to our customers. For Travel Solutions, we generate revenue from our distribution activities through transaction fees for bookings on our GDS, and from our IT solutions through recurring usage-based fees for the use of our SaaS and hosted systems, as well as upfront fees and professional services fees. For Hospitality Solutions, we generate revenue from recurring usage-based fees for the use of our SaaS and hosted systems, as well as upfront fees and professional services fees. Items that are not allocated to our business segments are identified as corporate and primarily include stock-based compensation expense, litigation costs, corporate headcount-related costs and other items that are not identifiable with either of our segments.
Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations
The travel industry continues to be adversely affected by the global health crisis due to COVID-19, as well as by government directives that have been enacted to slow the spread of the virus. In 2020, we experienced significant decreases in transaction-based revenue in our Travel Solutions segment, including increased cancellation activity beyond what was initially estimated, as well as a reduction in SynXis Software and Services revenue in our Hospitality Solutions segment due to a decrease in transaction volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As expected, this pandemic has continued to have a material impact to our consolidated financial results in 2021. Despite the continued negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and global travel volumes, we have seen some gradual improvement in our key volume metrics during 2021 as COVID-19 vaccines have continued to be administered and some travel restrictions have been relaxed. With the increase in volumes, our incentive consideration costs are also increasing significantly compared to the prior year.
The inputs into our judgments and estimates consider the economic implications of COVID-19 on our critical and significant accounting estimates. Our air booking cancellation reserve totaled $18 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Additionally, our provision for expected credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $74 million from the prior year, primarily related to fully reserving for aged balances of certain customers in the prior year and an overall improvement in our forecasted credit losses in the current year given the gradual global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2020, several of our customers filed for bankruptcy protection in various jurisdictions. Due to our creditor position, we do not expect significant recovery for amounts due to us prior to the customer's filing for bankruptcy protection and have fully reserved for any amounts due; however, we continue to provide services and receive timely payment for post-bankruptcy balances due in most cases. See Note 8. Credit Losses. Given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19, including any variants, on transaction volumes in the global travel industry, particularly air travel transaction volumes and future cancellation activity, including from airlines’ insolvency or suspension of service or aircraft groundings, we cannot provide assurance that the assumptions used in the estimates will be accurate and the impacts could be material on our cancellation reserves, credit loss provisions and results of operations.
We believe the ongoing effects of COVID-19 on our operations and global bookings will continue to have a material negative impact on our financial results and liquidity, and this negative impact may continue well beyond the containment of the outbreak. We believe our cash position and the liquidity measures we have taken in 2021 and 2020 will provide additional flexibility as we manage through the global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. See “-Recent Events Impacting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources” and “-Senior Secured Credit Facilities.” As a result, we believe that we have resources to sufficiently fund our liquidity requirements over at least the next twelve months; however, given the magnitude of travel decline and the unknown duration of the COVID-19 impact, we will continue to monitor our liquidity levels and take additional steps should we determine they are necessary.
During 2020, we took several actions with regard to our workforce and compensation programs as both temporary and permanent cost reduction efforts which are impacting our year-over-year results of operations, including: a temporary reduction in base compensation pay for our US-based salaried workforce; a temporary reduction in the cash retainer for members of our Board of Directors; a temporary furlough of approximately one-third of our workforce; the temporary suspension of our 401(k) match program for US-based employees; reductions in third-party contracting, vendor costs and other discretionary spending; an offering of voluntary unpaid time off, voluntary severance and a voluntary early retirement program; and a right-sizing of our global organization through a reduction in force.
On October 28, 2021, we announced that we have entered into an agreement with a third party to sell our suite of flight and crew management and optimization solutions, which represents our AirCentre airline operations portfolio within Travel Solution’s IT Solutions. At closing, we will sell the AirCentre product portfolio, related technology and intellectual property for $392.5 million. Approximately 500 employees are also expected to have the opportunity to transition to the purchaser in connection with the sale. As of December 31, 2021, assets including goodwill of $225 million and liabilities of $37 million associated with the disposition are classified as held for sale on our consolidated balance sheet. The sale is subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals and is expected to close in the first quarter of 2022. In connection with the closing, we expect to enter into a transition services agreement with the purchaser, pursuant to which we will continue to provide certain services and conduct certain operations in connection with the transferred business while it transitions to the purchaser’s system, in return for compensation from the purchaser with respect to these costs. We cannot provide assurance that the sale will occur on these terms or at all.
Factors Affecting our Results
The impacts of COVID-19 on our business as described above are the most significant factors affecting our current results, and they are expected to continue to significantly impact our future results. The following is a discussion of other trends that we believe are additional significant opportunities and challenges currently impacting our business and industry. The discussion also includes management’s assessment of the effects these trends have had and are expected to have on our results of continuing operations. This information is not an exhaustive list of all of the factors that could affect our results and should be read in conjunction with the factors referred to in the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and "-Recent Developments Affecting our Results of Operations" included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Technology transformation and change in mix of technology spend
We expect to further enable our technology transformation with incremental operational and capital expenditure investments in 2022 and continued investment over the next few years which will have a material impact on our financial results. We expect to continue to make significant investments in our re-platforming efforts to open source and cloud-based solutions, as previously disclosed, with the goal of modernizing our architecture, driving efficiency in development and ongoing technology costs, further enhancing the stability and security of our network, and complying with data privacy regulations, and in next-generation retailing capabilities, including NDC and personalized offers, LCCs and CRS revenue generation. In 2022, we expect total capital expenditures to range from $50 million to $90 million. Technology costs include the cost of our technology transformation and may be impacted by inflationary wage impacts in the future.
In addition, our selling, general and administrative costs are expected to remain elevated in the near term due to investments in our internal business systems and processes to allow us to better support our customers as modern retailing strategies advance and new commercial models emerge. Development costs incurred for internal systems are capitalized and included in the expected total capital expenditures above. We also expect elevated costs for risk and security in the near term to help enable us to mitigate cyber risks during the completion of our technology transformation efforts.
We expect to benefit from higher margins beginning in 2025 than would be realized had we not undertaken our technology transformation efforts as we believe the technology transformation will help enable us to avoid capital expenditures that would have otherwise been required and to yield lower cloud infrastructure costs. We believe that continued investment in our technology will help to provide us the necessary framework and infrastructure for a secure and stable architecture for our customers, grow our addressable market, provide new revenue opportunities, reduce costs and will help to improve sales of our software solutions. However, there are various risks associated with our technology transformation efforts, including not achieving the amount of anticipated cost savings, not completing the steps during their current projected time frame, or changing the approach leading to, among other things, additional changes in our mix of technology spend between operating expense and capitalization.
Geographic mix of travel bookings
The revenue recognized by our Travel Solutions business is affected by the mix between domestic and international travel reservation bookings and the related varying rates paid by airline suppliers. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our mix of transactions has shifted such that domestic bookings exceed international bookings, negatively impacting our revenue. The increase in domestic bookings is also partly due to an increase in leisure bookings over business travel. As business travelers have moved to a remote working environment with travel restrictions, leisure travel has increased impacting the domestic and international mix further. Due to our geographic concentration, our results of operations are particularly sensitive to factors affecting North America, which has been accentuated by the impacts of COVID-19. For example, booking fees per transaction in North America have traditionally been lower than those in Europe. As we continue to invest in our technology and expand the travel content and functionality available in our GDS, we anticipate that we will continue to grow global market share. Booking share in the near term, however, could be impacted by the regional mix of travel bookings during recovery from COVID-19. We invest for sustainable share growth, and in certain parts of Asia-Pacific and Latin America, our share may be impacted by travel agency commercial arrangements we have declined to pursue due to credit risk and unfavorable economics. The geographic mix of our Direct Billable Bookings is summarized below:
________________________________________________________________________________________
(1) “Direct Billable Bookings” is the primary metric utilized by Travel Solutions to measure operating performance and includes bookings made through our GDS and through our joint venture partners in cases where we are paid directly by the travel supplier.
Recent insolvencies and the impact of COVID-19 on Travel Solutions customers
In 2020, several Travel Solutions customers filed for bankruptcy but continued to operate. In April 2019, a customer of Travel Solutions, Jet Airways suspended flight operations and is now insolvent which negatively impacted our year-over-year revenue growth in 2019 and 2020. Additionally, given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19 on transaction volumes in the global travel industry, particularly air travel and hotel transaction volumes, including from airlines’ insolvency or suspension of service or aircraft groundings, our provision for expected credit losses increased in 2020 partially due to fully reserving for aged balances related to certain customers and bankruptcy-related reserves. In the future, we may incur additional credit losses if further bankruptcies occur or our customers lack the ability to pay for services performed. Additionally, bankruptcy proceedings may require the renegotiation of contractual terms that may not be favorable. Our revenue has and may continue to be impacted by contracting with our customers, including force majeure provisions and requests to renegotiate the terms of existing agreements prior to their expiration, including providing temporary concessions on contractual minimums. Future revenues may be negatively impacted by, among other things, reduced sales of our software solutions and reduced Passengers Boarded due to delayed or uncertain implementations and insolvencies of airline carriers. See “Risk Factors-Our travel supplier customers may experience financial instability or consolidation, pursue cost reductions, change their distribution model or undergo other changes.”
Increasing travel agency incentive consideration
Travel agency incentive consideration is a large portion of Travel Solutions expenses. The vast majority of incentive consideration is tied to absolute booking volumes based on transactions such as flight segments booked. Incentive consideration, which often increases once a certain volume or percentage of bookings is met, is provided in two ways, according to the terms of the agreement: (i) on a periodic basis over the term of the contract and (ii) in some instances, up front at the inception or modification of contracts, which is capitalized and amortized over the expected life of the contract.
Consideration on a per booking basis declined in 2021 and 2020 as compared to the respective prior years, due to regional mix and increased leisure bookings over business travel. We remain focused on managing incentive consideration and expect growth in the near term. Although incentive rate increases may continue to impact margins, we expect these increases to be offset by growth in Travel Solutions revenue. This expectation is based in part on anticipated increases in international travel, which would favorably impact our revenue rates, along with our continuing to offer value added services and content to travel buyers, such as the Sabre Red Workspace, a SaaS product that provides a simplified interface and enhanced travel agency workflow and productivity tools.
Travel buyers can shift their bookings to or from our Travel Solutions business
Our Travel Solutions business relies on relationships with several large travel buyers, including TMCs and OTAs, to drive a large portion of its revenue. Although our contracts with larger travel agencies often increase the amount of the incentive consideration when the travel agency processes a certain volume or percentage of its bookings through our GDS, travel buyers are not contractually required to book exclusively through our GDS during the contract term. Travel buyers may shift bookings to other distribution intermediaries for many reasons, including to avoid becoming overly dependent on a single source of travel content and increase their bargaining power with the GDS providers. For example, certain travel agencies have adopted a dual GDS provider strategy and shifted a sizeable portion of their business from our GDS to a competitor GDS, while other agencies have shifted a sizable portion their business to our GDS. Additionally, the impact of COVID-19 on travel buyers has caused them, and may continue to cause them, to select the GDS with the most favorable terms or contractual commitment. Our distribution revenue in 2021 and in future periods has been, and is expected to be impacted by a certain OTA notifying us of their intent to shift a significant portion of its North America volumes to a competitor. We began to see the impacts of this shift in the third quarter of 2021 and expect a decline in our volumes partially offset by an increase in our rate going forward.
Increasing importance of LCC/hybrids
LCC/hybrids have become a significant segment of the air travel market, stimulating demand for air travel through low fares. LCC/hybrids have traditionally relied on direct distribution for the majority of their bookings. However, as these LCC/hybrids are evolving, many are increasing their distribution through indirect channels to expand their offering into higher yield markets and to higher yield customers, such as business and international travelers. Other LCC/hybrids, especially start up carriers, may choose not to distribute through the GDS until wider distribution is desired. On October 15, 2019, we acquired Radixx, an airline retailing software provider whose signature products are an LCC passenger service system and internet booking engine. We have invested in Radixx to expand its capabilities and expect to make additional investments to address the LCC space and continue to grow upmarket with a more competitive offering.
Shift to SaaS and hosted solutions by airlines and hotels to manage their daily operations
Historically, large travel suppliers built custom in-house software and applications for their business process needs. In response to a desire for more flexible systems given increasingly complex and constantly changing technological requirements, reduced IT budgets and increased focus on cost efficiency, many travel suppliers turned to third party solutions providers for many of their key technologies and began to license software from software providers. We believe that significant revenue opportunity remains in this outsourcing trend, as legacy in-house systems continue to migrate and upgrade to third party systems; however, the impact of COVID-19 on the travel industry may cause delays in these decisions, which may impact new sales during the pandemic and recovery period. The shift from a model with initial license fees to one with recurring monthly fees associated with our SaaS and hosted solutions, has resulted in an ongoing revenue stream based on the number of passengers boarded. However, under the SaaS and hosted solutions revenue model, revenue recognition may be delayed due to longer implementation schedules for larger suppliers. The SaaS and hosted models’ centralized deployment also allows us to save time and money by reducing maintenance and implementation tasks and lowering operating costs.
Growing demand for continued technology improvements in the fragmented hotel market
Most of the hospitality industry is highly fragmented. Independent hotels and small to medium sized chains (groups of less than 300 properties) comprise a majority of hotel properties and available hotel rooms, with global and regional chains comprising the balance. Hotels use a number of different technology systems to distribute and market their products and operate efficiently. We offer technology solutions to all segments of the hospitality industry. Our SynXis Central Reservation System integrates critical hospitality systems to optimize distribution, operations, retailing and guest experience via one scalable, flexible and intelligent platform. We believe the impact of COVID-19 on the hospitality industry highlights the benefits of a scalable solution such as our SynXis Central Reservation System. As these markets recover and begin to grow, we believe both independent and enterprise hotel owners and operators will continue to seek increased connectivity and integrated solutions to ensure access to global travelers. We anticipate that this will contribute to the continued growth of Hospitality Solutions, which is ultimately dependent upon these hoteliers accepting and utilizing our products and services.
Impact of customer consolidation in Hospitality Solutions
Growth through acquisition and brand consolidation is emerging as a strategy for enterprise hoteliers. This has resulted, and may continue to result, in customer de-migration as larger hotel chains consolidate acquired brands onto their existing technology platforms. Certain of our Hospitality Solutions customers were acquired by larger hoteliers, and it is possible that additional customer consolidations could occur in the future. We expect these consolidations to adversely impact revenue growth for the Hospitality Solutions business.
Continued focus by travel suppliers on cost cutting and distribution methods
Airline consolidations, pricing pressure during contract renegotiations and changes in how airlines choose to distribute their content may continue to subject our business to challenges. These changes may adversely affect our Travel Solutions contract renegotiations with suppliers that use alternative distribution channels.
These trends have impacted the revenue of Travel Solutions, which recognizes revenue for airline ticket sales based on transaction volumes. Simultaneously, this focus on cost cutting and alternative distribution has also presented opportunities for Travel Solutions. Many airlines have turned to outside providers for key systems, process and industry expertise and other products that assist in their cost cutting initiatives in order to focus on their primary revenue generating activities.
Components of Revenues and Expenses
Revenues
Travel Solutions generates revenues from distribution activities through Direct Billable Bookings processed on our GDS, adjusted for estimated cancellations of those bookings. Travel Solutions also generates revenues from IT solutions activities from its product offerings including reservation systems for full-service and low-cost carriers, commercial and operations products, professional services, agency solutions and booking data. Additionally, Travel Solutions generates revenue through software licensing and maintenance fees. Recognition of license fees upon delivery has previously resulted and will continue to result in periodic fluctuations in revenue recognized. Hospitality Solutions generates revenue through upfront solution fees and recurring usage-based fees for the use of our software solutions hosted on secure platforms or deployed through our SaaS and through other professional service fees including Digital Experience ("DX"). Certain professional service fees are discrete sales opportunities that may have a high degree of variability from period to period, and we cannot guarantee that we will have such fees in the future consistent with prior periods.
Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs
Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, incurred by Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions consists primarily of costs associated with the delivery and distribution of our products and services and includes employee-related costs for our delivery, customer operations and call center teams as well as allocated overhead such as facilities and other support costs. Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, for Travel Solutions also includes incentive consideration expense representing payments or other consideration to travel agencies for reservations made on our GDS which accrue on a monthly basis. Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, also includes amortization of upfront incentive consideration representing upfront payments or other consideration provided to travel agencies for reservations made on our GDS which are capitalized and amortized over the expected life of the contract. The technology costs excluded from Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, are presented separately below.
Corporate cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, includes certain expenses such as stock-based compensation, restructuring charges and other items not identifiable with either of our segments.
Depreciation and amortization included in cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, is associated with capitalized implementation costs and intangible assets associated with contracts, supplier and distributor agreements purchased through acquisitions or established with our take private transaction in 2007.
Technology Costs
Technology costs incurred by Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions consist of expenses related to third-party providers and employee-related costs to operate technology operations including hosting, third-party software, and other costs associated with the maintenance and minor enhancement of our technology. Technology costs also include costs associated with our technology transformation efforts. Technology costs are less variable in nature and therefore may not correlate with related changes in revenue.
Depreciation and amortization included in technology costs is associated with software developed for internal use that supports our products, assets supporting our technology platform, businesses and systems and intangible assets for technology purchased through acquisitions or established through the take private transaction in 2007.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of professional service fees, certain settlement charges or reimbursements, costs to defend legal disputes, provision for expected credit losses, other overhead costs, and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, for employees engaged in sales, sales support, account management and who administratively support the business in finance, legal, human resources, information technology and communications.
Depreciation and amortization included in selling, general and administrative expenses is associated with property and equipment, acquired customer relationships, trademarks and brand names purchased through acquisitions or established through the take private transaction in 2007.
Intersegment Transactions
We account for significant intersegment transactions as if the transactions were with third parties, that is, at estimated current market prices. Hospitality Solutions pays fees to Travel Solutions for hotel stays booked through our GDS.
Key Metrics
“Direct Billable Bookings” and “Passengers Boarded” are the primary metrics utilized by Travel Solutions to measure operating performance. Travel Solutions generates distribution revenue for each Direct Billable Booking, which includes bookings made through our GDS (e.g., Air, and Lodging, Ground and Sea ("LGS")) and through our equity method investments in cases where we are paid directly by the travel supplier. Air Bookings are presented net of bookings cancelled within the period presented. Travel Solutions also recognizes IT solutions revenue from recurring usage-based fees for Passengers Boarded ("PBs"). The primary metric utilized by Hospitality Solutions is booking transactions processed through the Sabre Hospitality Solutions SynXis Central Reservation System. These key metrics allow management to analyze customer volume over time for each of our product lines to monitor industry trends and analyze performance. We believe that these key metrics are useful for investors and other third parties as indicators of our financial performance and industry trends. While these metrics are based on what we believe to be reasonable estimates of our transaction counts for the applicable period of measurement, there are inherent challenges associated with their measurement. In addition, we are continually seeking to improve our estimates of these metrics, and these estimates may change due to improvements or changes in our methodology.
The following table sets forth these key metrics for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Definitions of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have included both financial measures compiled in accordance with GAAP and certain non-GAAP financial measures in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income from continuing operations ("Adjusted Net (Loss) Income"), Adjusted EBITDA, Free Cash Flow and ratios based on these financial measures. As a result of the Strategic Realignment, we have separated our technology costs from cost of revenue and moved certain expenses previously classified as cost of revenue to selling, general and administrative to provide increased visibility to our technology costs for analytical and decision-making purposes and to align costs with the current leadership and operational organizational structure.
We define Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income as Operating (loss) income adjusted for equity method (loss) income, impairment and related charges, acquisition-related amortization, restructuring and other costs, acquisition-related costs, litigation costs, net, and stock-based compensation.
We define Adjusted Net (Loss) Income as net (loss) income attributable to common stockholders adjusted for loss (income) from discontinued operations, net of tax, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, preferred stock dividends, impairment and related charges, acquisition-related amortization, restructuring and other costs, loss on extinguishment of debt, other, net, acquisition-related costs, litigation costs, net, stock-based compensation, and the tax impact of adjustments.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as (Loss) Income from continuing operations adjusted for depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, amortization of capitalized implementation costs, acquisition-related amortization, impairment and related charges, restructuring and other costs, interest expense, net, other, net, loss on extinguishment of debt, acquisition-related costs, litigation costs, net, stock-based compensation and the remaining (benefit) provision for income taxes. We have revised our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA to no longer exclude the amortization of upfront incentive consideration in all periods presented.
We define Free Cash Flow as cash (used in) provided by operating activities less cash used in additions to property and equipment.
We define Adjusted Net (Loss) Income from continuing operations per share as Adjusted Net (Loss) Income divided by diluted weighted-average common shares outstanding.
These non-GAAP financial measures are key metrics used by management and our board of directors to monitor our ongoing core operations because historical results have been significantly impacted by events that are unrelated to our core operations as a result of changes to our business and the regulatory environment. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are used by investors, analysts and other interested parties as measures of financial performance and to evaluate our ability to service debt obligations, fund capital expenditures, fund our investments in technology transformation, and meet
working capital requirements. We also believe that Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income and Adjusted EBITDA assist investors in company-to-company and period-to-period comparisons by excluding differences caused by variations in capital structures (affecting interest expense), tax positions and the impact of depreciation and amortization expense. In addition, amounts derived from Adjusted EBITDA are a primary component of certain covenants under our senior secured credit facilities.
Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income, Adjusted EBITDA, Free Cash Flow and ratios based on these financial measures are not recognized terms under GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures and ratios based on them are unaudited and have important limitations as analytical tools, and should not be viewed in isolation and do not purport to be alternatives to net income as indicators of operating performance or cash flows from operating activities as measures of liquidity. These non-GAAP financial measures and ratios based on them exclude some, but not all, items that affect net income or cash flows from operating activities and these measures may vary among companies. Our use of these measures has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•these non-GAAP financial measures exclude certain recurring, non-cash charges such as stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangible assets;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for such replacements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect amortization of capitalized implementation costs associated with our revenue contracts, which may require future working capital or cash needs in the future;
•Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our indebtedness;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•Free Cash Flow removes the impact of accrual-basis accounting on asset accounts and non-debt liability accounts, and does not reflect the cash requirements necessary to service the principal payments on our indebtedness; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, Adjusted Net (Loss) Income, Adjusted EBITDA or Free Cash Flow differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of Net (Loss) Income attributable to common stockholders to Adjusted Net (Loss) Income from continuing operations, Operating (Loss) Income to Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income, and (Loss) Income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
The following tables set forth the reconciliation of Adjusted Operating (Loss) Income to Operating (Loss) Income in our statement of operations and Adjusted EBITDA to (Loss) Income from Continuing Operations in our statement of operations by business segment (in thousands):
The following tables present information from our statements of cash flows and set forth the reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
________________________________
(1)Net income attributable to non-controlling interests represents an adjustment to include earnings allocated to non-controlling interests held in (i) Sabre Travel Network Middle East of 40% (ii) Sabre Seyahat Dagitim Sistemleri A.S. of 40%, (iii) Sabre Travel Network Lanka (Pte) Ltd of 40%, and (iv) Sabre Bulgaria of 40%.
(2)Impairment and related charges consists of $5 million associated with software developed for internal use and $4 million associated with capitalized implementation costs related to a specific customer based on our analysis of the recoverability of such amounts.
(3)Depreciation and amortization expenses:
a.Acquisition-related amortization represents amortization of intangible assets from the take-private transaction in 2007 as well as intangibles associated with acquisitions since that date.
b.Depreciation and amortization of property and equipment includes software developed for internal use as well as amortization of contract acquisition costs.
c.Amortization of capitalized implementation costs represents amortization of upfront costs to implement new customer contracts under our SaaS and hosted revenue model.
(4)Other, net includes a $15 million gain on sale of equity securities during the first quarter of 2021, an $8 million pension settlement charge recorded in 2021, debt modification costs for financing fees of $2 million recorded in the third quarter of 2021, a $46 million charge related to termination payments incurred in 2020 in connection with the now-terminated acquisition of Farelogix Inc. ("Farelogix") and an $18 million pension settlement charge recorded in 2020, partially offset by a $10 million gain on sale of our headquarters building in the fourth quarter of 2020. In addition, all periods presented include foreign exchange gains and losses related to the remeasurement of foreign currency
denominated balances included in our consolidated balance sheets into the relevant functional currency. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Dispositions to our consolidated financial statements regarding the Farelogix termination and Note 16. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans to our consolidated financial statements regarding the pension settlements.
(5)Restructuring and other costs represents charges, and adjustments to those charges, associated with business restructuring and associated changes, as well as other measures to support the new organizational structure and to respond to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, facilities and cost structure. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(6)Acquisition-related costs represent fees and expenses incurred associated with the now-terminated agreement to acquire Farelogix, as well as costs related to the acquisition of Radixx in 2019 and other acquisition and disposition related activities. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Dispositions to our consolidated financial statements.
(7)Litigation costs, net represent charges associated with antitrust litigation and other foreign non-income tax contingency matters. In 2020, we reversed the previously accrued non-income tax expense of $4 million due to success in our claims. In 2019, we recorded the reversal of our previously accrued loss related to the US Airways legal matter for $32 million. See Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
(8)The tax impact of adjustments includes the tax effect of each separate adjustment based on the statutory tax rate for the jurisdiction(s) in which the adjustment was taxable or deductible, the impact of the adjustments on valuation allowance assessments, and the tax effect of items that relate to tax specific financial transactions, tax law changes, uncertain tax positions, and other items.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Travel Solutions-Revenue increased $327 million, or 28%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to:
•a $319 million, or 55%, increase in distribution revenue, which was primarily due to a 66% increase in Direct Billable Bookings to 207 million. This increase consists of a $243 million decrease in primarily transaction-based revenue during the first quarter of 2021, offset by a $562 million increase during the remainder of the year. These year-over- year changes are due to the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenue beginning in the latter portion of the first quarter of 2020, which included significant cancellations beyond original estimates of approximately $100 million in the second quarter of 2020. We are currently experiencing a gradual recovery in volumes, offset by an unfavorable regional rate mix driven by growth in North America bookings, resulting in the overall increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. Additionally, our revenue and volumes in the last two quarters of 2021 were impacted by a certain OTA shifting a significant portion of its North America volumes to a competitor. This shift diluted our volume growth at a rate that is lower than our average rate due to the nature of these
bookings as leisure; and
•an $8 million, or 1%, increase in IT solutions revenue consisting of a $39 million, or 22% increase in reservation revenue primarily due to a 31% increase in Passengers Boarded to 424 million as a result of the gradual recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an unfavorable rate mix due to revenue that does not fluctuate with our volumes. Commercial and operations revenue decreased $32 million primarily due to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customer base of $20 million, certain product divestitures of $8 million, and lower license fee revenue from new implementations recognized upon delivery to the customer of $11 million, partly offset by improved professional services revenue of $7 million. Recognition of license fees upon delivery has previously resulted and will continue to result in periodic fluctuations in revenue recognized.
Hospitality Solutions-Revenue increased $28 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in SynXis Software and Services revenue due to an increase in transaction volumes of 37% to 92 million, as a result of continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, and an increase of $6 million in DX revenue. This increase is partially offset by dilution in rate from the prior year due to revenue that does not fluctuate with volumes and a change in transaction mix versus 2020.
Cost of Revenue, excluding technology costs
Travel Solutions-Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, increased $126 million, or 29%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily the result of a $131 million increase in incentive consideration due to higher overall transaction volume, compared to the prior year. This increase is partially offset by a $3 million decline in labor and professional services costs resulting from the reduction in workforce from our cost reduction measures implemented in the prior year. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Hospitality Solutions-Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, increased $5 million, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily driven by an increase in transaction-related costs associated with higher volumes as well as costs related to growth in other products such as our call center and DX.
Corporate-Cost of revenue, excluding technology costs, decreased $20 million, or 70%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a decline in severance costs of $21 million associated with the reduction of our workforce in 2020 and a decline in impairment charges of $2 million related to an impairment recorded in the prior year associated with capitalized implementation costs related to a specific customer. The decrease was partially offset by a $3 million increase in labor costs resulting from an increase in stock-based compensation, primarily associated with previously awarded performance-based units. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities. See Note 13. Equity-Based Awards, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on stock-based compensation.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization increased $1 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year due to assets placed in service.
Technology Costs
Travel Solutions-Technology costs decreased $70 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $88 million primarily due to a change in the mix of our technology spend beginning in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software, and a decrease in labor and professional services costs of $10 million resulting from the reduction in workforce from our cost reduction measures implemented in the prior year, and attrition and cost reduction measures in the current year. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in technology hosting costs of $20 million associated with higher transaction volumes, and an increase in labor costs of $9 million resulting from the continued decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement open-source and cloud-based solutions. We expect depreciation and amortization expense to be significantly lower in 2022 than in the prior year due to the lower capitalization rate on technology spend.
Hospitality Solutions-Technology costs decreased $1 million, or 1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a $17 million decline in depreciation and amortization primarily driven by a change in the mix of our technology spend beginning in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in labor and professional services costs of $10 million resulting from the expiration of the temporary cost reduction measures implemented in the second quarter of 2020 and to support our technology operations in the current year. Additionally, technology hosting costs increased by $4 million resulting from higher transaction volumes and the continued decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement open-source and cloud-based solutions also resulted in an increase in labor costs of $2 million.
Corporate-Technology costs decreased $33 million, or 29%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to a decline in severance costs of $35 million associated with the reduction of our workforce in 2020, a decline in impairment charges of $6 million related to an impairment recorded in the prior year associated with software developed for internal use, and a $4 million decline in depreciation and amortization primarily driven by a change in the mix of our technology spend beginning in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in labor costs of $14 million resulting from an increase in stock-based compensation primarily associated with previously awarded performance-based units. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities. See Note 13. Equity-Based Awards, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on stock-based compensation.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Travel Solutions-Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $29 million, or 10%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The decrease is driven by a $65 million decline in the provision for expected credit losses primarily related to fully reserving for aged balances of certain customers in the prior year and an overall improvement in our credit losses in the current year given the gradual global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in legal costs due to litigation of $21 million, an increase in labor and professional services costs of $12 million associated with the reversal of certain third-party commissions in the prior year which did not reoccur in the current year, consulting related to our business strategy to support the long-term growth of the business, labor costs due to the expiration of the temporary cost reduction measures implemented in the second quarter of 2020 and increases in risk and security, and an increase in depreciation and amortization of $7 million.
Hospitality Solutions-Selling, general and administrative expenses remained flat for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. A decrease of $9 million in the provision for expected credit losses primarily related to fully reserving for aged balances of certain customers in the prior year and an overall improvement in our forecasted credit losses in the current year given the slow global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is offset by increases in technology costs, labor and professional services costs, and depreciation and amortization.
Corporate-Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $53 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase is driven by an increase in labor costs of $37 million as a result of a $34 million increase in stock-based compensation primarily associated with previously awarded performance-based units, a $21 million increase in labor costs to support the business and increased costs associated with improving our internal business systems, and a $5 million increase resulting from the expiration of the temporary cost reduction measures implemented in the second quarter of 2020, partially offset by a $23 million decrease in severance costs. Additionally, legal and professional fees increased $19 million due to a $39 million increase in costs primarily associated with ongoing legal matters in the current year, partially offset by a $20 million decrease in acquisition-related costs primarily associated with the now terminated Farelogix acquisition, and other operating expenses increased due to higher insurance and other administrative costs. These increases were offset by a $14 million abandonment charge associated with the closure of certain office locations in connection with the restructuring
activities in 2020. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities, and see Note 13. Equity-Based Awards, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on stock-based compensation.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense increased $32 million, or 14%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to additional borrowings under the 9.250% senior secured notes due 2025 and the 4.000% senior exchangeable notes due 2025 (the "Exchangeable Notes") entered into during the second quarter of 2020, and the 7.375% senior secured notes due 2025 entered into in the third quarter of 2020. See Note 9. Debt for further details these debt transactions.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $13 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of the refinancing that occurred in the third quarter of 2021 (the "2021 Refinancing") and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $22 million in 2020 as a result of the refinancing that occurred in the third quarter of 2020 (the "2020 Refinancing"). See Note 9. Debt for further details these debt transactions.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net decreased $65 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a $46 million charge related to the termination payments in connection with the now-terminated acquisition of Farelogix recorded in the first quarter of 2020, a $15 million gain on sale in investment recorded in the first quarter of 2021 and a reduction of pension related expense of $17 million compared to the same period in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by a $10 million gain resulting from the sale of our headquarters buildings in the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as realized and unrealized foreign currency exchange fluctuations during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 1.6%. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 remained flat primarily due to a lower valuation allowance recorded on current year net operating losses and other deferred balances. See Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies for details regarding the adoption of guidance applied retroactively, which adjusted our 2020 benefit for income taxes from previously reported amounts.
The differences between our effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily resulted from our geographic mix of taxable income in various tax jurisdictions, tax permanent differences, valuation allowances, and tax credits.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Travel Solutions-Revenue decreased $2,546 million, or 68%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily due to:
• a $2,149 million, or 79%, decrease in transaction-based distribution revenue due to a 78% decrease in Direct Billable Bookings to 125 million resulting from lower transaction volume primarily as a result of reduced travel caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•a $397 million decrease in IT solutions revenue consisting of a $265 million, or 52%, decrease in reservation revenue primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our existing customer base and a $28 million decrease in revenue compared to the same period in the prior year due to the transition away from our services by certain customers and Jet Airways' insolvency in April 2019, partially offset by an increase of $12 million driven by the acquisition of Radixx in October 2019. Passengers Boarded, inclusive of Radixx, decreased by 56% to 323 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, commercial and operations revenue decreased $132 million primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our existing customer base.
Hospitality Solutions-Revenue decreased $118 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in SynXis Software and Services revenue due to a decrease in transaction volumes of 38% to 67 million, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Revenue, excluding technology costs
Travel Solutions-Cost of revenue decreased $1,128 million, or 72%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily the result of a $1,086 million decline in incentive consideration in all regions due to lower transaction volumes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a $37 million reduction in labor and professional services costs in connection with our cost reduction measures.
Hospitality Solutions-Cost of revenue decreased $62 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by $55 million reduction in transaction-related costs due to the decline in transaction volume as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a reduction in labor costs in connection with our cost reduction measures.
Corporate-Cost of revenue associated with corporate costs increased $20 million, or 244%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a restructuring charge of $19 million for severance benefits. The increase is partially offset by a reduction in labor costs in connection with our cost reduction measures. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization decreased $1 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. The decrease is primarily due to customer implementations that became fully amortized during the year.
Technology Costs
Travel Solutions-Technology costs decreased $155 million, or 14%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This decrease was due to a decrease in technology labor of $91 million in connection with our cost reduction measures, a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $46 million primarily due to a change in the mix of our technology spend in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software, and a decrease in technology costs of $55 million associated with lower transaction volumes resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease is partially offset by an increase in labor costs of $40 million due to a continued decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement open source and cloud-based solutions.
Hospitality Solutions-Technology costs decreased $15 million, or 13%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This decrease is due to a decrease in technology labor of $12 million in connection with our cost reduction measures, and a decrease in depreciation and amortization of $10 million primarily due to a change in the mix of our technology spend in 2019 resulting in less capitalized internal use software. This decrease is partially offset by an increase in labor costs of $6 million due to a continued decline in the capitalization mix of our technology spend as we implement open source and cloud-based solutions.
Corporate-Technology costs increased $41 million, or 57%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by a restructuring charge of $32 million for severance benefits. See Note 4. Restructuring Activities, to our consolidated financial statements for further details on restructuring activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Travel Solutions-Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $17 million, or 6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This decrease was primarily driven by a $43 million decrease in labor and professional services costs in connection with our cost reduction measures and a decline in other costs in conjunction with our expense management initiatives. This decrease was offset by an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $38 million.
Hospitality Solutions-Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $2 million, or 5%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to an increase in the provision for expected credit losses of $8 million, partially offset by a decrease of $3 million in labor and professional services costs in connection with our cost reduction measures and a decline in other costs in conjunction with our expense management initiatives.
Corporate-Selling, general and administrative expenses remained flat for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. Increases in costs included a $20 million charge for severance benefits recorded in the current year, a $14 million abandonment charge associated with the closure of certain office locations in connection with our restructuring activities in the current year, and an increase of $32 million due to the reversal of a previously accrued loss in the prior year related to the US Airways legal matter. These costs were offset by a decrease of $29 million in labor and professional services costs in connection with our cost reduction measures, a decrease of $27 million in legal costs associated with the now-terminated acquisition of Farelogix and a decline in other costs in conjunction with our expense management initiatives.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense increased $69 million, or 44%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to additional borrowings under the 9.250% senior secured notes due 2025 and the 4.000% senior exchangeable notes due 2025 entered into during the second quarter of 2020, and the 7.375% senior secured notes due 2025 entered into in the third quarter of 2020. See Note 9. Debt for further details these debt transactions.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
As a result of the debt refinancing transactions during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of $22 million. In connection with the extinguishment in August 2020 of our 5.375% senior secured notes due April 2023, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $10 million which consisted of a redemption premium of $7 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $3 million. In connection with our extinguishment of our 5.25% senior secured notes due November 2023 and our Term Loan A in December 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $11 million which consisted of a redemption premium of $6 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million. See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding these debt transactions.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net increased $58 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a $46 million charge related to termination payments in connection with our proposed acquisition of Farelogix, a pension plan settlement charge of $18 million, and a benefit recognized in the prior year associated with a reduction to our Tax Receivable Agreement ("TRA") liability due to the settlement of an audit. The increase is partially offset by a $10 million gain resulting from the sale of our headquarters buildings in the fourth quarter of 2020. See Note 3. Acquisitions, to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding the Farelogix acquisition, Note 12. Leases, to our consolidated financial statements for further details regarding the sale and leaseback transaction, and Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional information regarding the TRA.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 1.6% and 17.7%, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period in 2019 was primarily due to a $268 million valuation allowance recorded on tax losses generated in the current tax year related to the impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations and various discrete items recorded in each of the respective periods.
The differences between our effective tax rate and the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily resulted from our geographic mix of taxable income in various tax jurisdictions, tax permanent differences, valuation allowances, and tax credits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our current principal source of liquidity is our cash and cash equivalents on hand. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our cash and cash equivalents, Revolver, bilateral letter of credit facility, and outstanding letters of credit were as follows (in thousands):
We consider cash equivalents to be highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into cash. Securities with contractual maturities of three months or less, when purchased, are considered cash equivalents. We record changes in a book overdraft position, in which our bank account is not overdrawn but recently issued and outstanding checks result in a negative general ledger balance, as cash flows from financing activities. We invest in a money market fund which is classified as cash and cash equivalents in our consolidated balance sheets and statements of cash flows. We held no short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. We had $21 million held as cash collateral for standby letters of credit in restricted cash on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021. We had no restricted cash as of December 31, 2020.
We do not consider undistributed foreign earnings to be indefinitely reinvested as of December 31, 2021, with certain limited exceptions and have, in those cases, recorded corresponding deferred taxes. We consider the undistributed capital investments in most of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested as of December 31, 2021 and have not provided deferred taxes on any outside basis differences, with the exception of balances associated with the AirCentre disposition. With respect to the held for sale nature of our AirCentre portfolio of products, we have established deferred taxes, where applicable, for the outside basis of the capital investment of subsidiaries to be sold. Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by our foreign subsidiaries are available to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse impact on our business, we expect to recognize federal taxable income in 2022 based on our operating and non-operating results, the annual limitation on the use of NOL carryforwards and a provision of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act set to take effect. As a result, while we expect to be a U.S. federal cash taxpayer in 2022, we expect to also benefit from the usage of NOLs in 2022 to the extent available. We expect to continue to benefit from our NOLs in the near-term beyond 2022.
Liquidity Outlook
The reduction in revenues as the result of COVID-19 has significantly adversely affected our liquidity. Given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19, including any variants, on transaction volumes in the global travel industry, particularly air travel transaction volumes, including from airlines’ insolvency or suspension of service or aircraft groundings, we cannot provide assurance that the assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will be accurate. However, based on our assumptions and estimates with respect to our financial condition, we believe that we have resources to sufficiently fund our liquidity requirements over at least the next twelve months. As previously disclosed, we responded with measures to increase our cash position during 2020, including the suspension of quarterly cash dividends on our common stock, effective with respect to the dividends occurring after the March 30, 2020 payment and share repurchases under our $500 million share repurchase program (the "Share Repurchase Program"), borrowing under our Revolver, implementing cost savings measures, and completing debt and equity offerings. In addition, in the third quarter of 2021, we refinanced and extended the maturity on a portion of our debt and amended the financial performance covenant to remove minimum liquidity and leverage ratio requirements. We believe these actions will provide additional flexibility as we manage through the global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
During 2021, our free cash flow has improved on a sequential quarter-over-quarter basis. Free cash flow is calculated as cash flow from operations reduced by additions to property and equipment. For 2022, we expect our free cash flow to improve on an annual basis from 2021, turning positive within the second half of 2022. This expectation is based on industry projections regarding anticipated recovery levels in air travel and could change. See “-Risk Factors" for further details. Given the magnitude of travel decline and the unknown duration of the COVID-19 impact, we will continue to monitor travel activity and take additional steps should we determine they are necessary. Additionally, we may review opportunities to refinance our existing debt, as well as conduct debt or equity offerings to support future strategic investments, provide additional liquidity, or pay down debt.
We utilize cash and cash equivalents primarily to pay our operating expenses, make capital expenditures, invest in our information technology infrastructure, products and offerings, pay taxes, pay quarterly dividends on our Preferred Stock (as defined below) when declared, and service our debt and other long-term liabilities. On July 12, 2021, we refinanced the Revolver and terminated the commitments thereunder, replacing it with term loans. See “-Senior Secured Credit Facilities below. We had outstanding letters of credit totaling $10 million as of December 31, 2021, which were secured by a $20 million cash
collateral deposit account. We had $375 million outstanding under the Revolver on December 31, 2020, and had outstanding letters of credit totaling $10 million as of December 31, 2020, which reduced our overall credit capacity under the Revolver.
Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors beyond our control, and any failure to meet our debt service obligations could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our ability to make payments on and to refinance our indebtedness, and to fund working capital needs and planned capital expenditures will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, business, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including the impacts of COVID-19. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have a significant adverse impact on our business, including our financial results and prospects, and the travel suppliers on whom our business relies." and "-We may require more cash than we generate in our operating activities, and additional funding on reasonable terms or at all may not be available.”
The ongoing effects of COVID-19 on our operations and global bookings have had, and we believe they will continue to have, a material negative impact on our financial results and liquidity, and this negative impact may continue well beyond the containment of the outbreak. On an ongoing basis, we will evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, equity method investments, or repurchasing our outstanding debt obligations in open market or in privately negotiated transactions, as well as other transactions we believe may create stockholder value or enhance financial performance. These transactions may require cash expenditures or generate proceeds and, to the extent they require cash expenditures, may be funded through a combination of cash on hand, debt or equity offerings.
Contractual Obligations
Our material cash requirements consist of the following contractual obligations, excluding pension obligations. See Note 16. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans, to our consolidated financial statements. We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Debt
Our debt obligation includes all interest and principal of borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, senior secured notes due 2025, senior exchangeable notes due 2025 and finance lease obligations. Under certain circumstances, we are required to pay a percentage of the excess cash flow, if any, generated each year to our lenders which is not reflected in the amount disclosed below. Interest on the term loan is based on the LIBOR rate plus a base margin and includes the effect of interest rate swaps. See Note 9. Debt, to our consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total debt obligation of $5.6 billion, with $256 million due within the next 12 months. For purposes of this disclosure, we have used projected LIBOR rates for all future periods.
Operating lease obligations
We lease approximately 1.3 million square feet of office space in 65 locations in 38 countries. Lease payment escalations are based on fixed annual increases, local consumer price index changes or market rental reviews. We have renewal options of various term lengths in approximately 33 leases. We have 3 purchase options and no restrictions imposed by our leases concerning dividends or additional debt. See Note 12. Leases, to our consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, we had total lease obligation of $137 million, with $26 million due within the next 12 months.
IT agreements
Certain agreements with technology providers, including for the provision of outsourcing services for our IT infrastructure and applications and the provision of certain cloud-based services, include minimum amounts due for the provision of those services. Contractual minimums are annual in some instances and span multiple years in other contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we had total IT agreement obligations of $2.4 billion, with $240 million due within the next 12 months. Actual payments may vary significantly from the minimum amounts calculated and include our estimated spend for those contracts with committed spend covering multiple years.
Purchase obligations
Purchase obligations represent an estimate of open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business for which we have not received the goods or services as of December 31, 2021. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total purchase obligation of $428 million, with $295 million due within the next 12 months.
Letters of credit
Our letters of credit consist of stand-by letters of credit, underwritten by a group of lenders and backed by cash collateral, which we primarily issue in the normal course of business. There were no claims made against any standby letters of credit during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total obligation of $10 million, with $7 million due within the next 12 months.
Unrecognized tax benefits
Unrecognized tax benefits include associated interest and penalties. The timing of related cash payments for substantially all of these liabilities is inherently uncertain because the ultimate amount and timing of such liabilities is affected by factors which
are variable and outside our control. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total obligation of $110 million, with $6 million due within the next 12 months.
Subscription agreement
In December 2021, we entered into a subscription agreement with Apollo Strategic Growth Capital, a special purpose acquisition company, that has entered into a business combination agreement with GBT JerseyCo Limited (“GBT”). The Subscription Agreement provides that, concurrently with the closing of the business combination, we will purchase shares in the combined company for an aggregate purchase price of $80 million. The transaction is expected to be completed in the first half of 2022. The Subscription Agreement provides that it will terminate upon the earliest to occur of: (a) the termination of the business combination agreement in accordance with its terms; (b) the mutual written agreement of the parties to the Subscription Agreement and GBT or (c) if the transactions contemplated by the Subscription Agreement have not been consummated within 10 months after the date of the Subscription Agreement, other than as a result of breach by the terminating party.
Recent Events Impacting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources
Debt Agreements
On July 12, 2021, we refinanced the Revolver and terminated the commitments thereunder, replacing it with term loans. Among other things, the refinancing amended the financial performance covenant to remove the minimum liquidity requirement of $300 million, the Total Net Leverage Ratio maintenance requirement, and certain other limitations. See “- Senior Secured Credit Facilities" below.
Interest Payments
As a result of the 9.250% senior secured notes due 2025 and the 4.000% Exchangeable Notes entered into during the second quarter of 2020, and the 7.375% senior secured notes due 2025 entered into in the third quarter of 2020, interest payments increased $61 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year.
Equity Offerings
On August 24, 2020, we completed concurrent offerings of (1) 3,340,000 shares of our 6.50% Series A Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock (the "Preferred Stock") which generated net proceeds of approximately $323 million and (2) 41,071,429 shares of common stock which generated net proceeds of approximately $275 million.
Unless previously converted, each share of Preferred Stock will automatically convert, for settlement on the mandatory conversion date, which is expected to be September 1, 2023 into between 11.9048 and 14.2857 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. The number of shares of the Company’s common stock issuable upon conversion will be determined based on the average volume-weighted average price per share of the Company’s common stock over the 20 consecutive trading day period beginning on, and including, the 21st scheduled trading day immediately before September 1, 2023. Holders of the Preferred Stock will have the right to convert all or any portion of their shares of their Preferred Stock at any time until the close of business on the mandatory conversion date. Early conversions that are not in connection with a “make-whole fundamental change” (as defined in Certificate of Designations governing the Preferred Stock) will be settled at the minimum conversion rate. In addition, the conversion rate applicable to such an early conversion may in certain circumstances be increased to compensate holders of the Preferred Stock for certain unpaid accumulated dividends. If a make-whole fundamental change occurs, then holders of the Preferred Stock will, in certain circumstances, be entitled to convert their Preferred Stock at an increased conversion rate for a specified period of time and receive an amount to compensate them for certain unpaid accumulated dividends and any remaining future scheduled dividend payments. The Preferred Stock is not subject to redemption at the Company’s option. If the Company liquidates, dissolves or winds up, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, then, subject to the rights of any of the Company’s creditors or holders of any outstanding liquidation senior stock, each share of Preferred Stock will entitle the holder thereof to receive payment for the following amount out of the Company’s assets or funds legally available for distribution to its stockholders, before any such assets or funds are distributed to, or set aside for the benefit of, any liquidation junior stock: (1) the liquidation preference per share of Preferred Stock, which is equal to $100.00 per share; and (2) all unpaid dividends that will have accumulated on such share to, but excluding, the date of such payment. In the fourth quarter of 2021, a certain holder elected to convert 50,000 shares of preferred stock to 595,240 shares of common stock.
Dividends on Preferred Stock
The Preferred Stock accumulates cumulative dividends at a rate per annum equal to 6.50% and dividends are payable when, as and if declared by our board of directors, out of funds legally available for their payment to the extent paid in cash, quarterly in arrears on March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2020 and ending on, and including, September 1, 2023. Declared dividends on the Preferred Stock are payable, at our election, in cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock. We recorded $22 million of accrued preferred stock dividends in our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid cash dividends on our preferred stock of $22 million. On February 2, 2022, the Board of Directors declared a dividend of $1.625 per share on Preferred Stock payable on March 1, 2022 to holders of record of the Preferred Stock on February 15, 2022. Subject to certain exceptions, so long as any share of Preferred Stock remains outstanding, no dividends or distributions will be declared or paid on shares of the Company’s common stock or any other class or series of stock ranking junior to the Preferred Stock, and no common stock or any other class or series stock ranking junior to the Preferred Stock will be
purchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired for value by the Company or any of its subsidiaries unless, in each case, all accumulated and unpaid dividends for all prior completed dividend periods, if any, have been paid in full. In addition, if (i) less than all accumulated and unpaid dividends on the outstanding Preferred Stock have been declared and paid as of any dividend payment date or (ii) the board of directors declares a dividend on the Preferred Stock that is less than the total amount of unpaid dividends on the outstanding preferred stock that would accumulate to, but excluding, any dividend payment date, no dividends may be declared or paid on any parity stock, unless dividends are declared on the shares of Preferred Stock on a pro rata basis. If accumulated dividends on the outstanding Preferred Stock have not been declared and paid in an aggregate amount corresponding to six or more dividend periods, whether or not consecutive, then, subject to the other provisions of the Preferred Stock, the authorized number of the Company’s directors will automatically increase by two and the holders of the Preferred Stock, voting together as a single class with the holders of each class or series of voting parity stock, if any, will have the right to elect two directors to fill such two new directorships at the Company’s next annual meeting of stockholders (or, if earlier, at a special meeting of the Company’s stockholders called for such purpose).
Dividends on Common Stock
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not pay cash dividends on our common stock. As a result of the significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results and liquidity, on March 16, 2020, we announced the suspension of the payment of quarterly cash dividends on our common stock, effective with respect to the dividends occurring after the March 30, 2020 payment. Future cash dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of our board of directors and the amount of cash dividends per share will depend upon, among other things, our future operations and earnings, capital requirements and surplus, general financial condition, contractual restrictions, number of shares of common stock outstanding and other factors the board of directors may deem relevant. The timing and amount of future dividend payments will be at the discretion of our board of directors.
Share Repurchase Program
In February 2017, we announced the approval of a multi-year share repurchase program (the "Share Repurchase Program") to purchase up to $500 million of Sabre's common stock outstanding. Repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program may take place in the open market or privately negotiated transactions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not repurchase any shares pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program. On March 16, 2020, we announced the suspension of share repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program in conjunction with the cash management measures we are undertaking as a result of the market conditions caused by COVID-19. Approximately $287 million remains authorized for repurchase under the Share Repurchase Program as of December 31, 2021.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
On August 23, 2017, Sabre GLBL entered into a Fourth Incremental Term Facility Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, Term Loan A Refinancing Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, and Second Revolving Facility Refinancing Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2017 Refinancing”). The 2017 Refinancing included a $400 million revolving credit facility ("Revolver") as well as the application of the proceeds of the approximately $1,891 million incremental Term Loan B facility (“Term Loan B”) and $570 million Term Loan A facility (“Term Loan A”).
On August 27, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a Third Revolving Facility Refinancing Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment") and the First Term A Loan Extension Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Term A Loan Extension Amendment" and, together with the Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment, the "2020 Refinancing"), which extended the maturity of the Revolver from July 1, 2022 to November 23, 2023 at the earliest and February 22, 2024 at the latest, depending on certain "springing" maturity conditions as described in the Third Revolving Refinancing Amendment. In addition to extending the maturity date of the Revolver, the 2020 Refinancing also provided that, during any covenant suspension resulting from a "Material Travel Event Disruption" (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement), including during the current covenant suspension period, we were required to maintain liquidity of at least $300 million on a monthly basis, which was lowered in December 2020 from $450 million. In addition, during this covenant suspension, the 2020 Refinancing limited certain payments to equity holders, certain investments, certain prepayments of unsecured debt and the ability of certain subsidiaries to incur additional debt. The applicable margins for the Revolver were between 2.50% and 1.75% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and between 1.50% and 0.75% per annum for base rate loans, with the applicable margin for any quarter reduced by 25 basis points (up to 75 basis points total) if the Senior Secured First-Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) was less than 3.75 to 1.0, 3.00 to 1.0, or 2.25 to 1.0, respectively. These interest rate spreads for the Revolver were increased by 0.25%, during covenant suspension, in connection with the 2020 Refinancing.
On December 17, 2020, Sabre GLBL entered into a Sixth Term A Loan Refinancing and Incremental Amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, resulting in additional Term Loan B borrowings of $637 million ("Other Term B Loans") due December 17, 2027. The applicable interest rate margins for the Other Term B Loans are 4.00% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and 3.00% per annum for base rate loans, with a floor of 0.75% for the Eurocurrency rate, and 1.75% for the base rate, respectively. The net proceeds of $623 million from the issuance, net of underwriting fees and commissions, were used to fully redeem both the $500 million outstanding 5.25% senior secured notes due November 2023 and the $134 million outstanding Term Loan A. We incurred no material additional indebtedness as a result of these transactions, other than amounts for certain interest, fees and expenses. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $11 million during the year ended
December 31, 2020 in connection with these transactions, which consisted of a redemption premium of $6 million and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $5 million.
On July 12, 2021, we entered into agreements to refinance the Other Term Loan B facility and the Revolver, and terminated the revolving commitments thereunder (the "2021 Refinancing"). We incurred no additional indebtedness as a result of the 2021 Refinancing, other than amounts covering certain interest, fees and expenses. Among other things, the 2021 Refinancing amended the financial performance covenant to remove the minimum liquidity requirement of $300 million, the Total Net Leverage Ratio maintenance requirement, and certain other limitations. The 2021 Refinancing included the application of the proceeds of (i) a new $404 million term loan “B-1” facility (the “New Term B-1 Facility”) and (ii) a new $644 million term loan “B-2” facility (the "New Term B-2 Facility" and together with the New Term B-1 Facility, the “New Facilities”), borrowed by Sabre GLBL under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, to pay down in full approximately $634 million of Other Term B Loans and the outstanding $400 million Revolver balance, and to terminate the revolving commitments thereunder. The remaining proceeds, net of a $3 million discount, were used to pay a $6 million redemption premium and $6 million in other fees associated with the refinancing. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with these transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $13 million and debt modification costs for financing fees of $2 million recorded to Other, net. The New Facilities mature on December 17, 2027, and we have the ability to prepay the New Facilities after December 17, 2021 without a premium. In addition, on July 2, 2021, in anticipation of the Revolver repayment and termination of the revolving commitments (and related letter of credit subfacility), Sabre GLBL entered into a new $20 million bilateral letter of credit facility, which is secured by a cash collateral deposit account and included as Restricted cash on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021.
Under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the loan parties are subject to certain customary non-financial covenants, including certain restrictions on incurring certain types of indebtedness, creation of liens on certain assets, making of certain investments, and payment of dividends. As of December 31, 2021, we are in compliance with all covenants under the terms of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
Applicable margins for the Term Loan B are 2.00% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and 1.00% per annum for base rate loans over the life of the loan, with a floor of 0.00%. Applicable margins for the Term Loan B-1 and Term Loan B-2 are 3.50% per annum for Eurocurrency rate loans and 2.50% per annum for base rate loans over the life of the loan, with a floor of 0.50% for the Eurocurrency rate, and 1.50% for the base rate, respectively.
We are also required to pay down the term loans by an amount equal to 50% of annual excess cash flow, as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. This percentage requirement may decrease or be eliminated if certain leverage ratios are achieved. Based on our results for the year ended December 31, 2020, we were not required to make an excess cash flow payment in 2021, and no excess cash flow payment is expected to be required in 2022 with respect to our results for the year ended December 31, 2021. We are further required to pay down the term loans with proceeds from certain asset sales or borrowings, that are not otherwise reinvested in the business, as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding approximately $2.8 billion of variable debt that is indexed to the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") consisting of Term Loan B for $1.8 billion, Term Loan B-1 for $401 million and Term Loan B-2 for $635 million. In July 2017, the Financial Conduct Authority announced its intention to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021, and subsequently extended the phase-out date to June 30, 2023. In July 2021, we entered into the 2021 Refinancing which, among other things, allows for the LIBOR rate to be phased out and replaced with SOFR plus a credit spread adjustment factor for Term Loan B-1 and Term Loan B-2, and we therefore do not anticipate a material impact from the anticipated phase out of LIBOR with respect to these loans. Term Loan B allows for a transition to the Prime rate plus a margin, and assuming the discontinuation of LIBOR in June 2023 and assuming no change in Prime rates in effect as of December 31, 2021, we estimate the impact of transitioning to the Prime rate in June 2023 would result in an aggregate of approximately $25 million of incremental interest expense over the remaining life of Term Loan B. We intend to seek an amendment with our lenders of Term Loan B prior to June 2023 to provide for a transition to SOFR or another alternative to LIBOR in anticipation of its discontinuation, but there can be no assurance that we will be able to reach an agreement with our lenders for any such amendment or that the incremental amount of any interest pursuant to such amendment would be significantly less than current requirements. See “Risk Factors-We are exposed to interest rate fluctuations.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
Immediately prior to the closing of our initial public offering in April 2014, we entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement (the "TRA"), which provides the right to receive future payments from us to stockholders and equity award holders that were our stockholders and equity award holders, respectively, immediately prior to the closing of our initial public offering (collectively, the "Pre-IPO Existing Stockholders"). In connection with the TRA, we made payments, including interest, of $72 million in January 2020 and $105 million in 2019, respectively. In December 2019, we exercised our right under the terms of the TRA to accelerate our remaining payments under the TRA and make an early termination payment of $1 million, to the Pre-IPO Existing Shareholders, which was included in the January 2020 payment of $72 million described above. As a result, no future payments are required to be made to the Pre-IPO Existing Stockholders under the TRA.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities totaled $415 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The $356 million decrease in cash used for operating activities from 2020 was primarily due to an improvement in our results of operations as a result of the gradual global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021, acquisition termination fees of $21 million paid in the first quarter of 2020 in connection with the now-terminated agreement to acquire Farelogix, a reduction in severance payments of $34 million related to restructuring activities initiated in 2020, and a $21 million reduction in upfront incentive consideration payments. This increase in operating cash flow was partially offset by additional interest payments of $61 million resulting from debt refinancing activities during 2020.
Cash used in operating activities totaled $770 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $1.4 billion decrease in operating cash flow from 2019 is primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 on the travel industry and on our results of operations during 2020, severance payments of $48 million related to restructuring activities during 2020, additional interest payments of $29 million resulting from debt refinancing activities during 2020, acquisition termination fees paid in 2020 of $21 million, and net cash outflows to carriers resulting from the cancellations of previous bookings. This decrease in operating cash flow was partially offset by a $44 million decrease in upfront incentive consideration payments and a $31 million decrease in tax payments.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds of $25 million from the sale of certain investments and assets, offset by $54 million of cash used on capital expenditures primarily related to software developed for internal use.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had $69 million provided by proceeds from the sale of our two headquarter buildings. Cash provided from the sale was offset by cash used of $65 million on capital expenditures, including $41 million related to software developed for internal use.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $51 million for financing activities. Significant highlights of our financing activities included:
•proceeds of $403 million and $642 million from the issuance of New Term B-1 Facility and New Term B-2 Facility, respectively;
•proceeds from borrowings under the Revolver of $25 million;
•payment of $661 million on Term Loan B and Other Term Loan B;
•payments of $400 million for the Revolver;
•net payments of $23 million from the settlement of employee stock-option awards;
•payment of $22 million in dividends on our preferred stock;
•payment of $12 million in debt prepayment fees and issuance costs; and
•payment of $3 million for the settlement of exchangeable notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, proceeds from financing activities were $1,838 million. Significant highlights of our financing activities included:
•proceeds from borrowings under the senior secured and exchangeable notes of $1,970 million;
•proceeds from issuance of stock of $598 million;
•proceeds from borrowings under the Revolver of $375 million;
•payment of $1,030 million on senior secured notes due 2023;
•payment of $503 million on Term Loan A and Term Loan B;
•fourth and final annual payment on the TRA liability for $72 million , excluding interest;
•payment of $78 million on debt issuance costs;
•payment of $39 million in dividends on our common stock;
•net payments of $6 million from the settlement of employee stock-option awards, including payments of $6 million in income tax withholdings associated with the settlement of employee restricted-stock awards; and
•payment of $5 million on our capital leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information related to Recent Accounting Pronouncements is included in Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and other financial information. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates, and our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary under different assumptions and conditions. In addition, our reported financial condition and results of operations could vary due to a change in the application of a particular accounting standard.
Our accounting policies that include significant estimates and assumptions include: (i) estimation for revenue recognition and multiple performance obligation arrangements, (ii) judgments used in our air booking cancellation reserve, (iii) estimation for our allowance for credit losses (iv) the evaluation of the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets and goodwill, (v) assumptions utilized to test recoverability of capitalized implementation costs, (vi) the evaluation of uncertainties surrounding the calculation of our tax assets and liabilities, and (vii) estimation of loss contingencies. We regard an accounting estimate underlying our financial statements as a “critical accounting estimate” if the accounting estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time of estimation and if changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to occur and could have a material effect on the presentation of financial condition, changes in financial condition, or results of operations.
We have included below a discussion of the accounting policies involving material estimates and assumptions that we believe are most critical to the preparation of our financial statements, how we apply such policies and how results differing from our estimates and assumptions would affect the amounts presented in our financial statements. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these accounting policies with our Audit Committee. Although we believe these policies to be the most critical, other accounting policies also have a significant effect on our financial statements and certain of these policies also require the use of estimates and assumptions. For further information about our significant accounting policies, see Note 1. Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Multiple Performance Obligation Arrangements
Our agreements with customers of our Travel Solutions business may have multiple performance obligations which generally include software solutions through SaaS and hosted delivery, professional service fees and implementation services. In addition, from time to time, we enter into agreements with customers to provide access to Travel Solutions' GDS and, at or near the same time, enter into a separate agreement to provide IT solutions through SaaS and hosted delivery. These multiple performance obligation arrangements involve judgments, including estimating the selling prices of goods and services, estimating the total contract consideration and allocating amounts to each distinct performance obligation, forecasting future volumes and estimating total costs and costs to complete a project.
Revenue recognition from our IT Solutions products requires significant judgments such as identifying distinct performance obligations including material rights within an agreement, estimating the total contract consideration and allocating amounts to each distinct performance obligation, determining whether variable pricing within a contract meets the allocation objective, and forecasting future volumes. For a small number of our contracts, we are required to forecast volumes as a result of pricing variability within the contract in order to calculate the rate for revenue recognition. Any changes in these judgments and estimates could have an impact on the revenue recognized in future periods. Our forecasted volumes were significantly impacted in 2020 and 2021 due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers which had, and will continue to have, a significant impact on our current and future revenues.
We evaluate revenue recognition for agreements with customers which generally are represented by individual contracts but could include groups of contracts if the contracts are executed at or near the same time. Typically, access to our GDS and our professional service fees are separated from the implementation and software services. We account for separate performance obligations on an individual basis with value assigned to each performance obligation based on our best estimate of relative standalone selling price ("SSP"). Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. SSP is assessed annually using a historical analysis of contracts with customers executed in the most recently completed calendar year to determine the range of selling prices applicable to a distinct good or service. In making these judgments, we analyze various factors, including discounting practices, price lists, contract prices, value differentiators, customer segmentation and overall market and economic conditions. Based on these results, the estimated SSP is set for each distinct product or service delivered to customers. As our market strategies evolve, we may modify pricing practices in the future which could result in changes to SSP.
Deferred customer advances and discounts are amortized against revenue in future periods as the related revenue is earned. Our contract assets include revenue recognized for services already transferred to a customer, for which the fulfillment of another contractual performance obligation is required, before we have the unconditional right to bill and collect based on contract terms. Contract assets are reviewed for recoverability on a periodic basis based on a review of impairment indicators.
Deferred customer advances and discounts are reviewed for recoverability based on future contracted revenues and estimated direct costs of the contract when a significant event occurs that could impact the recoverability of the assets, such as a significant contract modification or early renewal of contract terms. These assets are directly supported by estimates of Passengers Boarded and booking volumes for specific customers over their remaining contractual terms. Due to the long-term nature of the relevant contracts, recovery of these assets is not sensitive to near-term declines in volumes such as those that have occurred in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not impair any of these assets as a result of the related contracts becoming uncollectable, modified or canceled. Contracts are priced to generate total revenues over the life of the contract that exceed any discounts or advances provided and any upfront costs incurred to implement the customer contract.
Air Booking Cancellation Reserve
Transaction revenue for airline travel reservations is recognized by Travel Solutions at the time of the booking of the reservation, net of estimated future cancellations. Cancellations prior to the day of departure are estimated based on the historical and expected level of cancellation rates, adjusted to take into account any recent factors which could cause a change in those rates. In circumstances where expected cancellation rates or booking behavior changes, our estimates are revised, and in these circumstances, future cancellation rates could vary materially, with a corresponding variation in revenue net of estimated future cancellations. Factors that could have a significant effect on our estimates include global security issues, epidemics or pandemics (such as that experienced in the current year as a result of COVID-19), natural disasters, general economic conditions, the financial condition of travel suppliers, and travel related accidents. Our cancellation reserve is highly sensitive to our estimate of bookings that we expect will eventually travel, as well as to the mix of those bookings between domestic and international, given the varying rates paid by airline suppliers. The air booking cancellation reserve was $18 million as of December 31, 2021. If international cancellations increased by 10% on the same estimated base of cancelled bookings, the reserve as of December 31, 2021 would increase by $1 million. If total bookings expected to cancel increased by 10%, the reserve as of December 31, 2021 would increase by $2 million.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We determine the allowance for credit losses at the portfolio segment level by assessing the risks and losses inherent in our receivables related to each segment. Historical loss data provides the basis for estimating expected credit losses. This data is then adjusted for asset-specific considerations, current economic conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Additionally, we utilize global GDP growth rates as the primary metric in forecasting the current expected credit loss ("CECL") forecast reserve on a quarterly basis. As of December 31, 2021, the five-year forward-looking growth rate approximates the data over the past 30 years and therefore no CECL forecast reserve was recorded.
We evaluate the collectability of our receivables based on a combination of factors. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations to us, such as bankruptcy filings or failure to pay amounts due to us or others, we specifically provide for credit losses against amounts due to reduce the recorded receivable to the amount we reasonably believe will be collected. For all other customers, we record reserves for receivables, including unbilled receivables and contract assets, based on historical experience and the length of time the receivables are past due. All receivables aged over twelve months are fully reserved.
Given the uncertainties surrounding the duration and effects of COVID-19, we cannot provide assurance that the assumptions used in our estimates will be accurate and actual collections may vary from our estimates, resulting in a material impact to our results of operations. See 8. Credit Losses, to our consolidated financial statements for further considerations involved in the development of this estimate.
Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
We have two reporting units associated with our continuing operations: Travel Solutions and Hospitality Solutions. As a result of the Strategic Realignment, our historical Travel Network and Airline Solutions business segments have been combined into a new business segment, Travel Solutions. In connection with this reorganization, the historical Travel Network and Airline Solutions reporting units and their related goodwill were combined into a single Travel Solutions reporting unit, thereby requiring no reallocation of goodwill based on fair values. There was no change to our historical Hospitality Solutions reporting unit. Goodwill related to our reporting units totaled $2.5 billion as of December 31, 2021.
We evaluate goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or when impairment indicators exist. We begin our evaluation with a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value before applying a quantitative assessment. Our qualitative assessments considered recent information available regarding the anticipated duration of the recovery period which we believe to be a key assumption, including information as of April 2021 from the International Air Transport Association ("IATA") that forecast in its base-case scenario that global passenger traffic is not expected to return to pre-COVID-19 levels until 2024. If it is determined through the evaluation of events or circumstances that the carrying value may not be recoverable, we perform a comparison of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to which the goodwill has been assigned to the sum of the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of that unit. If the sum of the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of a reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value of that reporting unit, the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is reduced to its fair value through an adjustment to the goodwill balance, resulting in an impairment charge. The determination of fair value requires us to make significant judgments and estimates including cash flow projections and assumptions related to market participants, the principal markets, and the highest and best use of the reporting units. Changes in the assumptions used in our impairment testing may result in future impairment losses which could have a material impact on our results of operations. As of December 31, 2021, based on a qualitative review of Goodwill, it is more likely than not that fair value exceeds carrying value; therefore, we deemed it reasonable not to perform a quantitative impairment analysis. We did not record any goodwill impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
On October 28, 2021, we announced that we have entered into an agreement with a third party to sell our suite of flight and crew management and optimization solutions, which represents our AirCentre airline operations portfolio within Travel Solution’s IT Solutions. As part of this disposition, we allocated goodwill of $153 million from the Travel Solutions reporting unit to assets held for sale as of December 31, 2021 based on relative fair value. The determination of fair value of both the Travel Solutions reporting unit and the AirCentre business requires us to make judgements and estimates including cash flow projections and assumptions related to the value of this portfolio in the principal market. We evaluated goodwill for impairment both prior and subsequent to allocation to the held for sale assets. We did not record any goodwill impairment charges as a result of this evaluation for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Definite-lived intangible assets are assigned depreciable lives of two to thirty years, depending on classification, and are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of definite-lived intangible assets used in combination to generate cash flows largely independent of other assets may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators exist for definite-lived intangible assets, the undiscounted future cash flows associated with the expected service potential of the assets are compared to the carrying value of the assets. If our projection of undiscounted future cash flows is in excess of the carrying value of the intangible assets, no impairment charge is recorded. If our projection of undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value, the intangible assets are then measured at fair value and an impairment charge is recorded based on the excess of the carrying value of the assets over its fair value. We also evaluate the need for additional impairment disclosures based on our Level 3 inputs. For fair value measurements categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, we disclose the valuation processes used by the reporting entity. We did not record material intangible asset impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Capitalized Implementation Costs
Capitalized implementation costs represents upfront costs to implement new customer contracts under our SaaS and hosted revenue model. Capitalized implementation costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contract term, ranging from three to ten years, as they are recoverable through deferred or future revenues associated with the relevant contract. These assets are reviewed for recoverability on a periodic basis or when an event occurs that could impact the recoverability of the assets, such as the impact of COVID-19 on a particular customer, a significant contract modification or early renewal of contract terms. Recoverability is measured based on the future estimated revenue and direct costs of the contract compared to the capitalized implementation costs. During 2021 and 2020, we considered current estimates of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic to 2019 levels, which we believe to be a key assumption in our assessment of recoverability. We record an impairment charge for the portion of the asset considered unrecoverable in the period identified, while considering the uncertainties associated with these types of contracts and judgments made in estimating revenue and direct costs. These assets are directly supported by estimates of Passengers Boarded and booking volumes for specific customers over their remaining contractual terms. Due to the long-term nature of the relevant contracts, recovery of these assets is not sensitive to near-term declines in volumes such as those that have occurred in 2021 and 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $1 million in impairments associated with unrecoverable amounts in capitalized implementation costs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $10 million in impairments associated with unrecoverable amounts in capitalized implementation costs.
Income and Non-Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. We regularly review deferred tax assets by jurisdiction to assess their potential realization and establish a valuation allowance for portions of such assets that we believe will not be ultimately realized. In performing this review, we make estimates and assumptions regarding projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and the implementation of tax planning strategies. A change in these assumptions could cause an increase or decrease to the valuation allowance resulting in an increase or decrease in the effective tax rate, which could materially impact our results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused increased uncertainty in determining certain key assumptions within the assessment of our future taxable income upon which recognition of deferred tax
assets is assessed. At year end, we had a valuation allowance on a portion of our deferred tax assets based on our assessment that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We believe that our estimates for the valuation allowances against deferred tax assets are appropriate based on current facts and circumstances.
When assessing the need for a valuation allowance, all positive and negative evidence is analyzed, including our ability to carry back net operating losses ("NOLs") to prior periods, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, tax planning strategies and projected future taxable income. Significant losses related to COVID-19 resulted in a three-year cumulative loss in certain jurisdictions, which represents significant negative evidence regarding the ability to realize deferred tax assets. As a result, we maintain a cumulative valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets of $322 million and $22 million, respectively as of December 31, 2021. For non-U.S. deferred tax assets of certain subsidiaries, we maintained a cumulative valuation allowance on current year losses and other deferred tax assets of $86 million as of December 31, 2021. We reassess these assumptions regularly, which could cause an increase or decrease to the valuation allowance resulting in an increase or decrease in the effective tax rate, and could materially impact our results of operations.
We operate in numerous countries where our income tax returns are subject to audit and adjustment by local tax authorities. Because we operate globally, the nature of the uncertain tax positions is often very complex and subject to change, and the amounts at issue can be substantial. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as we must determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We re-evaluate uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activity. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a liability, including interest and penalty, of $110 million and $96 million, respectively, for unrecognized tax benefits, of which $98 million and $77 million, respectively, would affect our effective tax rate if recognized. Such a change in recognition or measurement would result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the provision for income taxes from continuing operations.
Loss Contingencies
While certain legal proceedings and related indemnification obligations and certain tax matters to which we are a party specify the amounts claimed, these claims may not represent reasonably possible losses. Given the inherent uncertainties of litigation and tax claims, the ultimate outcome of these matters cannot be predicted, nor can the amount of possible loss or range of loss, if any, be reasonably estimated, except in circumstances where an aggregate litigation accrual has been recorded for probable and reasonably estimable loss contingencies. A determination of the amount of accrual required, if any, for these contingencies is made after careful analysis of each matter. The required accrual may change in the future due to new information or developments in each matter or changes in approach such as a change in settlement strategy in dealing with these matters. Changes in these factors could materially impact our results of operations.