Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on March 31, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, or the initial business combination. We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 23, 2021 was related to our formation and IPO. Since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination target. We will not generate any operating revenues until the consummation of our initial business combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $313,787, which consisted of $10,806 in operating costs, $160,000 in general and administrative expenses, $150,000 in franchise tax expense, offset by $7,019 in income earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 23, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 11,500,000 units, including 1,500,000 units issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Each unit consists of one share of Class A capital stock, par value $0.0001 and one right, with each right entitling the holder to receive one-eighth (1/8) of one share of Class A common stock. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $115.0 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 400,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit in a private placement to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $4.0 million. In connection with the consummation of the IPO, we issued to the representative and/or its designees 115,000 representative’s shares.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the private placement, $116.15 million ($10.10 per unit) of the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds from the private placement were placed in a trust account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee. We incurred $8,525,729 in IPO related transaction costs, including $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting fees, 1,150,000 for the fair value of shares of Class A common stock issued to underwriters as representative shares, $1,634,620 for the fair value of the founder shares in excess of amounts paid by anchor investors, and $566,109 of offering costs.
For the period from March 31, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $313,787, which consisted of $10,806 in operating costs, $160,000 in general and administrative expenses, $150,000 in franchise tax expense, offset by $7,019 in income earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $762,040 in its operating bank accounts, $116,157,019 in marketable securities held in the Trust Account to be used for a Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem its common stock in connection therewith and a working capital of $737,422. Until the consummation of a business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts.
Going Concern
In connection with the our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until June 23, 2023 to consummate the proposed initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate the proposed initial business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of our Company. Additionally, we may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of our Company through one year from the issuance of these financial statements. Our management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after June 23, 2023. We intend to complete the proposed initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by June 23, 2023. In addition, we may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors or third parties. Our officers, directors and sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the liquidation date of June 23, 2023.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than, an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for cash salary, office space, utilities, secretarial, and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on May 1, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly for up to 12 months (or 13 to 18 months as applicable) following the completion of the IPO.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, up to $4,025,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete the initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares, private placement Shares, shares of Class A common stock underlying the private placement rights, the representative’s shares and shares of Class A common stock included in or underlying the units that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any shares of Class A common stock held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on or around the effective date of the IPO. These holders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company registers such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the underwriters may not exercise their demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five and seven years, respectively, after the effective date of the IPO registration statement.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $2.3 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO.
An additional fee of $0.35 per unit, or $4.025 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, (the “Securities Act”), as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Use of Estimate
The preparation of the financial statement in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statement.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statement, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ from those estimates.
Marketable Securities Held in Trust Account
At December 31, 2021, substantially all of the assets held in the Trust Account were held in money market funds, which are invested primarily in U. S. Treasury securities. Our investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of investments held in Trust Account are included in other income earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair value of investments held in Trust Account are determined using available market information.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $116,157,019 in cash held in the Trust Account.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable class A common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable class A common stock are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
As of December 31, 2021, 11,500,000 shares of class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - Expenses of Offering. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction in equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. We incurred offering costs amounting to $8,525,729 consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting fees, $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting fees, $1,150,000 for underwriting related costs recognized for representative shares, $1,634,620 for the fair value of the founder shares in excess of amounts paid by anchor investors, and $566,109 of other offering costs.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition. Based on our evaluation, it has been concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in the our financial statement. Since we were incorporated on March 31, 2021, the evaluation was performed for the upcoming 2021 tax year which will be the only period subject to examination.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021. We are currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Income and losses are shared pro rata between Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption and non-redeemable ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period. Non-redeemable ordinary shares include Founder Shares, Representative Shares, and Private Placement Shares as these shares do not have any redemption features.
Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the rights issued in connection with the (i) IPO, and (ii) the private placement that convert into 1,487,500 ordinary shares since the conversion of the rights into ordinary shares is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject us to concentration of credit risk consist of a cash account at a financial institution, the balance in which may at times exceed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation coverage limit of $250,000. We have not experienced losses on this account and management believes we are not exposed to significant risks on such account
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of our assets and liabilities approximates the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheets, primarily due to their short-term nature.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our shares of Class A common stock that is held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.