ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
General
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. Our Consolidated Financial Statements are not directly comparable from period to period due to acquisitions and dispositions. Refer to Note 3 of our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this annual report for details of each of these transactions. We have elected the presentation requirements under Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act as a smaller reporting company and have herein included a two-year
discussion of our financial condition and results of operations.
Historical operating results are not necessarily indicative of future operating results. Actual future results may differ from those contained in or implied by the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. These factors include, but are not limited to:
•
the coronavirus COVID-19
pandemic (“COVID-19”)
that adversely impacted our business,
•
risks and uncertainties relating to the need for additional funds to service our debt,
•
risks and uncertainties relating to the need for additional funds to execute our business strategy,
•
our ability to access borrowings under our ABL Facility,
•
reductions in revenue forecasts,
•
our ability to renew our broadcast licenses,
•
changes in interest rates,
•
the timing of our ability to complete any acquisitions or dispositions,
•
costs and synergies resulting from the integration of any completed acquisitions,
•
our ability to effectively manage costs,
•
our ability to drive and manage growth,
•
the popularity of radio as a broadcasting and advertising medium,
•
changes in consumer tastes,
•
the impact of general economic conditions in the United States or in specific markets in which we do business,
•
the impact of inflation increasing operating costs and changing consumer habits,
•
industry conditions, including existing competition and future competitive technologies,
•
disruptions or postponements of advertising schedules and programming in response to national or world events,
•
our ability to generate revenue from new sources, including local commerce and technology-based initiatives, and
•
the impact of regulatory rules or proceedings that may affect our business from time to time, and the future write-off
of any material portion of the fair value of our FCC broadcast licenses and goodwill.
Overview
Salem Media Group, Inc. (“Salem” “we” “us” “our” and “its”) is a domestic multimedia company specializing in Christian and conservative content, with media properties comprising radio broadcasting, digital media, and publishing. Our content is intended for audiences interested in Christian and family-themed programming and conservative news talk. We maintain a website at www.salemmedia.com. Our annual reports on Form 10-K,
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q,
current reports on Form 8-K,
and any amendments to these reports are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after those reports are electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. The information on our website is not a part of or incorporated by reference into this or any other report of the company filed with, or furnished to, the SEC.
We have three operating segments: (1) Broadcast, (2) Digital Media, and (3) Publishing, which also qualify as reportable segments. Our operating segments reflect how our chief operating decision makers, which we define as a collective group of senior executives, assess the performance of each operating segment and determine the appropriate allocations of resources to each segment. We continually review our operating segment classifications to align with operational changes in our business and may make changes as necessary.
We measure and evaluate our operating segments based on operating income and operating expenses that exclude costs related to corporate functions, such as accounting and finance, human resources, legal, tax and treasury. We also exclude costs such as amortization, depreciation, taxes, and interest expense when evaluating the performance of our operating segments.
Our principal sources of broadcast revenue include:
•
the sale of block program time to national and local program producers;
•
the sale of advertising time on our radio stations to national and local advertisers;
•
the sale of banner advertisements on our station websites or on our mobile applications;
•
the sale of digital streaming advertisements on our station websites or on our mobile applications;
•
the sale of advertisements included in digital newsletters;
•
fees earned for the creation of custom web pages and custom digital media campaigns for our advertisers through Salem Surround;
•
the sale of advertising time on our national network;
•
the syndication of programming on our national network;
•
the sale of advertising time through podcasts and video-on-demand
services;
•
product sales and royalties for on-air
host materials, including podcasts and programs; and
•
other revenue such as events, including ticket sales and sponsorships, listener purchase programs, where revenue is generated from special discounts and incentives offered to our listeners from our advertisers; talent fees for voice-overs or custom endorsements from our on-air
personalities and production services, and rental income for studios, towers or office space.
Our principal sources of digital media revenue include:
•
the sale of digital banner advertisements on our websites and mobile applications;
•
the sale of digital streaming advertisements on websites and mobile applications;
•
the support and promotion to stream third-party content on our websites;
•
the sale of advertisements included in digital newsletters;
•
the digital delivery of newsletters to subscribers; and
•
the number of video and graphic downloads.
Our principal sources of publishing revenue include:
•
the sale of books and e-books;
•
publishing fees from authors; and
•
the sale of digital advertising in digital newsletters.
In each of our operating segments, the rates we can charge for airtime, advertising and other products and services are dependent upon several factors, including:
•
audience share;
•
how well our programs and advertisements perform for our clients;
•
the size of the market and audience reached;
•
the number of impressions delivered;
•
the number of advertisements and programs streamed;
•
the number of page views achieved;
•
the number of downloads completed;
•
the number of events held, the number of event sponsorships sold and the attendance at each event;
•
demand for books and publications;
•
general economic conditions; and
•
supply and demand for airtime on a local and national level.
Broadcasting
Our foundational business is radio broadcasting, which includes the ownership and operation of radio stations in large metropolitan markets, our national networks and our national sales firms including Salem Surround. Refer to Item 1. Business of this annual report for a description of our broadcasting operations.
Revenue generated from our radio stations, networks, and sales firms is reported as broadcast revenue in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this annual report. Advertising revenue is recorded on a gross basis unless an agency represents the advertiser, in which case, revenue is reported net of the commission retained by the agency.
Broadcast revenue is impacted by the rates radio stations can charge for programming and advertising time, the level of airtime sold to programmers and advertisers, the number of impressions delivered, or downloads made, and the number of events held, including the size of the event and the number of attendees. Block programming rates are based upon our stations’ ability to attract audiences that will support the program producers through contributions and purchases of their products. Advertising rates are based upon the demand for advertising time, which in turn is based on our stations and networks’ ability to produce results for their advertisers. We market ourselves to advertisers based on the responsiveness of our audiences. We do not subscribe to traditional audience measuring services for most of our radio stations. In select markets, we subscribe to Nielsen Audio, which develops monthly reports measuring a radio station’s audience share in the demographic groups targeted by advertisers. Each of our radio stations and our networks has a pre-determined
level of time available for block programming and/or advertising, which may vary at different times of the day.
Nielsen Audio uses the Portable People Meter TM
(“PPM”
) technology to collect data for its ratings service. PPM is a small device that is capable of automatically measuring radio, television, Internet, satellite radio and satellite television signals encoded by the broadcaster. The PPM offers a number of advantages over traditional diary ratings collection systems, including ease of use, more reliable ratings data, shorter time periods between when advertising runs and actual listening data, and little manipulation of data by users. A disadvantage of the PPM includes data fluctuations from changes to the “panel” (a group of individuals holding PPM devices). This makes all stations susceptible to some inconsistencies in ratings that may or may not accurately reflect the actual number of listeners at any given time. We subscribe to Nielsen Audio for ratings services in seven of our broadcast markets.
Our results are subject to seasonal fluctuations. As is typical in the broadcasting industry, our second and fourth quarter advertising revenue typically exceeds our first and third quarter advertising revenue. Seasonal fluctuations in advertising revenue correspond with quarterly fluctuations in the retail industry. Additionally, we experience increased demand for political advertising during election even numbered years, over non-election
odd numbered years. Political advertising revenue varies based on the number and type of candidates as well as the number and type of debated issues.
Our cash flows from broadcasting may be affected by transitional periods experienced by radio stations when, based on the nature of the radio station, our plans for the market and other circumstances, we find it beneficial to change the station format. During this transitional period, when we develop a radio station’s listener and customer base, the station may generate negative or insignificant cash flow.
In broadcasting, trade or barter agreements are commonly used to reduce cash expenses by exchanging advertising time for goods or services. We may enter barter agreements to exchange airtime or digital advertising for goods or services that can be used in our business or that can be sold to our audience under Listener Purchase Programs. The terms of these barter agreements permit us to preempt the barter airtime or digital campaign in favor of customers who purchase the airtime or digital campaign for cash. The value of these non-cash
exchanges is included in revenue in an amount equal to the fair value of the goods or services we receive. Each transaction must be reviewed to determine that the products, supplies and/or services we receive have economic substance, or value to us. We record barter operating expenses upon receipt and usage of the products, supplies and services, as applicable. We record barter revenue as advertising spots or digital campaigns are delivered, which represents the point in time that control is transferred to the customer thereby completing our performance obligation. Barter revenue is recorded on a gross basis unless an agency represents the programmer, in which case, revenue is reported net of the commission retained by the agency. During each of the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, 99% and 98% of our broadcast revenue was sold for cash, respectively.
Broadcast operating expenses include: (i) employee salaries, commissions and related employee benefits and taxes, (ii) facility expenses such as lease expense and utilities, (iii) marketing and promotional expenses, (iv) production and programming expenses, and (v) music license fees. In addition to these expenses, our network incurs programming costs and lease expenses for satellite communication facilities.
Digital Media
Our digital media segment provides Christian, conservative, investing, retirement, e-commerce,
audio and video streaming, and other resources digitally through the web. Refer to Item 1. Business of this annual report for a description of each of our digital media websites and operations.
Revenue generated from this segment is reported as digital media revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Operations included in this annual report. Digital media revenue is impacted by the rates our sites can charge for advertising time, the level of advertisements sold, the number of impressions delivered, or the number of products sold, and the number of digital subscriptions sold. Like our broadcasting segment, our second and fourth quarter advertising revenue generally exceeds our first and third quarter advertising revenue. This seasonal
fluctuation in advertising revenue corresponds with quarterly fluctuations in the retail advertising industry. We also experience fluctuations in quarter-over-quarter comparisons based on the date on which Easter is observed, as this holiday generates a higher volume of product downloads from our church product websites. Additionally, we experience increased demand for advertising time and placement during election years for political advertisements.
The primary operating expenses incurred by our digital media businesses include: (i) employee salaries, commissions and related employee benefits and taxes, (ii) facility expenses such as lease expense and utilities, (iii) marketing and promotional expenses, (iv) royalties, (v) streaming costs, and (vi) cost of goods sold associated with e-commerce
sites.
Publishing
Our publishing operations include book publishing through Regnery®
Publishing and self-publishing services through Salem Author Services. Refer to Item 1. Business of this annual report for a detailed description of our publishing operations.
Revenue generated from this segment is reported as publishing revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Operations included in this annual report. Publishing revenue is impacted by the retail price of books and e-books,
the number of books sold, the number and retail price of e-books
sold, and the number and rate at which self-published books are published. Regnery®
Publishing revenue is impacted by elections as it generates higher levels of interest and demand for publications containing conservative and political based opinions.
The primary operating expenses incurred by our publishing businesses include: (i) employee salaries, commissions and related employee benefits and taxes, (ii) facility expenses such as lease expense and utilities, (iii) marketing and promotional expenses; and (iv) cost of goods sold that includes book printing and production costs, fulfillment costs, author royalties and inventory reserves.
Known Trends and Uncertainties
The COVID-19
global pandemic that began in March 2020 materially impacted our business. We experienced a rapid decline in revenue from advertising, programming, events, and book sales. Several advertisers reduced or ceased advertising spending due to the outbreak and stay-at-home
orders that effectively shut many businesses down. The revenue decline impacted our broadcast segment, which derives substantial revenue from local advertisers who were particularly hard hit due to social distancing and government interventions, and our publishing segment, which derives revenue from book sales through retail stores and live events.
While we see progress being made in revenue returning to pre-pandemic
levels, the COVID-19
pandemic continues to create significant uncertainty and disruption in the economy. These uncertainties could materially impact significant accounting estimates related to, but not limited to, allowances for doubtful accounts, impairments, and right-of-use assets.
As a result, many estimates and assumptions require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information emerges, and such changes are recognized or disclosed in our consolidated financial statements.
The growth of broadcast revenue associated with the sale of airtime remains challenged. We believe this is due to audiences spending less time commuting in cars, increased competition from other forms of content distribution, and decreases in the length of time spent listening to broadcast radio as compared to audio streaming services, podcasts, and satellite radio. These factors may lead advertisers to conclude that the effectiveness of radio has diminished. In response, we continue to enhance our digital assets to complement our broadcast content. The increased use of smart speakers, or voice activated platforms, that provide audiences with the ability to access AM and FM radio stations show increased potential for radio broadcasters to reach audiences.
Our broadcast spot advertising revenue is particularly dependent on advertising from our Los Angeles and Dallas markets, which generated 13.6% and 21.1%, respectively, of our total net broadcast spot advertising revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 14.1% and 22.1%, respectively, of our total net broadcast spot advertising revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Digital revenue is impacted by the nature and delivery of page views and the number of advertisements per page. We have experienced a shift in the number of page views from desktop devices to mobile devices. While mobile page views have increased dramatically, they carry a lower number of advertisements per page and are generally sold at lower rates. A shift from desktop page views to mobile device views negatively impacts revenue as mobile devices carry lower rates and less advertisement per page. Decreases in digital revenue could adversely affect our operating results, financial condition, and results of operations. To minimize the impact that any one of these areas could have, we continue to explore opportunities to cross-promote our brands and our content, and to strategically monitor costs.
Key Financial Performance Indicators - Same-Station Definition
In the discussion of our results of operations below, we compare our broadcast operating results between periods on an as-reported
basis, which includes the operating results of all radio stations and networks owned or operated at any time during either period and on a Same Station basis. Same Station is a Non-GAAP
financial measure used both in presenting our results to stockholders and the investment community as well as in our internal evaluations and management of the business. We believe that Same Station Operating Income provides a meaningful comparison of period over period performance of our core broadcast operations as this measure excludes the impact of new stations, the impact of stations we no longer own or operate, and the impact of stations operating under a new programming format. Our presentation of Same Station Operating Income is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable financial measures reported in accordance with GAAP. Refer to “Non-GAAP
Financial Measures” below for definitions and a reconciliation of these non-GAAP
performance measures to the most comparable GAAP measures.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures
Management uses certain non-GAAP
financial measures defined below in communications with investors, analysts, rating agencies, banks, and others to assist such parties in understanding the impact of various items on our financial statements. We use these non-GAAP
financial measures to evaluate financial results, develop budgets, manage expenditures and as a measure of performance under compensation programs.
Our presentation of these non-GAAP
financial measures should not be considered as a substitute for or superior to the most directly comparable financial measures as reported in accordance with GAAP.
Item 10€ of Regulation S-K
defines and prescribes the conditions under which certain non-GAAP
financial information may be presented in this annual report. We closely monitor EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Station Operating Income (“SOI”), Same Station net broadcast revenue, Same Station broadcast operating expenses, Same Station Operating Income, Digital Media Operating Income, and Publishing Operating Income, all of which are non-GAAP
financial measures. We believe that these non-GAAP
financial measures provide useful information about our core operating results, and thus, are appropriate to enhance the overall understanding of our financial performance. These non-GAAP
financial measures are intended to provide management and investors a more complete understanding of our underlying operational results, trends, and performance.
The performance of a radio broadcasting company is customarily measured by the ability of its stations to generate SOI. We define SOI as net broadcast revenue less broadcast operating expenses. Accordingly, changes in net broadcast revenue and broadcast operating expenses, as explained above, have a direct impact on changes in SOI. SOI is not a measure of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP. SOI should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for our results of operations presented on the basis of GAAP. We believe that
SOI is a useful non-GAAP
financial measure to investors when considered in conjunction with operating income (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures to SOI), because it is generally recognized by the radio broadcasting industry as a tool in measuring performance and in applying valuation methodologies for companies in the media, entertainment, and communications industries. SOI is commonly used by investors and analysts who report on the industry to provide comparisons between broadcasting groups. We use SOI as one of the key measures of operating efficiency and profitability, including our internal reviews for potential impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets and our internal reviews to approve capital expenditures. SOI does not purport to represent cash provided by operating activities. Our statement of cash flows presents our cash activity in accordance with GAAP and our income statement presents our financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our definition of SOI is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
We define Same Station net broadcast revenue as net broadcast revenue from our radio stations and networks that we own or operate in the same format on the first and last day of each quarter, as well as the corresponding quarter of the prior year. We define Same Station broadcast operating expenses as broadcast operating expenses from our radio stations and networks that we own or operate in the same format on the first and last day of each quarter, as well as the corresponding quarter of the prior year. Same Station Operating Income includes those stations we own or operate in the same format on the first and last day of each quarter, as well as the corresponding quarter of the prior year. Same Station Operating Income for a full calendar year is calculated as the sum of the Same Station-results for each of the four quarters of that year. We use Same Station Operating Income, a non-GAAP
financial measure, both in presenting our results to stockholders and the investment community, and in our internal evaluations and management of the business. We believe that Same Station Operating Income provides a meaningful comparison of period over period performance of our core broadcast operations as this measure excludes the impact of new stations, the impact of stations we no longer own or operate, and the impact of stations operating under a new programming format. Our presentation of Same Station Operating Income is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable financial measures reported in accordance with GAAP. Our definition of Same Station net broadcast revenue, Same Station broadcast operating expenses and Same Station Operating Income is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
We apply a similar methodology to our digital media and publishing group. Digital Media Operating Income is defined as net digital media revenue less digital media operating expenses. Publishing Operating Income (Loss) is defined as net publishing revenue less publishing operating expenses. Digital Media Operating Income and Publishing Operating Income are not measures of performance in accordance with GAAP. Our presentations of these non-GAAP
financial performance measures are not to be considered a substitute for, or superior to, our operating results reported in accordance with GAAP. We believe that Digital Media Operating Income and Publishing Operating Income are useful non-GAAP
financial measures to investors, when considered in conjunction with operating income (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure), because they are comparable to those used to measure performance of our broadcasting entities. We use this analysis as one of the key measures of operating efficiency, profitability and in our internal reviews for impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets and our internal reviews to approve capital expenditures. This measurement does not purport to represent cash provided by operating activities. Our statement of cash flows presents our cash activity in accordance with GAAP and our income statement presents our financial performance in accordance with GAAP. Our definitions of Digital Media Operating Income and Publishing Operating Income (Loss) are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
We define EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA before gains or losses on the disposition of assets, before changes in the estimated fair value of contingent earn-out
consideration, before gains on bargain purchases, before the change in fair value of interest rate swaps, before impairments, before debt modification costs, before net miscellaneous income and expenses, before loss on early retirement of debt, before (gain) loss from discontinued operations and before non-cash
compensation expense. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are commonly used by the broadcast and
media industry as important measures of performance and are used by investors and analysts who report on the industry to provide meaningful comparisons between broadcasters. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of liquidity or of performance in accordance with GAAP and should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for or superior to our results of operations and financial condition presented in accordance with GAAP. Our definitions of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
For all non-GAAP
financial measures, investors should consider the limitations associated with these metrics, including the potential lack of comparability of these measures from one company to another.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP
Financial Measures:
In the tables below, we present a reconciliation of net broadcast revenue, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Same Station net broadcast revenue, and broadcast operating expenses, the most comparable GAAP measure to Same Station broadcast operating expense. We show our calculation of SOI and Same Station Operating Income, which is reconciled from net income, the most comparable GAAP measure in the table following our calculation of Digital Media Operating Income and Publishing Operating Income (Loss). Our presentation of these non-GAAP
measures are not to be considered a substitute for or superior to the most directly comparable measures reported in accordance with GAAP.
In the table below, we present our calculations of Station Operating Income, Digital Media Operating Income, and Publishing Operating Income. Our presentation of these non-GAAP
performance indicators are not to be considered a substitute for or superior to the directly comparable measures reported in accordance with GAAP.
In the table below, we present a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Station Operating Income, Digital Media Operating Income, and Publishing Operating Income (Loss). Our presentation of these non-GAAP
performance indicators are not to be considered a substitute for or superior to the most directly comparable measures reported in accordance with GAAP.
In the table below, we present a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to EBITDA to Net Income (Loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP
financial performance measures that are not to be considered a substitute for or superior to the most directly comparable measures reported in accordance with GAAP.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
The following factors affected our results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year:
Financing
•
On September 10, 2021, we exchanged $112.8 million of the 2024 Notes for $114.7 million (reflecting a call premium of 1.688%) of newly issued 7.125% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (“2028 Notes.”) Contemporaneously with the refinancing, we obtained commitments from the holders of the 2028 Notes to purchase up to $50 million in additional 2028 Notes (“Delayed Draw 2028 Notes,”) contingent upon satisfying certain performance benchmarks, the proceeds of which are to be used exclusively to repurchase or repay the remaining balance outstanding of the 2024 Notes.
•
In addition to the exchange on September 10, 2021, we repurchased an additional $43.3 million in total of the 2024 Notes for $44.0 million in cash, recognizing a net loss of $1.0 million after adjusting for bond issuance costs through multiple transactions during the second half of 2021.
•
We received $11.2 million in aggregate principal amount of PPP loans through the SBA during the first quarter of 2021 based on the eligibility of our radio stations and networks as determined on a per-location
basis. We used the PPP loan proceeds according to the terms and filed timely applications for forgiveness. During July 2021, the SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans resulting in a pre-tax
gain on the forgiveness of $11.2 million. The remaining PPP loan was repaid in July 2021.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
The operating results of our business acquisitions and asset purchases are included in our consolidated results of operations from their respective closing date or the date that we began operating them under an LMA or TBA. The operating results of business and asset divestitures are excluded from our consolidated results of operations from their respective closing date or the date that a third-party began operating them under an LMA or TBA.
•
On November 30, 2021, we sold approximately 77 acres of land in Tampa, Florida for $13.5 million in cash. We recognized a pre-tax
gain on the sale of $12.9 million.
•
On July 27, 2021, we sold the Hilary Kramer Financial Newsletter and related assets for $0.2 million to be collected in quarterly installments over the two-year
period ending September 30, 2023. We recognized a pre-tax
gain on the sale of $0.1 million.
•
On July 23, 2021, we sold approximately 34 acres of land in Lewisville, Texas, for $12.1 million in cash. The land was being used as the transmitter site for company owned radio station KSKY-AM.
We retained a portion of the land in the southwest corner of the site to continue operating the radio station. We recognized a pre-tax
gain on the sale of $10.5 million.
•
On July 2, 2021, we acquired the SeniorResource.com domain for $0.1 million in cash.
•
On July 1, 2021, we acquired the ShiftWorship.com domain and digital assets for $2.6 million in cash. The digital content library is operated within Salem Web Network’s church products division.
•
On June 1, 2021, we acquired radio stations KDIA-AM
and KDYA-AM
in San Francisco, California for $0.6 million in cash.
•
On May 25, 2021, we sold Singing News Magazine and Singing News Radio for $0.1 million in cash.
•
On April 28, 2021, we acquired the Centerline New Media domain and digital assets for $1.3 million in cash. The digital content library is operated within Salem Web Network’s church products division.
•
On March 8, 2021, we acquired the Triple Threat Trader newsletter. We paid no cash at the time of closing and assumed deferred subscription liabilities of $0.1 million.
•
On March 18, 2021, we sold radio station WKAT-AM
and an FM translator in Miami, Florida for $3.5 million. The buyer began operating the station under a LMA in November 2020.
•
On September 15, 2020, we acquired the Hyper Pixels Media website and related assets for $1.1 million in cash. We paid $0.4 million in cash upon closing with deferred payments of $0.4 million due January 31, 2021, and $0.3 million due September 15, 2021.
•
On April 6, 2020, we sold radio station WBZW-AM
and an FM translator construction permit in Orlando, Florida, for $0.2 million in cash.
Net Broadcast Revenue
The following table shows the dollar amount and percentage of net broadcast revenue for each broadcast revenue source.
Block programming revenue increased $2.2 million, including $1.7 million from national programming and $0.5 million from local programming. National programming on our Christian Teaching and Talk format radio stations increased $1.4 million, including the impact of early payment discounts of $1.2 million included in the 2020 results. Revenue from our News Talk format stations increased by $0.3 million in national programming and $0.3 million in local programming, including local sports programming that resumed in 2021. The remaining increase in local programming of $0.2 million includes a $0.1 million increase from our CCM format radio stations and $0.1 million from other formats due to an increase in the number of programmers. With this increase in demand for programming, we expect to see increases in rates as premium time slots are sold out.
Advertising revenue, net of agency commissions, increased $1.3 million overall, including a $2.3 million increase in local advertising that was offset by a $1.0 million decline in national advertising. Excluding the impact of political revenue, advertising revenue increased $3.2 million overall including a $2.9 million increase in local advertising revenue and a $0.3 million increase in national advertising revenue. Excluding political, the increase includes $2.6 million from our CCM format radio stations, primarily in Atlanta, Dallas, and Los Angeles, and $1.1 million from other format radio stations, that was offset with a $0.4 million decline from our Spanish Christian Teaching and Talk format radio stations, a $0.1 million decline from our News Talk format radio stations, and a $0.1 million decline from our Christian Teaching and Talk format radio stations. The increases in Atlanta, Dallas and Los Angeles reflect an increase in demand for advertising as pandemic restrictions ease which in turn creates higher spot rates for premium airtime spots. The decline from our Christian Teaching and Talk format radio stations reflects the sale of WKAT-AM
in Miami, Florida and the reformatting of our remaining Spanish Christian Teaching and Talk format radio stations.
Broadcast digital revenue, net of agency commissions, or net digital revenue generated from our broadcast markets and networks, increased by $7.7 million due to growth in digital product offerings and the launch of the Salem Podcast Network in January 2021. Salem Podcast Network is a highly specialized platform for conservative, political, news, and family-oriented podcasts with talk show hosts including Dinesh D’Souza, Todd Starnes, Charlie Kirk, and Trish Regan. Salem Podcast Network joins Salem Surround, our multimedia digital advertising agency providing digital marketing services to our customers, and SalemNow, our on-demand
pay-per-view
video streaming platform launched in the fourth quarter of 2020, along with our owned and operated station branded websites to offer new digital products and services. Increases in digital revenue include
$6.4 million from the January 2021 launch of the Salem Podcast Network, a $3.6 million increase in digital marketing services through Salem Surround, a $1.2 million increase in streaming revenue, and a $1.1 million increase in digital advertising revenue from our station websites that were offset by a $3.7 million decline in revenue from SalemNow that released two successful titles during the prior year and a decrease of $0.8 million from our networks. There were no significant changes in digital rates as compared to the prior year.
Declines in infomercial revenue were due to a reduction in the number of infomercials aired with no significant changes in rates as compared to the prior year. The placement of infomercials can vary significantly from one period to another due to the number of time slots available and the degree to which the infomercial content is considered to be of interest to our audience.
Network revenue, net of amounts reported as digital, increased by $0.4 million due to a $2.5 million increase in revenue from our nationally syndicated host programs that was partially offset by a $2.1 million decline in political advertising.
Other revenue increased by $1.8 million including a $0.8 million increase in event revenue as some live events return, a $0.2 million increase in listener purchase program revenue from higher listener participation as schools and businesses return to full operations, a $0.4 million increase in LMA and TBA fees from radio station KBJD-AM,
Denver, Colorado and KGU-AM,
Honolulu, Hawaii, a $0.2 million increase from the sale of an integrated marketing campaign to our advertiser that included television and billboards, and a $0.2 million increase in talent fees. Event revenue varies from period to period based on the nature and timing of events, audience demand, and in some cases, the weather which can affect attendance.
On a Same Station basis, net broadcast revenue increased $13.2 million, which reflects the above-described items net of the impact of stations acquired, stations disposed of, and stations with format changes.
Net Digital Media Revenue
The following table shows the dollar amount and percentage of national net digital media revenue, or revenue generated from our websites and digital subscriptions, for each digital media revenue source.
National digital advertising revenue, net of agency commissions, or net advertising revenue from our owned and operated Christian and conservative opinion websites, declined by $1.0 million including a $1.3 million decline from Townhall Media due to a lower volume of advertisements on our conservative opinion websites that were partially offset with a $0.2 million increase in programmatic advertising rates on Salem Web Network. Our
conservative opinion websites experience lower demand and lower page views during non-election
years. We also experienced lower demand from advertisers who move advertising spending to digital programmatic advertisers, such as Facebook and Google, and we may lose advertisers who decide to reduce or eliminate advertising on political-content websites such as ours. We continue to acquire, develop, and promote the use of mobile applications to reduce our dependency on page views from digital programmatic advertisers. Because mobile page views carry fewer advertisements and tend to have shorter site visits as compared to desktop, our growth in mobile page views exceeds our growth in revenue from the mobile applications.
Digital streaming revenue was consistent with the prior year with no significant changes in rates or volume as compared to the prior year.
Revenue from digital subscriptions increased by $3.0 million on a consolidated basis including a $1.1 million increase from Christianjobs.com and Churchstaffing.com due to increases in job postings as job markets start to re-open,
a $1.0 million increase from Eagle Financial Publications, and a $0.9 million increase from Townhall Media that continued to see growth from the launch of Townhall VIP in the fourth quarter of 2019. Eagle Financial Publications saw an increase in the number of subscribers resulting from our increased investment in marketing with no significant changes in rates over the same period of the prior year.
Digital download revenue increased by $0.5 million from our church product websites, WorshipHouseMedia.com and SermonSpiceTM
.com and the acquisition of Centerline New Media in April 2021 and ShiftWorship.com in July 2021. There were no significant changes in rates as compared to the prior year.
E-commerce
revenue includes in-app
purchases through Salem Web Network that increased in volume with no significant changes in rates over the prior year.
Other revenue includes revenue sharing arrangements for mobile applications and mail list rentals which remained consistent with no changes in volume or rates.
Net Publishing Revenue
The following table shows the dollar amount and percentage of net publishing revenue for each publishing revenue source.
Net book sales increased by $5.9 million, including a $5.6 million increase from Regnery®
Publishing, due to a 68% increase in the number of books sold, largely attributable to the reopening of bookstores and retail locations and a strong lineup of book titles, that was offset by a 7% decrease in the average unit price and a $0.3 million increase in sales from Salem Author Services. The increase in the number of print books sold through Regnery®
Publishing resulted in a $0.9 million increase to the estimated sales returns and allowances. The $0.3 million increase in book sales from Salem Author Services was due to sales at tradeshows with events resuming in limited capacity as pandemic restrictions are lifted. There were no significant changes in rates for Salem Author Services as compared to the prior year.
Regnery®
Publishing e-book
sales increased $0.4 million with a 12% increase in the average price per unit sold and a 12% increase in sales volume. E-book
sales vary based on the composite mix of titles released and available in each period. Revenues can vary significantly based on the book release date and the number of titles that achieve placement on bestseller lists, which can increase awareness and demand for the book.
Self-publishing fees increased $0.7 million due an increase in the number of authors and services provided with no major change in fees charged to authors.
Declines in print magazine subscription revenues and advertising revenues reflect the sale of Singing News Magazine on May 25, 2021, and ongoing lower consumer demand and distribution levels prior to the sale.
Digital advertising revenue decreased $0.3 million due to the sale of Singing News Magazine on May 25, 2021, and changes in the number of websites offered through Regnery®
Publishing with no changes in rates.
Other revenue includes change fees, video trailers, and subright revenue for foreign translation and audio books for original published titles from Regnery®
Publishing which increased $0.1 million.
Broadcast Operating Expenses
Broadcast operating expenses increased by $4.8 million, including a $3.7 million increase from Salem Podcast Network, a $2.3 million increase from Salem Surround, and a $1.3 million increase from broadcast stations that was offset with a $2.5 million decline in expenses from Salem Now. The increase in expenses associated with Salem Surround and Salem Podcast Network are consistent with the growth of these entities in expanding digital product offerings through our broadcast division. SalemNow incurred greater costs during 2020 as a result of two successful titles offered during that year. The increase of $1.3 million from our broadcast stations includes a $2.8 million increase in payroll costs including the January 2021 reversal of company-wide pay cuts implemented in 2020, a $0.9 million increase in advertising and event costs, a $0.6 million increase in health insurance costs and a $0.6 million increase in production and programming costs that were partially offset with a $3.3 million decline in bad debt expense due to the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the prior year reserves and a $0.3 million decrease in professional services.
On a same-station basis, broadcast operating expenses increased by $5.9 million. The increase on a same station basis reflects these items net of the impact of start-up
costs associated with acquisitions, station dispositions and format changes.
Digital Media Operating Expenses
Digital media operating expenses increased by $2.1 million, including a $1.6 million increase in advertising and promotional costs, a $1.1 million increase in payroll and a $0.7 million increase in sales-based commissions and incentives that were offset by a $0.8 million decrease in cost of sales, a $0.3 million decrease in bad debt expense, a $0.1 million decrease in rent and facilities related expenses and a $0.1 million decrease in professional services. The increase in advertising and promotional costs were driven by new marketing initiatives for Eagle Financial Publications that management believes to be beneficial for the business and an overall increase in adverting spending. The increase in payroll related expenses reflects the January 2021 reversal of company-wide pay cuts that were implemented in 2020. Decreases in cost of sales reflect lower royalty costs from SWN Church Products following our acquisitions of Centerline Media and ShiftWorship that had previously been paid royalties for content and lower software support fees that resulted from a change in service providers and renegotiated contracts.
Publishing Operating Expenses
Publishing operating expenses increased by $1.3 million, including a $1.5 million increase in costs of sales and a $0.8 million increase in royalty expenses based on higher sales revenue, a 0.5 million increase in payroll costs due to the January 2021 reversal of company-wide pay cuts that were implemented in 2020 and a $0.2 million increase in advertising and promotional costs that were offset by a $0.9 million decrease in bad debt expense, a $0.5 million decrease in facility related expenses due to the relocation of our offices from Washington D.C. to Virginia, and a $0.4 million decrease in professional services. The increase in costs of goods sold included a $1.7 million increase from print books sold by Regnery®
Publishing and $0.1 million increase from Salem Author Services due to higher volume of book sales offset by a $0.3 million decline from Salem Publishing due to the sale of Singing News Magazine. The gross profit margin for Regnery®
Publishing improved to 50% from 44% as sales volume increased while material costs increased only slightly. Regnery®
Publishing margins vary based on the volume of e-book
sales, which have higher margins due to the nature of delivery and no reserve for sales returns and allowances. The gross profit margin for Salem Author Services improved to 74% from 72% due to higher sales volume while paper costs for print book sales increased only slightly.
Unallocated Corporate Expenses
Unallocated corporate expenses include shared services, such as accounting and finance, human resources, legal, tax, and treasury, that are not directly attributable to any one of our operating segments. The increase of $1.3 million includes a $2.1 million increase in payroll costs due to the January 2021 reversal of company-wide pay cuts that were implemented in 2020 that were offset by a $0.1 million decrease in travel and entertainment-related expenses due to the costs incurred in early 2020 prior to pandemic restrictions, a $0.2 million decrease in
professional services, and a $0.6 million decrease in employee-related benefit costs associated with the cash surrender value of split dollar life insurance that was discontinued in 2020.
Debt Modification Costs
On September 10, 2021, we exchanged $112.8 million of the 2024 Notes for $114.7 million (reflecting a call premium of 1.688%) of 2028 Notes. The transaction was assessed on a lender-specific level and was accounted for as a debt modification in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 470 with $2.3 million of fees paid to third parties included in operating expenses for the period. We recorded additional debt modification costs of $0.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense reflects the impact of prior year capital expenditures for data processing equipment and computer software that had shorter estimated useful lives as compared to towers or other assets and were fully depreciated during the current year. There were no changes in our depreciation methods or in the estimated useful lives of our asset groups.
Amortization Expense
The decrease in amortization expense reflects the impact of fully amortized domain names, customer lists and contracts, and subscriber base lists that had estimated useful lives of three to five years. These items were fully amortized at or near the beginning of the 2021 calendar year resulting in lower amortization expense for this year. There were no changes in our amortization methods or the estimated useful lives of our intangible asset groups.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived Long-Term Assets Other Than Goodwill
In March 2020, we performed an interim review of broadcast licenses for impairment due to the COVID-19
pandemic and the adverse impact on revenue. We recorded an impairment charge of $17.0 million to the value of broadcast licenses in Chicago, Cleveland, Louisville, Philadelphia, Portland, Sacramento, and Tampa. We also recorded an impairment charge of $0.3 million to the value of mastheads. These impairments were driven by declines in projected revenue resulting from the pandemic and an increase in the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (“WACC”). We believed that these factors were indicative of trends in the industry as a whole and not unique to our company or operations.
Impairment of Goodwill
In March 2020, we performed an interim review of goodwill for impairment due to the COVID-19
pandemic and the adverse impact on revenue. We recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $0.3 million. The impairment was driven by declines in projected revenue due to the resulting from the pandemic and an increase in the WACC. We believed that these factors were indicative of trends in the industry as a whole and not unique to our company or operations.
Net (Gain) Loss on the Disposition of Assets
We recognized a net gain on the disposition of assets of $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 based on land sales of 77 acres of land in Tampa, Florida that generated a $12.9 million pre-tax
gain and 34 acres in Lewisville, Texas that generated a $10.5 million pre-tax
gain, and a $0.5 million pre-tax
gain on the sale of Singing News Magazine and Singing News Radio and a $0.1 million pre-tax
gain on the sale of the Hilary Kramer Financial Newsletter and related assets, that was offset by a $0.4 million of additional costs recorded upon closing on the sale of radio station WKAT-AM
and an FM translator in Miami, Florida as well as various other asset disposals.
The net loss on the disposition of assets of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $1.4 million estimated pre-tax
loss associated with the sale of radio station WKAT-AM
in Miami, Florida and our plans to exit that market, as well as various other asset disposals.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income represents earnings on excess cash and interest due under promissory notes.
Interest expense includes interest due on outstanding debt balances and non-cash
accretion associated with deferred installments. The decrease of $0.3 million reflects the lower outstanding balance of the Notes, the lower outstanding balance of the ABL Facility, and finance lease obligations outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We received $11.2 million in aggregate principal amount of PPP loans through the SBA during the first quarter of 2021 based on the eligibility of our radio stations and networks as determined on a per-location
basis. We used the PPP loan proceeds according to the terms and filed timely applications for forgiveness. During July 2021, the SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans resulting in a pre-tax
gain on the forgiveness of $11.2 million.
The loss on the early retirement of long-term debt reflects $43.3 million of repurchases of the 2024 Notes for $44.0 million in cash, recognizing a net loss of $1.0 million after adjusting for bond issuance costs. The gain on the early retirement of long-term debt reflects $3.5 million of repurchases of the 2024 Notes at prices below face value resulting in a pre-tax
gain of $49,000 for the year ended December 31,2020.
Net miscellaneous income and expenses includes non-operating
receipts such as usage fees and other miscellaneous expenses.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We recognized a tax benefit of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a tax provision of $30.3 million for the prior year. The provision for income taxes as a percentage of income before income taxes, or the effective tax rate was (1.9)% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to (127.3)% for the prior year. The effective tax rate for each period differs from the federal statutory income rate of 21.0% due to the effect of the sale of assets in various states, state income taxes, certain expenses that are not deductible for tax purposes, forgiveness of the PPP loan and changes in the valuation allowance. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the primary drivers of the effective tax rate includes a federal income tax provision generated from operations of $8.6 million, a reduction to the valuation allowance of $7.4 million relating to the utilization federal net operating loss carryforwards, a $1.5 million valuation allowance related to the utilization of state net operating loss carryforwards, and a favorable tax adjustment of $2.4 million around the forgiveness of the PPP loans along with other permanent differences and other state statutory rate adjustments. The state income tax provision is an accumulation of applicable state income taxes calculated in accordance with each state’s tax laws and each state’s pre-tax
income that ranges from various losses to income levels.
Net Income (Loss)
We recognized net income of $41.5 million compared to a net loss of $54.1 million during the same period of the prior year due to the changes described above.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates require the use of judgment as future events, and the effect of these events cannot be predicted with certainty. The COVID-19
pandemic created significant uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. It is reasonably possible that these uncertainties could materially impact our estimates related to, but not limited to, revenue recognition, broadcast licenses, goodwill, and income taxes. As a result, many of our estimates and assumptions require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility.
Our estimates may change as new events occur and additional information emerges, and such changes are recognized or disclosed in our consolidated financial statements. We evaluate and update our assumptions and estimates on an ongoing basis and we may consult outside experts to assist as considered necessary.
Business and Asset Acquisitions
We perform purchase price accounting upon an acquisition. The total acquisition consideration is allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the date of the transaction. Estimates of the fair value include discounted estimated cash flows to be generated by the assets and their expected useful lives based on historical experience, market trends and any synergies believed to be achieved from the acquisition. Acquisitions may include contingent earn-out
consideration, the fair value of which is estimated as of the acquisition date as the present value of the expected contingent payments as determined using weighted probabilities of the payment amounts.
We may retain a third-party appraiser to estimate the fair value of the acquired net assets as of the acquisition date. As part of the valuation and appraisal process, the third-party appraiser prepares a report assigning estimated fair values to the various asset categories in our financial statements. These fair value estimates are subjective in nature and require careful consideration and judgment. Management reviews the third-party reports for reasonableness of the assigned values. We believe that the purchase price allocations represent the appropriate estimated fair value of the assets acquired and we have not had to modify our purchase price allocations.
We estimate the economic life of each tangible and intangible asset acquired to determine the period of time in which the asset should be depreciated or amortized. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the economic life of each asset. We consider our own experience with similar assets, industry trends, market conditions and the age of the property at the time of our acquisition to estimate the economic life of each asset. If the financial condition of the assets were to deteriorate, the resulting change in life or impairment of the asset could cause a material impact and volatility in our operating results. To date, we have not experienced changes in the economic life established for each major category of our assets.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Approximately 67% of our total assets at December 31, 2021, consists of indefinite-lived intangible assets that originated from acquisitions in which a significant amount of the purchase price was allocated to broadcast licenses and goodwill. We do not amortize indefinite-lived intangible assets, but rather test for impairment annually or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that an asset may be impaired. We perform our annual impairment testing during the fourth quarter of each year, which coincides with our budget and planning process for the upcoming year.
Impairment testing requires estimates of the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets. We believe that these estimates of fair value are critical accounting estimates as the value is significant in relation to our total
assets and the estimates incorporate variables and assumptions based on our experiences and judgment about our future operating performance. Fair value measurements use significant unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the estimates that market participants would use in measuring fair value, including assumptions about risk. If actual future results are less favorable than the assumptions and estimates used in our estimates, we are subject to future impairment charges, the amount of which may be material. The unobservable inputs are defined in FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures
as Level 3 inputs discussed in Note 12 in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this annual report.
The first step of our impairment testing is to perform a qualitative assessment as to whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. This qualitative assessment requires significant judgment when considering the events and circumstances that may affect the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets. These events and circumstances are not all-inclusive
and are not by themselves indicators of impairment. We consider external and internal factors when reviewing the following events and circumstances, which are presented in the order of what we believe to be the strongest to weakest indicators of impairment:
(1) the difference between any recent fair value calculations and the carrying value;
(2) financial performance, such as station operating income, including performance as compared to projected results used in prior estimates of fair value;
(3) macroeconomic economic conditions, including limitations on accessing capital that could affect the discount rates used in prior estimates of fair value;
(4) industry and market considerations such as a decline in market-dependent multiples or metrics, a change in demand, competition, or other economic factors;
(5) operating cost factors, such as increases in labor, that could have a negative effect on future expected earnings and cash flows;
(6) legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business, or other factors;
(7) other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in management or customers; and
(8) any changes to the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset.
If it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, we are required to perform a second step to preparing a quantitative analysis to estimate the fair or enterprise value of the assets. We did not find reconciliation to our current market capitalization meaningful in the determination of our enterprise value given current factors that impact our market capitalization, including but not limited to: limited trading volume, the impact of our publishing segment operating losses and the significant voting control of our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer. We engage an independent third-party appraisal and valuation firm to assist us with determining the enterprise value as part of our quantitative review.
If the results of our quantitative analysis indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value, an impairment is recorded equal to the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value.
We believe we have made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, however, these estimates and assumptions are highly judgmental in nature. Actual results can be materially different from estimates and assumptions. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by the industry or by us, or if events occur or circumstances change that would reduce the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets below the amounts reflected on our balance sheet, we may recognize future impairment charges, the amount of which may be material.
Sensitivity of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
When estimating the fair value of broadcast licenses and goodwill, we make assumptions regarding future revenue growth rates, operating cash flow margins and discount rates. These assumptions require substantial judgment that may differ materially from actual results. The following sensitivity analysis shows the incremental impact and the hypothetical non-cash
impairment charge that would result if our estimates were to change by 100 basis points as of the annual testing period in the fourth quarter of 2021:
(1) Each assumption used in the sensitivity analysis is independent of the other assumptions
The risk-adjusted discount rate reflects the WACC developed based on data from same or similar industry participants and publicly available market data as of the measurement date. The same discount rate was used in each of our broadcast markets. The discount rate applied to our digital media and publishing entities was higher given the perceived additional risks associated with the cash flows of these businesses.
Operating profit margin is defined as operating income before interest, depreciation, amortization, income tax, and corporate allocation charges divided by net revenue. For the fair value analysis, the projections of operating profit margin that are used are based upon industry expectations. These margin projections are not specific to the performance of our radio stations or segments in a market but are predicated on the expectation that a new entrant into the market could reasonably be expected to perform at a level similar to a typical competitor. If actual future margins are lower than our estimates, we may recognize future impairment charges, the amount of which may be material.
For the goodwill fair value analysis, the projections of operating margin for each broadcast market and each entity are based on our historical performance. If the future outlook for the broadcast, digital, or publishing industry growth declines by more than our estimates, we may recognize future impairment charges, the amount of which may be material.
Long-term revenue growth rates are determined using publicly available information on industry expectations rather than our own estimates, which could differ. Long-term revenue growth rates can vary for each of our broadcast markets. Using industry expectations, each broadcast market, digital and publishing entity’s revenue was forecasted over a ten-year
projection period to reflect the projected long-term growth rate. If the future outlook for the broadcast, digital or publishing industry growth declines by more than our estimates, we may recognize future impairment charges, the amount of which may be material.
Leases
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for leases and the impact of these estimates are as follows:
Lease Term
The lease term can materially impact the value of the Right-of-Use
(“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities recorded on our balance sheet as required under ASC 842. We calculate the term for each lease agreement to include the noncancellable period specified in the agreement together with (1) the periods covered by options to extend the lease if we are reasonably certain to exercise that option, (2) periods covered by an option to
terminate if we are reasonably certain not to exercise that option and (3) period covered by an option to extend (or not terminate) if controlled by the lessor. The assessment of whether we are reasonably certain to exercise an option to extend a lease requires significant judgement surrounding contract-based factors, asset-based factors, entity-based factors, and market-based factors. We have not modified our estimate methodology since adopting ASC 842 on January 1, 2019.
Incremental Borrowing Rate
ROU assets and related lease liabilities recorded under ASC 842 are calculated based on the present value of the lease payments using (1) the rate implicit in the lease or (2) the lessee’s Incremental Borrowing Rate (“IBR”). IBR is defined as the rate of interest that a lessee would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, we estimate the IBR applicable to Salem using significant judgement and estimates, including the estimated value of the underlying leased asset, and the following available evidence:
The credit history of Salem Media Group
Our credit facilities consist of 7.125% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (“2028 Notes”), 6.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (“2024 Notes”), and an ABL revolver. The weighted average interest rate on outstanding debt is calculated as of each month end.
The credit worthiness of Salem Media Group
We review our credit ratings from third parties, including Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s. Both ratings were upgraded during 2021 based on improved liquidity and the forgiveness of the PPP Loans.
Class of the underlying asset and the remaining term of the arrangement
We use a portfolio approach applying a single IBR to all leases with reasonably similar characteristics, including the remaining lease term, the underlying assets, and the economic environment. We group leases according to the nature of leased asset and the lease term. We have six main categories of leases, (1) Buildings, (2) Equipment, (3) Land, (4) Other (Parking Facilities), (5) Towers and (6) Vehicles.
We consider vehicles to have a higher risk for collateral that is mitigated by the shorter term of the lease that would typically range from three to five years. We consider building and towers to have a higher risk based on (1) the longer lease term of up to thirty years and (2) a higher outstanding balance that is mitigated by the lower risk that the collateralized asset would lose significant value.
The debt incurred under the lease liability as compared to amounts that would be borrowed
We review the cost to finance comparable amounts under our ABL Facility and based on the current market environment as derived from available economic data.
We referred to the Bloomberg Single B Rated Communications Yield Curve (unsecured) and considered adjustments for industry risk factors and the estimated value of the underlying leased asset to be collateral for the debt incurred.
From these data points, we developed a matrix to estimate the IBR for each lease class. We review the IBR estimates on a quarterly basis and update as necessary. We have not modified our estimate methodology and we have not recognized significant changes in our estimates.
Fair market value of leased asset:
The fair market value of leased property is generally estimated based on comparable market data as provided by third-party sources. Fair market value is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum
lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the fair market value of the leased property. A higher fair market value reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Impairment of ROU Assets
ROU assets are reviewed for impairment when indicators of impairment are present as described in Note 7 to the accompanying financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Significant management judgments and estimates must be made in connection with determining the amount of revenue to be recognized in any accounting period. We must assess the promises within each sales contract to determine if they are distinct performance obligations. Once the performance obligation(s) are determined, the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligation(s) based on a relative standalone selling price basis. If a sales contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price. If the stand-alone selling price is not determinable, an estimate is used.
Principal and Agent Considerations
A growing source of revenue is generated from digital product offerings, which allow for enhanced audience interaction and participation, and integrated digital advertising solutions. When offering digital products, another party may be involved in providing the goods or services that make up a performance obligation to the customer. These include the use of third-party websites for social media campaigns. We must evaluate if we are the principal or agent in order to determine if revenue should be reported gross as principal or net as agent. In this evaluation, we consider if we obtain control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to our customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price. The determination of whether we control a specified good or service immediately prior to the good or service being transferred requires us to make reasonable judgments on the nature of each agreement. We have determined that we are acting as principal when we manage all aspects of a social media campaign, including reviewing and approving target audiences, monitoring actual results, and making modifications as needed, and when we are responsible for delivering campaign results to our customers regardless of the use of a third-party or parties.
Sales Returns and Allowances
We provide for estimated returns for products sold with the right of return, primarily book sales associated with Regnery®
Publishing and nutritional products sold through our wellness division. We record an estimate of these product returns as a reduction of revenue in the period of the sale. Our estimates are based upon historical sales returns, the amount of current period sales, economic trends and any changes in customer demand and acceptance of our products. We regularly monitor actual performance to estimated return rates and make adjustments as necessary. Estimated return rates utilized for establishing estimated returns reserves have approximated actual returns experience. However, actual returns may differ significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from these estimates if factors such as the historical data we used to calculate these estimates do not properly reflect future returns or as a result of changes in economic conditions of the customer and/or the market. We have not modified our estimate methodology and we have not historically recognized significant losses from changes in our estimates. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable and that our reserves are accurately reflected.
Trade and Barter Transactions
In broadcasting, trade or barter agreements are commonly used to reduce cash expenses by exchanging advertising time for goods or services. We may enter barter agreements to exchange airtime or digital advertising for goods or services that can be used in our business or that can be sold to our audience under Listener Purchase Programs. The terms of these barter agreements permit us to preempt the barter airtime or digital campaign in favor of customers who purchase the airtime or digital campaign for cash. The value of these non-cash
exchanges is included in revenue in an amount equal to the fair value of the goods or services we receive. Each transaction must be reviewed to determine that the products, supplies and/or services we receive have economic substance, or value to us. We record barter operating expenses upon receipt and usage of the products, supplies and services, as applicable. We record barter revenue as advertising spots or digital campaigns are delivered, which represents the point in time that control is transferred to the customer thereby completing our performance obligation. Barter revenue is recorded on a gross basis unless an agency represents the programmer, in which case, revenue is reported net of the commission retained by the agency.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We evaluate the balance reserved in our allowance for doubtful accounts on a quarterly basis based on our historical collection experience, the age of the receivables, specific customer information and current economic conditions. We increased our reserve percentages during 2020 based on the adverse economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic and the expected impact on the ability of our customers to make payments. Past due balances are generally not written-off
until all collection efforts have been unsuccessful, including use of a collection agency. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the likelihood of ultimate realization of these receivables, including the current creditworthiness of each customer. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. We have not modified our estimate methodology and we have not historically recognized significant losses from changes in our estimates. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable and that our reserves are accurately reflected.
Contingency Reserves
In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in various legal proceedings, lawsuits, arbitration, and other claims that are complex in nature and have outcomes that are difficult to predict. Consequently, we are unable to ascertain the ultimate aggregate amount of monetary liability or the financial impact with respect to these matters. Certain of these proceedings are discussed in Note 14, Commitments and Contingencies, contained in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this annual report.
We record contingency reserves to the extent we conclude that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the related loss can be reasonably estimated. The establishment of the reserve is based on a review of all relevant factors, the advice of legal counsel, and the subjective judgment of management. The reserves we have recorded to date have not been material to our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. We believe that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable and that our reserves are accurately reflected.
While we believe that the final resolution of any known matters, individually and in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse effect upon our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows, it is possible that we could incur additional losses. We maintain insurance that may provide coverage for such matters. Future claims against us, whether meritorious or not, could have a material adverse effect upon our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows, including losses due to costly litigation and losses due to matters that require significant amounts of management time that can result in the diversion of significant operational resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are described in Note 2 to the accompanying financial statements.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal sources of funds are operating cash flows, borrowings under credit facilities and proceeds from the sale of selected assets or businesses. We have historically funded, and will continue to fund, expenditures for operations, administrative expenses, and capital expenditures from these sources. We have historically financed acquisitions through borrowings, including borrowings under credit facilities and, to a lesser extent, from operating cash flow and from proceeds on selected asset dispositions. We expect to fund future acquisitions from cash on hand, borrowings under our credit facilities, operating cash flow and possibly through the sale of income-producing assets or proceeds from debt and equity offerings.
The COVID-19
global pandemic that began in March 2020 materially impacted our business. We experienced a rapid decline in revenue from advertising, programming, events, and book sales. Several advertisers reduced or ceased advertising spending due to the outbreak and stay-at-home
orders that effectively shut many businesses down. The revenue decline has a more meaningful impact on our broadcast segment, which derives substantial revenue from local advertisers who were particularly hard hit due to social distancing and government interventions, and our publishing segment, which derives revenue from book sales through retail stores and live events.
While we see progress being made in revenue returning to pre-pandemic
levels, the COVID-19
pandemic continues to create significant uncertainty and disruption in the economy. These uncertainties could materially impact significant accounting estimates related to, but not limited to, allowances for doubtful accounts, impairments, and right-of-use
assets. As a result, many estimates and assumptions require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information emerges, and such changes are recognized or disclosed in its consolidated financial statements.
During 2020 we implemented several measures to reduce costs and conserve cash to ensure that we had adequate cash to meet our debt servicing requirements, including:
•
limiting capital expenditures;
•
reducing discretionary spending, including travel and entertainment;
•
eliminating open positions and freezing new hires;
•
reducing staffing levels;
•
implementing temporary company-wide pay cuts of 5%, 7.5% or 10% depending on salary level;
•
furloughing certain employees;
•
temporarily suspending the company 401(k) match;
•
requesting rent concessions from landlords;
•
requesting discounts from vendors;
•
offering early payment discounts to certain customers in exchange for advance cash payments; and
•
suspending the payment of distributions on our common stock indefinitely.
As the economy began to show signs of recovery, we reversed several of these cost reduction initiatives during 2021. We continue to operate with lower staffing levels where appropriate, we have not declared or paid equity distributions on our common stock, and the company 401(k) match was not reinstated until January 2022.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act provided emergency economic assistance for individuals and businesses impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including opportunities for additional liquidity, loan guarantees, and other government programs. On December 27, 2020, Congress passed the Consolidated Appropriations Act (“CAA”) that included a second relief package, which, among other things, provides for an extension of the Payroll Support Program established by the CARES Act. We utilized certain benefits of the CARES Act and the CAA, including:
•
We deferred $3.3 million of employer FICA taxes from April 2020 through December 2020, of which 50% was paid in December 2021 and the remaining 50% is payable in December 2022;
•
A relaxation of interest expense deduction limitation for income tax purposes;
•
We received Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans of $11.2 million in total during the first quarter of 2021 through the Small Business Association (“SBA”) based on the eligibility as determined on a per-location
basis; and
•
In July 2021, the SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans, with the remaining PPP loan repaid in July 2021.
Operating Cash Flows
Our largest source of operating cash inflows are receipts from customers in exchange for advertising and programming. Other sources of operating cash inflows include receipts from customers for digital downloads and streaming, book sales, subscriptions, self-publishing fees, ticket sales, sponsorships, and vendor promotions. A majority of our operating cash outflows consist of payments to employees, such as salaries and benefits, and vendor payments under facility and tower leases, talent agreements, inventory purchases and recurring services such as utilities and music license fees.
Our operating cash flows are subject to factors such as fluctuations in preferred advertising media and changes in demand caused by shifts in population, station listenership, demographics, and audience tastes. In addition, our operating cash flows may be affected if our customers are unable to pay, delay payment of amounts owed to us, or if we experience reductions in revenue, or increases in costs and expenses. The adverse economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic negatively impacted our revenue and cash receipts from customers. While we expect to continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, we anticipate that we will continue to generate sufficient cash flow from operating activities, that combined with our current credit facilities, are sufficient to meet our current and long-term capital and liquidity requirements.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, to $22.5 million from $22.9 million during the prior year. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities includes the impact of the following items:
•
Accounts receivables, net of allowances, increased by $1.2 million compared to a decrease of $6.4 million for the prior year;
•
Total revenue increased by $22.0 million;
•
Operating expenses exclusive of depreciation, amortization, changes in the estimated fair value of contingent earn-out
consideration, impairments, debt modification costs and net gain (loss) on the disposition of assets, increased by $9.4 million;
•
Unbilled revenue increased $0.2 million;
•
Our Day’s Sales Outstanding, or the average number of days to collect cash from the date of sale, decreased to 56 days at December 31, 2021, from 59 days in the same period of the prior year;
•
Deferred income tax liabilities decreased by $1.9 million compared to an increase of $30.1 million during the same period of the prior year; and
•
Net accounts payable and accrued expenses increased $4.5 million to $27.7 million from $23.2 million as of the prior year.
Investing Cash Flows
Our primary source of investing cash inflows includes proceeds from the sale of assets or businesses. Investing cash outflows include cash payments made to acquire businesses and business-related assets. While our focus continues to be on deleveraging, we remain committed to explore and pursue strategic acquisitions. We plan to fund any future purchases and any future acquisitions from cash on hand, operating cash flow or our credit facilities.
We undertake projects from time to time to upgrade our radio station technical facilities and/or FCC broadcast licenses, expand our digital and web-based
offerings, improve our facilities, and upgrade our computer infrastructures. The nature and timing of these upgrades and expenditures can be delayed or scaled back at the discretion of management. Based on our current plans, we expect to incur capital expenditures of approximately $12.3 million during 2022.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash used in of $2.9 million during the prior year. The $14.6 million increase in cash provided by investing activities was the result of:
•
Receiving $29.3 million of cash from the sale of assets during 2021 compared to $0.2 million of cash during same period of the prior year;
•
Cash paid for capital expenditures increased $6.2 million to $10.8 million from $4.6 million during the same period of the prior year;
•
Cash paid for acquisitions increased $4.9 million to $5.3 million compared to $0.4 million during the same period of the prior year; and
•
Collection of $2.4 million in cash from the surrender of split dollar life insurance policies in 2020.
Financing Cash Flows
Financing cash inflows include borrowings under our credit facilities and any proceeds from the exercise of stock options issued under our stock incentive plan. Financing cash outflows include repayments of our credit facilities, the payment of distributions on our common stock and payments of amounts due under deferred installments and contingency earn-out
consideration associated with acquisition activity.
In April 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3
with the SEC covering the offering, issuance and sale of up to $15.0 million of our Class A Common Stock pursuant to an at-the-market
facility, with B. Riley Securities, Inc. acting as sales agent. No Common Stock transactions have taken place under the facility.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the aggregate principal balances outstanding under the 2024 Notes, 2028 Notes and the ABL Facility ranged from $174.3 million to $227.6 million. Additionally, during the first quarter of 2021 we received $11.2 million in aggregate principal amount of PPP loans through the SBA available to our radio stations and networks by location under the CAA. The SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans during July 2021 resulting in a pre-tax
gain on the forgiveness of $11.2 million. The remaining $20,000 PPP loan was repaid in July 2021. The outstanding balances were ordinary and customary based on our operating and investing cash needs during this time
Our sole source of cash available for making any future distributions on our common stock is our operating cash flow, subject to our credit facilities and Notes, which contain covenants that restrict the payment of dividends and distributions to our equity holders unless certain specified conditions are satisfied. On May 6, 2020, our Board voted to discontinue distributions on our common stock indefinitely due to the adverse economic impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $25.0 million to $38.6 million compared to $13.6 million during the prior year. The increase in cash used for financing activities includes:
•
We exchanged $112.8 million of our Senior Secured Notes due 2024 (“2024 Notes”) for $114.7 million (reflecting a call premium of 1.688%) of newly issued 7.125% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (“2028 Notes”);
•
We received $11.2 million in aggregate principal amount of PPP loans through the SBA during the first quarter of 2021 based on the eligibility of our radio stations and networks as determined on a per-location
basis. During July 2021, the SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans with the remaining PPP loan repaid in July 2021;
•
We used $44.0 million in cash to repurchase $43.3 million in face value of the 2024 Notes compared to $3.4 million in cash to repurchase $3.5 million in face value of 2024 Notes during the same period of the prior year;
•
Net repayments on our ABL Facility were $5.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.4 million during the same period of the prior year; and:
•
There was no book overdraft at December 31, 2021 compared to $1.9 million at the end of the prior year.
Long-term debt consists of the following:
1. As of December 31, 2021, the Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility (“ABL”), had a borrowing base of $25.0 million, no outstanding borrowings, and $0.3 million of outstanding letters of credit, resulting in a $23.3 million borrowing base availability.
Our weighted average interest rate was 6.65% and 6.99% at December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2021, respectively.
In addition to the outstanding amounts listed above, we also have interest obligations related to our long-term debt as follows as of December 31, 2021:
•
$114.7 million aggregate principal amount of 2028 Notes with semi-annual interest payments at an annual rate of 7.125%;
•
$60.2 million aggregate principal amount of 2024 Notes with semi-annual interest payments at an annual rate of 6.75%; and
•
Commitment fee of 0.25% to 0.375% per annum on the unused portion of the ABL Facility.
7.125% Senior Secured Notes
On September 10, 2021, we exchanged $112.8 million of the 2024 Notes for $114.7 million (reflecting a call premium of 1.688%) of newly issued 7.125% Senior Secured Notes due 2028 (“2028 Notes.”) Contemporaneously with the refinancing, we obtained commitments from the holders of the 2028 Notes to purchase up to $50 million in additional 2028 Notes (“Delayed Draw 2028 Notes,”) contingent upon satisfying certain performance benchmarks, the proceeds of which are to be used exclusively to repurchase or repay the remaining balance outstanding of the 2024 Notes.
The 2028 Notes and the related guarantees were exchanged and sold to certain holders of the 2024 Notes, whom we believe to be qualified institutional buyers, in a private placement. The 2028 Notes and the related guarantees have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act or the securities laws of any other jurisdiction and may not be offered or sold in the United States or to U.S. persons absent registration or an applicable exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the Securities Act or any state securities laws. The transaction was assessed on a lender-specific level and was accounted for as a debt modification in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 470.
The 2028 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis. We may redeem the 2028 Notes, in whole or in part, at any time prior to June 1, 2024, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2028 Notes plus a “make-whole” premium as of, and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the redemption date. At any time on or after June 1, 2024, we may redeem some or all of the 2028 Notes at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount to be redeemed) set forth in the 2028 Notes indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including the redemption date. In addition, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2028 Notes before June 1, 2024, with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a redemption price of 107.125% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including the redemption date. We may also redeem up to 10% of the aggregate original principal amount of the 2028 Notes per twelve-month period, in connection with up to two redemptions in such twelve-month period, at a redemption price of 101% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date.
The 2028 Notes mature on June 1, 2028, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased. Interest accrues on the 2028 Notes from September 10, 2021, and is payable semi-annually, in cash in arrears, on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing December 1, 2021. Based on the balance of the 2028 Notes outstanding, we are required to pay $8.2 million per year in interest. As of December 31, 2021, accrued interest on the 2028 Notes was $0.7 million.
The indenture to the 2028 Notes contains covenants that, among other things and subject in each case to certain specified exceptions, limit the ability to: (i) incur additional debt; (ii) declare or pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions to stockholders; (iii) make investments; (iv) create liens or use assets as security in other
transactions; (v) merge or consolidate, or sell, transfer, lease or dispose of substantially all assets; (vi) engage in transactions with affiliates; and (vii) sell or transfer assets. At December 31, 2021, we were, and we remain, in compliance with all of the covenants under the indenture.
We recorded debt issuance costs of $4.2 million, of which $2.3 million of third-party debt modification costs are reflected in operating expenses for the current period, $0.8 million is deferred with the Delayed Draw 2028 Notes, and $1.1 million, along with $3.0 million from the exchanged 2024 Notes, is being amortized as part of the effective yield on the 2028 Notes. During the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021, $0.3 million of debt issuance costs, discount and delayed draw associated with the Notes was amortized to interest expense.
SBA PPP Loans
We received $11.2 million in aggregate principal amount of PPP loans through the SBA during the first quarter of 2021 based on the eligibility of our radio stations and networks as determined on a per-location
basis. The PPP loans were accounted for as debt in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 470. The loan balances and accrued interest were forgivable provided that the proceeds were used for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities within the covered period. We used the PPP loan proceeds according to the terms and filed timely applications for forgiveness. During July 2021, the SBA forgave all but $20,000 of the PPP loans resulting in a pre-tax
gain on the forgiveness of $11.2 million. The remaining PPP loan was repaid in July 2021.
6.75% Senior Secured Notes
On May 19, 2017, we issued 6.75% Senior Secured Notes (“2024 Notes”) in a private placement. The 2024 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by our existing subsidiaries (“Subsidiary Guarantors”). The 2024 Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.75% per year and mature on June 1, 2024, unless they are earlier redeemed or repurchased. Interest is payable semi-annually, in cash in arrears, on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
The 2024 Notes are secured by a first-priority lien on substantially all assets of ours and the Subsidiary Guarantors other than the ABL Facility Priority Collateral as described below. There is no direct lien on our FCC licenses to the extent prohibited by law or regulation other than the economic value and proceeds thereof.
The indenture relating to the 2024 Notes contains covenants that, among other things and subject in each case to certain specified exceptions, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional debt; (ii) declare or pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions to stockholders; (iii) make investments; (iv) create liens or use assets as security in other transactions; (v) merge or consolidate, or sell, transfer, lease or dispose of substantially all of our assets; (vi) engage in transactions with affiliates; and (vii) sell or transfer assets. At December 31, 2021, we were, and we remain, in compliance with all of the covenants under the indenture.
We recorded debt issuance costs of $6.3 million that were recorded as a reduction of the debt proceeds that are being amortized to non-cash
interest expense over the life of the Notes using the effective interest method. During twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, $0.6 million and $0.7 million, respectively, of debt issuance costs associated with the Notes was amortized to interest expense.
Based on the balance of the 2024 Notes outstanding of $60.2 million, we are required to pay $4.1 million per year in interest on the 2024 Notes. As of December 31, 2021, accrued interest on the 2024 Notes was $0.3 million.
We may from time to time, depending on market conditions and prices, contractual restrictions, our financial liquidity, and other factors, seek to repurchase the 2024 Notes in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, by tender offer or otherwise, as market conditions warrant.
As described above, on September 10, 2021, we exchanged $112.8 million of the 2024 Notes for $114.7 million of newly issued 2028 Notes, reflecting a call premium of 1.688%. Bond issuance costs of $1.1 million associated with the $112.8 million of the 2024 Notes are being amortized as part of the effective yield on the 2028 Notes.
In addition to the exchange on September 10, 2021, we repurchased an additional $43.3 million in total of the 2024 Notes for $44.0 million in cash, recognizing a net loss of $1.0 million after adjusting for bond issuance costs through multiple transactions during the second half of 2021.
Based on the then existing market conditions, we completed repurchases of our 6.75% Senior Secured Notes at amounts less than face value as follows:
Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility
On May 19, 2017, the company entered into the ABL Facility pursuant to a Credit Agreement (“Credit Agreement”) by and among us and our subsidiaries party thereto as borrowers, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and lead arranger, and the lenders that are parties thereto. We used the proceeds of the ABL Facility, together with the net proceeds from the Notes offering, to repay outstanding borrowings under our previously existing senior credit facilities, and related fees and expenses. Current proceeds from the ABL Facility are used to provide ongoing working capital and for other general corporate purposes, including permitted acquisitions.
The ABL Facility is a $30.0 million revolving credit facility due March 1, 2024, which includes a $5.0 million sub-facility
for standby letters of credit and a $7.5 million subfacility for swingline loans. All borrowings under
the ABL Facility accrue interest at a rate equal to a base rate or LIBOR plus a spread. The spread, which is based on an availability-based measure, ranges from 0.50% to 1.00% for base rate borrowings and 1.50% to 2.00% for LIBOR borrowings. If an event of default occurs, the interest rate may increase by 2.00% per annum. Amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility may be paid and then reborrowed at our discretion without penalty or premium. Additionally, we pay a commitment fee on the unused balance from 0.25% to 0.375% per year based on the level of borrowings.
On October 20, 2020, we entered into a fourth amendment to our ABL Facility that provides a one-time
waiver with respect to the current covenant testing period allowing the covenant trigger event date be the first day after the availability on the ABL Facility had equaled or exceeded (1) 15% of the maximum revolver amount and (2) $4.5 million and a waiver permitting our July 2020 financial statements to be issued on or before September 30, 2020 due to delays that were caused by a ransomware attack.
On April 7, 2020, we entered into a third amendment to ABL Facility that increased the advance rate on eligible accounts receivable from 85% to 90% and extended the maturity date from May 19, 2022, to March 1, 2024. The April 7, 2020, amendment also allows for an alternative benchmark rate that may include SOFR due to LIBOR being scheduled to be discontinued at the end of calendar year 2021.
Availability under the ABL Facility is subject to a borrowing base consisting of (a) 90% of the eligible accounts receivable plus (b) a calculated amount based on the value of certain real property. As of December 31, 2021, the amount available under the ABL Facility was $23.3 million of which none was outstanding. The ABL Facility has a first-priority lien on our and the Subsidiary Guarantors’ accounts receivable, inventory, deposit and securities accounts, certain real estate and related assets (“ABL Facility Priority Collateral”) and by a second-priority lien on the Notes Priority Collateral. There is no direct lien on our FCC licenses to the extent prohibited by law or regulation (other than the economic value and proceeds thereof).
The Credit Agreement includes a springing fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0 to 1.0, which is tested during the period commencing on the last day of the fiscal month most recently ended prior to the date on which Availability (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is less than the greater of 15% of the Maximum Revolver Amount (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and $4.5 million and continuing for a period of 60 consecutive days after the first day on which Availability exceeds such threshold amount. The Credit Agreement also includes other negative covenants that are customary for credit facilities of this type, including covenants that, subject to exceptions described in the Credit Agreement, restrict our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries (i) to incur additional indebtedness; (ii) to make investments; (iii) to make distributions, loans or transfers of assets; (iv) to enter into, create, incur, assume or suffer to exist any liens, (v) to sell assets; (vi) to enter into transactions with affiliates; (vii) to merge or consolidate with, or dispose of all assets to a third party, except as permitted thereby; (viii) to prepay indebtedness; and (ix) to pay dividends.
The Credit Agreement provides for the following events of default: (i) default for non-payment
of any principal or letter of credit reimbursement when due or any interest, fees or other amounts within five days of the due date; (ii) the failure by any borrower or any subsidiary to comply with any covenant or agreement contained in the Credit Agreement or any other loan document, in certain cases subject to applicable notice and lapse of time; (iii) any representation or warranty made pursuant to the Credit Agreement or any other loan document is incorrect in any material respect when made; (iv) certain defaults of other indebtedness of any borrower or any subsidiary of indebtedness of at least $10 million; (v) certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to any borrower or any subsidiary; (vi) certain judgments for the payment of money of $10 million or more; (vii) a change of control; and (viii) certain defaults relating to the loss of FCC licenses, cessation of broadcasting and termination of material station contracts. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders may accelerate the amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility and may exercise remedies in respect of the collateral. At December 31, 2021, we were, and we remain, in compliance with all of the covenants under Credit Agreement.
We recorded debt issue costs of $0.9 million that were recorded as an asset and are being amortized to non-cash
interest expense over the term of the ABL Facility using the effective interest method. During each of the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, $0.1 million and $0.2 million of debt issuance costs associated with the ABL Facility was amortized to interest expense, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the blended interest rate on amounts outstanding under the ABL Facility was 0.0%.
We report outstanding balances on the ABL Facility as short-term regardless of the maturity date based on use of the ABL Facility to fund ordinary and customary operating cash needs with frequent repayments. We believe that our borrowing capacity under the ABL Facility allows us to meet our ongoing operating requirements, fund capital expenditures and satisfy our debt service requirements for at least the next twelve months. At December 31, 2021, we were, and we remain, in compliance with all of the covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Maturities of Long-Term Debt and Capital Lease Obligations
Principal repayment requirements under all long-term debt agreements outstanding at December 31, 2021, for each of the next five years and thereafter are as follows:
Impairment Losses on Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We have incurred impairment losses associated with goodwill and indefinite lived assets. The valuation of intangible assets is subjective and based on estimates rather than precise calculations. If actual future results are not consistent with the assumptions and estimates used, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future, the amount of which may be material. The fair value measurements for our indefinite-lived intangible assets use significant unobservable inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the estimates that market participants would use in measuring fair value including assumptions about risk. The unobservable inputs are defined in FASB ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,”
as Level 3 inputs discussed in detail in Note 12 of our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of this annual report. If actual future results are not consistent with the assumptions and estimates used, we may be exposed to impairment charges in the future, the amount of which may be material. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective market clusters and reporting units.
While the impairment charges we have recognized are non-cash
in nature and have not violated any debt covenants, the potential for future impairment charges can be viewed as a negative factor with regard to forecasted future performance and cash flows. We believe that we have adequately considered the potential for an economic downturn in our valuation models and do not believe that the non-cash
impairments in and of themselves are a liquidity risk.