Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 15, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities, which we refer to as our initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering, including the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, and the private placements of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, subsequent to our initial public offering, identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $682,065, which consists of formation and operating costs of $556,006, stock-based compensation expense of $143,327, offset by interest on marketable securities held in the trust account of $14,751, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $2,498 and interest income earned on our bank account of $19.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of founder shares by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
On October 13, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 15,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating total gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of an aggregate of 6,200,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor and Stifel Venture at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $6,200,000
On October 19, 2021, the underwriters of our initial public offering notified us of their exercise of the over-allotment option in part and concurrent forfeiture of the remaining portion of such option. As such, on October 22, 2021, the underwriters purchased 1,500,000 additional units at $10.00 per additional unit upon the closing of the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, generating total gross proceeds of $15,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, we consummated the private placement of an aggregate of 375,000 additional private placement warrants to our sponsor and Stifel Venture at $1.00 per additional private placement warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $375,000.
Of the aggregate 16,500,000 units sold in our initial public offering, 14,857,500 units were purchased by our anchor investors. In connection with the closing of our initial public offering, each anchor investor acquired from our sponsor an indirect economic interest in certain founder shares (937,500 founder shares in the aggregate) at a purchase price of $0.10 per share. Our sponsor has agreed to distribute such founder shares to the anchor investors pro rata based on their indirect ownership interest in such founder shares after the completion of our initial business combination.
Following our initial public offering, including the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the private placements, a total of $166,650,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $15,892,398 in initial public offering related costs, consisting of $2,475,000 of underwriting fees, $6,600,000 of deferred underwriting fees, $541,773 of other offering costs, and $6,275,625 for the fair value of the founder shares attributable to the anchor investors.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $826,598. Net loss of $682,065 was affected by stock-based compensation expense of $143,327, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $14,751 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $2,498. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $270,611 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $166,667,249 (including approximately $17,000 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,106,629 held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, our sponsor or our officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, such loaned amounts would be forgiven. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $25,000 for general and administrative services, including office space, utilities and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on October 7, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.40 per unit sold in our initial public offering, or $6,600,000 in the aggregate. Subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement, the deferred fee (i) will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination and (ii) will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Share-Based Payment Arrangements
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all share-based payments on their estimated fair values measured as of the grant date. These costs are recognized as an expense in the statement of operations upon vesting, once the applicable performance conditions are met, with an offsetting increase to additional paid-in capital. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Net Loss per Common Share
Net loss per common share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares issued and outstanding during the period. Subsequent measurement of the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from loss per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value. We calculate our earnings per share to allocate net loss pro rata to shares of Class A and Class B common stock. This presentation contemplates a business combination as the most likely outcome, in which case, both classes of common stock share pro rata in the loss of our company.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.