Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as referred to on page 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Executive Overview
We are a global multi-crop, middle-market agricultural company. We are market leaders in the breeding, production and sale of alfalfa seed and sorghum seed. We also have a commercial market presence in sunflower, wheat and pasture seed and maintain an active stevia development program.
Our seed platform develops and supplies high quality germplasm designed to produce higher yields for farmers worldwide. We sell over 500 seed products in more than 40 countries. We maintain an active product pipeline and expect to introduce more than 20 new products during the fiscal year 2023.
Strategic Review
We recently undertook a strategic review of our operations and future growth opportunities to determine areas we believe are key centers of value, including our U.S. sorghum, international forage, specialty crop and U.S. alfalfa businesses.
With respect to specialty crops, we intend to initially focus on stevia and camelina. We believe that an opportunity exists to bring to market new stevia varieties that can both meet consumer taste requirements and have yield quality that would enable farmers to profitably grow stevia in North and South America. We plan to leverage our proprietary stevia germplasm to form collaborations and commercial agreements with supply chain partners to create a U.S.-based stevia production industry for high-quality stevia sweetener with superior taste profiles that would supply major customers in the U.S. market, including pursuant to our previously announced U.S. stevia pilot production supply agreement with Ingredion. We also believe we have an opportunity to enter the camelina market as a seed and technology provider, where we plan to work with large oil companies for biofuel production leveraging our capabilities in producing, processing, and packaging camelina.
We have also begun working to align our cost structure to support these centers of value while assessing other potential value-generating transactions and means to strengthen our balance sheet. On May 11, 2022, we and Trigall Genetics, a leader in transgenic wheat, announced that we have entered into preliminary, nonbinding discussion to potentially combine our respective wheat operations through a joint venture in Australia. While we believe this joint venture could be beneficial in a number of respects, there can be no assurance that these preliminary, nonbinding discussions will result in a consummated transaction.
In addition, we have begun implementing our plan to reduce annual operating expenses by approximately $5.0 million, including through efforts to streamline our European sunflower operations by closing our facilities in Hungary, which we estimate could result in operating expense reductions of approximately $700,000.
Global Economic Conditions
The COVID-19 pandemic, military conflicts and other global events have had and may continue to have an adverse impact on our business, operations and the markets and communities in which we, our partners and customers operate. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve and cause disruptions in the various markets in which we operate. In addition, although we have not been materially impacted to date, the military conflict in Russia and Ukraine, and related sanctions imposed against Russia, could lead to disruption, instability and volatility in global markets and industries that could negatively impact our operations.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted our operations and financial results. Beginning in 2021 and continuing into 2022, ongoing strong demand for consumer goods and the effects of COVID-19 mitigation strategies have led to broad-based supply chain disruptions across the U.S. and globally, including inflation on many consumer products, labor shortages and demand outpacing supply. We continue to work closely with our business units, 3rd party contractors and suppliers and other external business partners to minimize the potential impact on our business.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect the areas in which we operate, we believe the outbreak has and will continue to have a negative impact on our sales, operating results and financial condition. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our sales, operating results and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, impact on our customers, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Our product revenue is predicated on our ability to timely fulfill customer orders, which depends in large part upon the consistent availability and operation of shipping and distribution networks operated by third parties. Farmers typically have a limited window during which they can plant seed, and their buying decisions can be shaped by actual or perceived disruptions in our distribution and supply channels, or concerns about our ability to timely fulfill their orders. If our customers delay or decrease their orders due to potential disruptions in our distribution and supply channels, this will adversely affect our product revenue.
During the years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, we experienced numerous logistical challenges due to limited availability of trucks for product deliveries, congestion at the ports, and overall rising costs of shipping and transportation costs. We expect these logistical challenges to persist throughout fiscal 2023, which may, among other things, delay or reduce our ability to recognize revenues within a particular fiscal period and harm our results of operations.
The ultimate impact that COVID-19 will have on our consolidated financial statements remains uncertain and ultimately will be dictated by the length and severity of the pandemic, including broad-based supply chain disruptions, rising levels of inflation, the spread of COVID-19 variance or resurgences, as well as the economic recovery and actions taken in response to local, state and national governments around the world, including the distribution of vaccinations. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of those potential and evolving impacts to our business and consolidated financial statements.
Components of Our Statements of Operations Data
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Product and Other Revenue
We derive most of our revenue from the sale of our proprietary seed varieties and hybrids. We expect that over the next several years, a substantial majority of our revenue will be generated from the sale of alfalfa, sorghum and pasture seed, although we are continually assessing other possible product offerings or means to increase revenue, including expanding into higher margin crops.
The mix of our product offerings will continue to change over time with the introduction of new seed varieties and hybrids resulting from our robust research and development efforts, including our potential expansion of novel, non-GMO product lines, potential entry into gene-edited product markets, potential entry into specialty crop markets, including stevia and biofuels, and additional strategic transactions.
Our revenue will fluctuate depending on the timing of orders from our customers and distributors and the extent to which markets are impacted by sources of instability and volatility in global markets and industries, including, among other things, the COVID-19 pandemic, the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and global inflation. Because some of our large customers and distributors order in bulk only one or two times per year, our product revenue can fluctuate significantly from period to period. Some of this fluctuation is offset by having operations in both the northern and southern hemispheres. In addition, due to the numerous logistical challenges we have
experienced in our shipping and distribution networks resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, our product revenue has fluctuated, and our ability to recognize revenues within a particular fiscal period has been impacted. We expect our product revenue will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our specialty crops, including our stevia breeding program and biofuels program, have yet to generate any meaningful revenue. However, management continues to evaluate this portion of our business and assess various opportunities to monetize the results of our research and development efforts. Such potential opportunities include possible collaborations, licensing agreements and royalty-based agreements.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue relates to sale of our seed products and consists of the cost of procuring seed, plant conditioning and packaging costs, direct labor and raw materials and overhead costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in the discovery, development, breeding and testing of new products incorporating the traits we have specifically selected. These expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, consultant services, land leased for field trials, chemicals and supplies and other external expenses.
Overall, we have been focused on controlling research and development expenses, while balancing that objective against the recognition that continued advancement in product development is an important part of our strategic planning. We intend to focus our resources on high value activities. For alfalfa seed, we plan to invest in further development of differentiating forage quality traits. For sorghum, we plan to invest in higher value grain products, proprietary herbicide tolerance traits and improved safety and palatability in forage products. We expect our research and development expenses will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing of various research and development projects.
Our internal research and development costs are expensed as incurred, while third-party research and developments costs are expensed when the contracted work has been performed or as milestone results have been achieved. The costs associated with equipment or facilities acquired or construed for research and development activities that have alternative future uses are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee costs, including salaries, employee benefits and share-based compensation, as well as professional service fees, insurance, marketing, travel and entertainment expense, public company expense and other overhead costs. We proactively take steps on an ongoing basis to control selling, general and administrative expense as much as is reasonably possible.
Depreciation and Amortization
We amortize intangible assets, including those acquired from Pasture Genetics in 2020, Chromatin in 2018 and from SV Genetics in May 2016, using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset, consisting of periods of 3-30 years for technology/IP/germplasm, 5-20 years for customer relationships and trade names and 3-20 years for other intangible assets. Property, plant and equipment is depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset, consisting of periods of 5-35 years for buildings, 2-20 years for machinery and equipment and 2-5 years for vehicles.
Other (Income) Expense
Other expense consists primarily of foreign currency gains and losses, change in contingent consideration obligation and interest expense in connection with amortization of debt discount. Interest expense primarily consists of interest costs related to outstanding borrowings on our working capital credit facilities and our financing with Conterra Agricultural Capital, LLC, and its affiliates, or Conterra.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates, differences in the deductibility of certain expenses and inclusion of certain income items between financial statement and tax return purposes, and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, if we determine that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, we recognize the benefit. Tax regulations require certain items to be included in the tax return at different times than when those items are required to be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. As a result, our effective tax rate reflected in our consolidated financial statements is different from that reported in our tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent, such as meals and entertainment expenses that are not fully deductible on our tax return, and some are temporary differences, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax return in future years for which we have already recorded the tax benefit in our consolidated statements of operations. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017, we recorded a valuation allowance against all of our deferred tax assets. The full valuation allowance was recorded during the fiscal year 2017 as a result of changes to our operating results and future projections, resulting from a decline in export sales to Saudi Arabia. As a result, we do not believe that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021
Revenue and Cost of Revenue
Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $71.4 million compared to $84.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The $12.7 million decrease in revenue for the year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily due to a $14.2 million decrease in product revenue received from Pioneer (subsidiary of Corteva) offset by a $1.5 million increase in product revenue in alfalfa, partially offset by pasture products. During the year ended June 30, 2022 we recorded no sales to Pioneer, compared to $14.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Core Revenue (which we define as total revenue, excluding product revenue attributable to Pioneer) for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $71.4 million compared to Core Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 of $69.9 million, representing an increase of $1.5 million or 2.1%. Due to the revised agreements with Pioneer in May 2019, we plan to provide Core Revenue as a metric to track performance of our business until product revenue attributable to our revised agreements with Pioneer is no longer reflected in comparisons between fiscal periods. The increase in Core Revenue for the year ended June 30, 2022 can be attributed to an increase in alfalfa revenues in the Middle East, partially offset by decreased sales of pasture products in Australia and a slight decline in service revenue for treating and packaging services.
Sales into international markets represented 70% and 56% of our total revenue during the year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Domestic revenue accounted for 30% and 44% of our total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in international revenue as a percentage of total revenue was primarily due to increased sales in the Middle East. The decrease in domestic revenue as a percentage of total revenue was primarily attributable to the termination of the Pioneer and Corteva agreement mentioned above.
The following table shows revenue from external sources by destination country:
Cost of revenue of $65.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 was equal to 91.1% of total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2022, while the cost of revenue of $70.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 was equal to 83.7% of total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021. Cost of revenue for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 included inventory write-downs of $6.4 million and $1.4 million, respectively. The write-down of inventory during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 related to certain inventory lots that deteriorated in quality and germination rates during the year. During the year ended June 30, 2022 the write-down of inventory also included reserves for an estimated amount that is expected to deteriorate in quality and germination during the product life cycle and adjusting specific products to market value.
Gross profit margin for the year ended June 30, 2022 was 8.9% compared to 16.3% in the prior year. The decrease in gross margin for the year ended June 30, 2022 is primarily driven by the increase in inventory write-downs and reserves, coupled with higher production costs, offset in part by higher margin Double Team™ grain sorghum sales. During the years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, the Company experienced numerous logistical challenges due to limited availability of trucks for product deliveries, congestion at the ports, and overall rising cost increases of shipping and transportation costs. The Company expects these logistical challenges to persist throughout fiscal 2023.
Excluding the $6.4 million of inventory write-downs, gross margin would have been 17.8% for the year ended June 30, 2022. Excluding the $1.4 million of inventory write-downs in the prior year, gross margin would have been 18.0% for the year ended June 30, 2021. We believe it is useful to exclude inventory write-downs in calculating adjusted gross margins in order to provide investors with a method to compare our operating results to prior periods and to peer companies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative, or SG&A, expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 totaled $24.5 million compared to $21.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The $2.6 million increase in SG&A expense versus the prior year was primarily due to $1.6 million incurred for changes in executive leadership and other severance in fiscal year 2022, $0.5 million increase in our stock-based compensation, $0.4 million change in our incentive compensation accruals and a $0.2 million increase in other expenses including professional fees, travel, rent and salaries and wages. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses were 34.3% for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to 26.0% for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 totaled $7.7 million compared to $8.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The $0.8 million decrease in research and development expense versus the prior year is primarily driven by reduced investment in our sunflower programs.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $5.5 million compared to $5.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. For the year ended June 30, 2022 the expense was $2.4 million of depreciation expense of fixed assets, $2.4 million of amortization expense of intangible assets and $0.7 million of amortization expense of finance leases. For the year ended June 30, 2021 the expense was $2.5 million of depreciation expense of fixed assets used in the business, $2.4 million of amortization expense of intangible assets and $0.6 million of amortization expense of finance leases. For the year ended June 30, 2022 depreciation expense was $0.1 million lower due to the fixed assets sold with our Five Points facility sale in January 2021, partially offset by $0.1 million increase in amortization expense for finance lease additions in Australia.
Gain on Disposal of Property, Plant and Equipment
The gain on disposal of property, plant and equipment for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $31,088 compared to $1.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The recorded gain on disposal of property, plant and equipment during the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily related to the sale of our Five Points facility and other assets located in California.
Goodwill Impairment Charges
Goodwill impairment charges for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $1.5 million compared to none for the year ended June 30, 2021. The impairment charge related to the full impairment of our goodwill as a result of a sustained decline in the market capitalization of our common stock during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
The sustained decline in market capitalization of our common stock during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was a potential indicator of impairment. As a result, we initiated an impairment test for the year ended June 30, 2022 and concluded that the entire goodwill balance was impaired.
Foreign Currency Loss (Gain)
Foreign currency loss for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $0.8 million compared to a $0.1 million foreign currency gain for the year ended June 30, 2021. The foreign currency losses and gains are primarily associated with S&W Australia and S&W Hungary, our wholly-owned subsidiaries.
Change in contingent consideration obligation
The change in contingent consideration obligation for the year ended June 30, 2022 was a $0.7 million benefit compared to $4.0 million benefit for the year ended June 30, 2021. The contingent consideration obligation is considered a level 3 fair value financial instrument and is measured at each reporting period. The $3.3 million decrease in benefit to non-cash change in contingent consideration versus the prior year was driven by the decrease in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration obligation associated with the February 2020 Pasture Genetics acquisition.
Interest Expense - Amortization of Debt Discount
Non-cash amortization of debt discount expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $0.9 million compared to $0.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The expense in both years represents the amortization of the debt issuance costs associated with our working capital facilities, our secured property note and our equipment capital leases.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 totaled $2.2 million compared to $2.3 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The expense in both years consists of the interest incurred on the working capital credit facilities, the secured property loan entered into in November 2017, and equipment capital leases. The $0.1 million decrease in interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily driven by decreases in average borrowings on the working capital credit facilities partially offset by year over year increased interest rates.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense totaled $0.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to an income tax benefit of $(24,358) for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our effective tax rate was (1.2%) for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to 0.1% for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our effective tax rate was relatively consistent year over year. The slight decrease in our effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily attributable to an increase in our non-US income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. Our tax expense is substantially driven by our full valuation allowance. Due to the valuation allowance, we do not record the income tax expense or benefit related to substantially all of our current year operating results, as such results are generally incorporated in our net operating loss deferred tax asset position, which has a full valuation allowance against it. However, we do record certain tax expenses and benefits related to some of our activity in our non-US locations, as well as related to our state tax return liabilities. For example, we recorded income tax expense related to the current year activity and prior year tax return filings of our subsidiary located in Australia. We also recorded minor tax benefit and expense related to current year activity and prior tax return filings of our subsidiaries in South Africa and Hungary, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital and working capital requirements fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the phase of the growing and sales cycle that falls during a particular quarter. Our need for cash has historically been highest in the second and third fiscal quarters (October through March) because we historically have paid our North American contracted growers progressively, starting in the second fiscal quarter. In fiscal year 2022, we paid our North American growers approximately 50% of amounts due in the fall of 2021 and the balance was paid in the spring of 2022. This payment cycle to our growers was similar in fiscal year 2021. We expect it to be similar for fiscal year 2023, provided, that we would be unable to pay our growers timely if we are unable to secure sufficient financing before October 2023. S&W Australia and Pasture Genetics, our Australian-based subsidiaries, have production cycles that are counter-cyclical to North America; however, this also puts a greater demand on our working capital and working capital requirements during the second, third and fourth fiscal quarters based on timing of payments to growers in the second through fourth quarters.
Historically, due to the concentration of sales to certain distributors, our month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter sales and associated cash receipts are highly dependent upon the timing of deliveries to and payments from these distributors, which varies significantly from year to year.
We continuously monitor and evaluate our credit policies with all of our customers based on historical collection experience, current economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of the respective trade accounts receivable balance. Our principal working capital components include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expense and other current assets, accounts payable and our working capital lines of credit.
In addition to funding our business with cash from operations, we have historically relied upon sales of our debt and equity securities and credit facilities from financial institutions, both in the United States and Australia.
Capital Resources and Requirements
We are not profitable and have had negative cash flow from operations for the last several years. To help fund our operations, we have in part relied on equity and debt financings, and we will need to obtain additional funding to finance our operations both for the next twelve months and thereafter. Accordingly, we are actively evaluating financing and strategic alternatives, including debt and equity financings and potential sales of assets or certain lines of business.
Our loan and security agreement with CIBC Bank USA, or CIBC, and our secured promissory note with Conterra, which mature on December 23, 2022, contain various operating and financial covenants. The COVID-19 pandemic and other factors affecting our results of operations have increased the risk of our inability to comply with these covenants, which could result in acceleration of our repayment obligations and foreclosure on our pledged assets. In addition, these loan agreements contain cross-default provisions, such that certain defaults or breaches under any of
our loan agreements may entitle CIBC or Conterra to invoke default remedies. We were not in compliance with certain of these covenants as of June 30, 2021, December 31, 2021, March 31, 2022, and June 30, 2022 and were required to obtain waivers and/or amendments from CIBC and Conterra. As of June 15, 2022 we were out of compliance with a minimum liquidity requirement, which was waived by CIBC. The CIBC loan agreement as presently in effect requires the Company to maintain minimum liquidity of no less than $1,000,000 at all times. We do not currently expect we will be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or maintain sufficient liquidity to meet these covenants in certain periods prior to maturity. We will need to raise additional capital, secure future waivers and/or amendments from our lenders, obtain financing from new lenders, and/or accomplish some combination of these items to maintain sufficient liquidity. We are actively pursuing refinancing of the CIBC facility and Conterra loan.
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will be influenced by numerous factors, including:
•
the maturity and repayment of our debt;
•
the extent and duration of future operating income;
•
the level and timing of future sales and expenditures;
•
timing for when we are able to recognize revenue;
•
working capital required to support our growth;
•
our ability to timely pay our growers;
•
investment capital for plant and equipment;
•
investment in our sales and marketing programs;
•
investment capital for potential acquisitions;
•
our ability to renew and/or refinance our debt on acceptable terms;
•
our ability to raise equity financing, in order to secure refinancing as well as support our operations, among other things;
•
competition;
•
market developments; and
•
developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We cannot assure you that we will be successful in renewing or refinancing our existing debt, raising additional capital, securing future waivers and/or amendments from CIBC, Conterra or our other lenders, renewing or refinancing our existing debt, or securing new financing. If we are unsuccessful in doing so, we may need to reduce the scope of our operations, repay amounts owing to our lenders, finance our cash needs through a combination of equity and debt financings, enter into collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, sell certain assets or divest certain operations.
If we are required or desire to raise additional capital in the future, whether as a condition to loan refinancing or separately, such additional financing may not be available on favorable terms, or available at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest would be diluted and the terms of these securities could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and may be secured by all or a portion of our assets, and may be on terms less favorable than our existing loans. If we fail to obtain additional capital as and when required, such failure could have a material impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the ongoing military conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and other factors beyond our control, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. It is possible that further deterioration in credit and financial markets and confidence in economic conditions will occur. If equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may affect our ability to raise equity capital, borrow on our existing facilities or make any additional necessary debt or equity financing more difficult to obtain, more costly and/or more dilutive. In addition, while we are currently in compliance with our loan agreements, our ability to comply with the terms of our loan agreements has been compromised and could result in an event of default. If an event of default were to occur,
our lenders could accelerate our repayment obligations or enforce their other rights under our agreements with them. Any such default may also require us to seek additional or alternative financing, which may not be available on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
Below is a summary of our material sources of capital in recent periods:
Debt Financings
Loan and Security Agreement with CIBC
On December 26, 2019, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with CIBC, or the Loan Agreement, which we amended on September 22, 2020, December 30, 2020, May 12, 2021, September 27, 2021, May 13, 2022 and September 22, 2022. As amended, the Loan Agreement provides for an $18.0 million credit facility, or the CIBC Credit Facility. As of June 30, 2022, we had a combined aggregate of $3.1 million of cash on hand and availability under the CIBC Credit Facility.
The key terms of the amended Loan Agreement include the following:
•
Advances under the CIBC Credit Facility are to be used: (i) to finance our ongoing working capital requirements; and (ii) for general corporate purposes. We may also use a portion of the CIBC Credit Facility to finance permitted acquisitions and related costs.
•
All amounts due and owing, including, but not limited to, accrued and unpaid principal and interest due under the CIBC Credit Facility, will be payable in full on December 23, 2022.
•
The CIBC Credit Facility generally establishes a borrowing base of up to 85% of eligible domestic accounts receivable (90% of eligible foreign accounts receivable) plus up to the lesser of (i) 65% of eligible inventory, (ii) 85% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory, and (iii) an eligible inventory sublimit as more fully set forth in the Loan Agreement, in each case, subject to lender reserves.
•
Loans are based on a base rate plus 2.0% per annum. In the event of a default, at the option of CIBC, the interest rate on all obligations owing will increase by 2% per annum over the rate otherwise applicable.
•
The CIBC Credit Facility is secured by a first priority perfected security interest in substantially all of our assets (subject to certain exceptions), including intellectual property.
•
The Loan Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and customary events of default that permit CIBC to accelerate our outstanding obligations under the CIBC Credit Facility, all as set forth in the Loan Agreement and related documents. The CIBC Credit Facility also contains customary and usual financial covenants imposed by CIBC.
Pursuant to the September 22, 2022 amendment, among other things, (i) the total revolving commitment provided under the Loan Agreement has been reduced to $18,000,000 from $20,000,000; (ii) the minimum liquidity financial covenant has been adjusted to require maintenance of no less than $1,000,000 for the remainder of the Loan Agreement, in each case tested weekly. We were not in compliance with the minimum liquidity requirement as of June 15, 2022; however, pursuant to the September 2022 amendment, we obtained waiver from CIBC to continue to be in compliance with the financial covenants under the Loan Agreement.
We cannot guarantee that we will be able to comply with our covenants in the Loan Agreement in the future, or secure additional waivers if or when required. If we are unable to comply with or obtain a waiver of any noncompliance under the Loan Agreement, CIBC could declare an event of default or require us to further renegotiate the Loan Agreement on terms that may be significantly less favorable to us, or we may be required to seek additional or alternative financing.
We are actively engaging with potential lenders to refinance the Loan Agreement prior to its maturity on December 23, 2022. However, we cannot assure you that we will succeed in securing such refinancing on commercially reasonable terms, if at all, and whether such terms may be more restrictive than the provisions governing the Loan Agreement. In addition, we cannot assure you that we will not experience an event of default or be required to further renegotiate with, or seek additional waivers from, CIBC, including on terms that may be significantly less favorable to us, before we are able to refinance the Loan Agreement, if ever. Any declaration by CIBC of an event
of default could significantly harm our liquidity, financial condition, operating results, business, and prospects and cause the price of our securities to decline.
Debt Facilities with National Australia Bank
At June 30, 2022, S&W Australia has debt facilities with National Australia Bank, or NAB, all of which are guaranteed by S&W Seed Company up to a maximum of AUD $15,000,000 (USD $10,332,000) and cross-guaranteed by S&W Australia.
On November 11, 2021, S&W Australia amended its debt facility with NAB pursuant to which:
•
the borrowing base line credit limit under the seasonal credit facility increased from AUD $26,000,000 (USD $18,722,600) at September 30, 2021 to AUD $32,000,000 (USD $22,041,600) at June 30, 2022;
•
the overdraft credit limit under the seasonal credit facility, or Overdraft Facility, decreased from AUD $3,000,000 (USD $2,160,300) at September 30, 2021 to AUD $2,000,000 (USD $1,497,400) at March 31, 2022. It then further decreased to AUD $1,000,000 (USD $748,700) at April 1, 2022. According to the agreement, the overdraft credit limit was to decrease to zero at June 30, 2022, but with NAB’s approval of the temporary extension of the Overdraft Facility, the credit limit remains AUD $1,000,000 (USD $688,800) at June 30, 2022;
•
the credit limit under the master asset finance facility increased from AUD $2,000,000 (USD $1,440,200) at September 30, 2021 to AUD $3,000,000 (USD $2,066,400) at June 30, 2022; and
•
the month in which annual principal repayments are required on the flexible rate loan was adjusted from November to May of each fiscal year.
After the amendment, the consolidated debt facilities with NAB provide up to an aggregate of AUD $40,000,000 (USD $27,552,000) of credit as of June 30, 2022, and include the following:
•
S&W Australia finances the purchase of most of its seed inventory from growers pursuant to a seasonal credit facility comprised of two facility lines: (i) an Overdraft Facility having credit limit of AUD $1,000,000 (USD $688,800) at June 30, 2022 and (ii) a Borrowing Base Line having a credit limit of AUD $32,000,000 (USD $22,041,600 at June 30, 2022). As of June 30, 2022, the Borrowing Base Line accrued interest on Australian dollar drawings at approximately 4.90% per annum calculated daily. The Overdraft Facility permitted S&W Australia to borrow funds on a revolving line of credit up to the credit limit. Interest accrues daily and is calculated by applying the daily interest rate to the balance owing at the end of the day and is payable monthly in arrears. As of June 30, 2022, the Overdraft Facility accrued interest at approximately 5.72% per annum calculated daily. As of June 30, 2022, AUD $32,000,000 (USD $22,041,600) was outstanding under S&W Australia’s seasonal credit facility with NAB. The seasonal credit facility is secured by a fixed and floating lien over all the present and future rights, property, and undertakings of S&W Australia.
•
S&W Australia has a flexible rate loan, or the Term Loan, in the amount of AUD $4,000,000 (USD $2,775,200) at June 30, 2022. Required annual principal payments of AUD $500,000 (USD $344,400) at June 30, 2022 on the Term Loan commenced on November 30, 2020, with the remainder of any unpaid balance becoming due on March 31, 2025. As part of the amendment, the November 2021 repayment was deferred to May 2022 with AUD $500,000 (USD $344,400) being paid and the remaining repayments due in May of each year. Monthly interest amounts outstanding under the Term Loan will be payable in arrears at a floating rate quoted by NAB for the applicable pricing period, plus 2.6%. The Term Loan is secured by a lien on all the present and future rights, property and undertakings of S&W Australia.
•
S&W Australia finances certain equipment purchases under a master asset finance facility with NAB. The master asset finance facility has various maturity dates through 2029 and have interest rates ranging from 2.86% to 5.03%. The credit limit under the facility is AUD $3,000,000 (USD $2,066,400) at June 30, 2022. As of June 30, 2022, AUD $1,757,085 (USD $1,210,280) was outstanding under S&W Australia’s master asset finance facility.
S&W Australia was in compliance with all debt covenants under its debt facilities with NAB at June 30, 2022.
Secured Note with Conterra
In November 2017, we entered into a secured note financing transaction with Conterra for $12.5 million in gross proceeds. Pursuant to this transaction, we issued a secured real estate note to Conterra in the principal amount of $10.4 million, which bears interest of 7.75% per annum and is secured by a first priority security interest in the property, plant and fixtures located at our Nampa, Idaho production facilities and our Nampa, Idaho research facilities. We may prepay the secured note, in whole or in part, at any time. In January 2021, the Company completed the sale of its Five Points facility which resulted in the Company making a one-time principal pay-down of $1,706,845 on the secured real estate note. The final semi-annual principal and interest payment of $454,185 was made on July 1, 2022. On September 22, 2022, we entered into an amendment to extend the note’s maturity date to December 23, 2022. We are required to make a one-time final payment of approximately $6,969,668 on December 23, 2022. We were not in compliance with our total debt coverage ratio as of June 30, 2022, however we received a waiver from Conterra. We are actively engaging with Conterra and potential lenders to refinance the Conterra note prior to the final payment under the Conterra note coming due. However, we cannot assure you that we will succeed in securing such refinancing on commercially reasonable terms, if at all, and whether such terms may be more restrictive than the provisions governing the Conterra note. In addition, we cannot assure you that we will not experience an event of default or be required to further renegotiate with, or see additional waivers from, Conterra, including on terms that may be significantly less favorable to us, before we are able to refinance the Conterra note, if ever.
Equity Issuances
On September 23, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with B. Riley Securities, Inc., or B. Riley, under which we may offer and sell from time to time, at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $17.1 million through B. Riley as our sales agent. On May 17, 2022, we amended the ATM Agreement to having an aggregate offering price of $24.6 million.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, we received gross proceeds of approximately $7.4 million from the sale of 3,655,136 shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we received gross proceeds of approximately $10.9 million from the sale of 3,008,015 shares of its common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement. As of June 30, 2022, we had $6.3 million remaining under the ATM Agreement.
On October 14, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with the purchasers named therein, or the Purchasers, pursuant to which we agreed to sell and issue to the Purchasers an aggregate of 1,847,343 shares of our common stock, or the Shares, at a purchase price of $2.73 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million.
The Purchasers included MFP Partners, L.P., or MFP, our largest stockholder, Starlight 4, LLLP, an entity affiliated with Mark W. Wong, our Chief Executive Officer and a member of our board of directors, and Alan D. Willits, Charles B. Seidler and Robert Straus, each a member of our board of directors. Alexander C. Matina, a member of our board of directors, is Vice President of Investments of the general partner of MFP.
On February 18, 2022, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with MFP, pursuant to which we sold and issued to MFP, in a private placement, 1,695 shares of our Series B Redeemable Convertible Non-Voting Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, an accompanying warrant to purchase up to 559,350 shares of our common stock, at a combined unit price of $2,950 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $5.0 million.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Operating Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, operating activities used $18.4 million in cash. Net loss plus and minus the adjustments for non-cash items as detailed on the statement of cash flows used $20.8 million in cash, and changes in operating assets and liabilities as detailed on the statement of cash flows provided $2.4 million in cash. The decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by increases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.2 million, accounts payable of $1.0 million and inventories of $0.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable of $0.4 million.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, operating activities used $14.2 million in cash. Net loss plus and minus the adjustments for non-cash items as detailed on the statement of cash flows used $15.8 million in cash, and changes in operating assets and liabilities as detailed on the statement of cash flows provided $1.6 million in cash. The decrease in cash from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable of $7.3 million, partially offset by a decrease in deferred revenue of $5.8 million and a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.0 million.
Investing Activities
Investing activities during the year ended June 30, 2022 used $0.9 million in cash. The purchase of property, plant and equipment used $2.1 million. The use of cash was partially offset by net proceeds from the sale of Bioceres stock that provided $1.0 million.
Investing activities during the year ended June 30, 2021 provided $2.5 million in cash. Proceeds from the disposal of property, plant and equipment of $0.8 million and net proceeds from the sale of properties in California provided $2.8 million. Net proceeds were partially offset by additions to property, plant and equipment of $1.1 million consisting primarily of equipment purchases for our distribution facility in Keith, Australia, and research and development facilities in Tamworth, Australia.
Financing Activities
Financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2022 provided $17.1 million in cash. During the year ended June 30, 2022, we had net proceeds from the sale of our common stock of $11.8 million, net proceeds from the sale of our preferred stock of $5.0 million, net borrowings on the working capital lines of credit of $1.8 million and borrowings of long-term debt of $0.9 million. Net proceeds were partially offset by repayments of long-term debt of $1.4 million and debt issuance costs of $0.7 million.
Financing activities during the year ended June 30, 2021 provided $10.9 million in cash. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we had net proceeds from the sale of our common stock of $10.2 million, net borrowings on the working capital lines of credit of $5.0 million, borrowings of long-term debt of $0.4 million and repayments of long-term debt of $4.4 million and debt issuance costs of $0.2 million.
Inflation Risk
Inflationary pressures on labor and commodity price increases directly impacted our consolidated results of operations during the three months ended June 30, 2022, and we expect this to continue throughout fiscal year 2023.
We attempt to manage any inflationary costs through selective price increases and changes in product mix, but rapidly changing inflationary pressures from global commodity prices and logistics could impact our costs of goods before pricing adjustments can be implemented. Delays in implementing such price increases, competitive pressures, and other factors may limit our ability to recover such cost increases in the future. Inherent volatility experienced in certain commodity markets could have a significant effect on our results of operations and may have an adverse effect on us in the future. The extent of any impact will depend on our ability to manage such volatility through the product mix that we sell and selective price increases.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing our financial statements, we must select and apply various accounting policies in accordance with GAAP. Our most significant policies are discussed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In order to apply our accounting policies, we often need to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable, based upon the information available to us. In making such estimates, we rely on historical experience, market and other conditions, and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. However, the estimation process is by its nature uncertain given that estimates depend on events over which we may not have control. If market and other conditions change from those that we anticipate, our results of operations, financial condition and changes in financial condition may be materially affected. In addition, if our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or to take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material effect on our results of operations, financial condition or changes in financial condition. Members of our senior management have discussed the development and selection of our critical accounting estimates, and our disclosure regarding them, with the audit committee of our board of directors, and do so on a regular basis.
We believe that the following estimates have a higher degree of inherent uncertainty and require our most significant judgments. In addition, had we used estimates different from any of these, our results of operations, financial condition or changes in financial condition for the current period could have been materially different from those presented.
Goodwill
Goodwill is assessed annually for impairment or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit. These events could include a significant change in business climate, legal factors, a decline in operating performance or market capitalization or our common stock, competition, sale or disposition of a significant portion of a business, or other factors. We perform our annual or interim goodwill impairment test by comparing the estimated fair value of our one reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the estimated fair value of our reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, an impairment is indicated, requiring recognition of a goodwill impairment charge for the differential, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
We had a sustained decline in the market capitalization of our common stock during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, thereby triggering a potential indicator of goodwill impairment. As a result, we initiated a goodwill impairment test for the year ended June 30, 2022.
We compared the carrying value of our invested capital to estimated fair values at June 30, 2022. We estimated the fair value using the market approach and a control premium (based on management’s best estimate) was added.
Upon completing the impairment test, we determined that the estimated fair value of invested capital was less than the carrying value by approximately 11%, thus indicating an impairment. We recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $1.5 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, which represented the entire goodwill balance prior to the impairment charge.
Our impairment assessment is sensitive to changes in control premium. For the June 30, 2022 assessment of our one reporting unit, if we assumed our selected control premium of 20% was increased to 24%, our goodwill impairment would have been approximately $1.4 million less.
Intangible Assets
All amortizable intangible assets are assessed for impairment whenever events indicate a possible loss. Such an assessment involves estimating undiscounted cash flows over the remaining useful life of the intangible. If the review indicates that undiscounted cash flows are less than the recorded value of the intangible asset, the carrying amount of the intangible is compared to its fair value, with an impairment loss recognized if the estimated fair value is below carrying value. Fair values are typically estimated using discounted cash flow techniques. Significant changes in key assumptions about the business, market conditions and prospects for which the intangible asset is currently utilized or expected to be utilized could result in an impairment charge.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718 Stock Compensation, which establishes accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under such provisions, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense, under the straight-line method, over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant).
We account for equity instruments, including stock options issued to non-employees, in accordance with authoritative guidance for equity-based payments to non-employees (FASB ASC 505-50). Stock options issued to non-employees are accounted for at their estimated fair value. The fair value of options granted to non-employees is re-measured as they vest.
We utilize the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the fair value of options granted under share-based compensation plans. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires us to estimate a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the expected term of the award, stock price volatility, dividend rate, risk-free interest rate. The input factors to use in the valuation model are based on subjective future expectations combined with management judgment. The expected term used represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to be outstanding. We have used the historical volatility for our stock for the expected volatility assumption required in the model, as it is more representative of future stock price trends. We use a risk-free interest rate that is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury issued with an equivalent remaining term at the time of grant. We have not paid dividends in the past and currently do not plan to pay any dividends in the foreseeable future, and as such, dividend yield is assumed to be zero for the purposes of valuing the stock options granted. We evaluate the assumptions used to value stock awards on a quarterly basis. If factors change, and we employ different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. When there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned share-based compensation expense. To the extent that we grant additional equity securities to employees, our share-based compensation expense will be increased by the additional unearned compensation resulting from those additional grants.
Income Taxes
We regularly assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent management believes that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established. When a valuation allowance is established or increased, an income tax charge is included in the consolidated financial statements and net deferred tax assets are adjusted accordingly. Changes in tax laws, statutory tax rates and estimates of our future taxable income levels could result in actual realization of the deferred tax assets being materially different from the amounts provided for in the consolidated financial statements. If the actual recovery amount of the deferred tax asset is less than anticipated, we would be required to write-off the remaining deferred tax asset and increase the tax provision, resulting in a reduction of earnings and stockholders’ equity.
Inventories
All inventories are accounted for on a lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods. Depending on market conditions, the actual amount received on sale could differ from our estimated value of inventory. In order to determine the value of inventory at the balance sheet date, we evaluate a number of factors to determine the adequacy of provisions for inventory and this may require us in some cases to make
significant judgements. The factors include the age of inventory, the amount of inventory held by type, future demand for products and the expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, expected business plans and expected market conditions. We perform a review of our inventory by product line on a quarterly basis.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we recognized a write-down of inventory in the amount of $6.4 million which is included in Cost of Revenue in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The write-down of inventory during the year ended June 30, 2022 was related to certain inventory lots that deteriorated in quality and germination rates during the year, reserves for an estimated amount that is expected to deteriorate in quality and germination during the product life cycle and adjusting specific products to market value.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized a write-down of inventory in the amount of $1.4 million which is included in Cost of Revenue in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The write-down of inventory during the year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily related to certain inventory lots that deteriorated in quality and germination rates during the year.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We regularly assess the collectability of receivables and provide an allowance for doubtful trade receivables equal to the estimated uncollectible amounts. That estimate is based on historical collection experience, current economic and market conditions and a review of the current status of each customer’s trade accounts receivable. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time. Management believes the allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate to cover anticipated losses in our accounts receivable under current conditions; however, unexpected, significant deterioration in any of the factors mentioned above or in general economic conditions could materially change these expectations.