Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company based in Austin, Texas. Our mission is to detect and treat neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease. Our novel science is based on stabilizing - but not removing - a critical protein in the brain.
Over the past 10 years, we have combined state-of-the-art technology with new insights in neurobiology to develop novel solutions for Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Our strategy is to leverage our unique scientific/clinical platform to develop a first-in-class program for treating neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s.
We currently have two biopharmaceutical assets under development:
our lead therapeutic product candidate, called simufilam, is a novel treatment for Alzheimer’s disease; and
our lead investigational diagnostic product candidate, called SavaDx, is a novel way to detect the presence of Alzheimer’s disease from a small sample of blood.
Our scientific approach for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease seeks to simultaneously suppress both neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation. We believe our ability to improve multiple vital functions in the brain represents a new, different and crucial approach to address Alzheimer’s disease.
Our lead therapeutic product candidate, simufilam, is a proprietary small molecule (oral) drug. Simufilam targets an altered form of a protein called filamin A (FLNA) in the Alzheimer’s brain. Published studies have demonstrated that the altered form of FLNA causes neuronal dysfunction, neuronal degeneration and neuroinflammation.
We believe simufilam improves brain health by reverting altered FLNA back to its native, healthy conformation, thus countering the downstream toxic effects of altered FLNA. We have generated and published experimental and clinical evidence of improved brain health with simufilam. Importantly, simufilam is not dependent on clearing amyloid from the brain. Since simufilam has a unique mechanism of action, we believe its potential therapeutic effects may be additive or synergistic with those of other therapeutic candidates aiming to treat neurodegeneration.
On October 6, 2021, and November 18, 2021, we announced initiation of our two Phase 3 studies of simufilam, respectively.
The first Phase 3 study, called RETHINK-ALZ, is designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of oral simufilam 100 mg in enhancing cognition and slowing cognitive and functional decline over 52 weeks. Secondary objectives include the assessment of simufilam's effect on neuropsychiatric symptoms and caregiver burden. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study plans to enroll approximately 750 patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease in the U.S. and Canada and, eventually, overseas.
The second Phase 3 study, called REFOCUS-ALZ, is designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of oral simufilam 100 mg and 50 mg over 76 weeks. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study plans to enroll approximately 1,000 patients with mild-to-moderate Alzheimer’s disease in the U.S. and Canada and, eventually, overseas.
Our investigational diagnostic product candidate, called SavaDx, is an early-stage program focused on detecting the presence of Alzheimer’s disease from a small sample of blood. The goal is to make the detection of Alzheimer’s disease as simple as getting a blood test.
Financial Overview
We have yet to generate any revenues from product sales. We have an accumulated deficit of $207.3 million at December 31, 2021. These losses have resulted principally from costs incurred in connection with research and development activities, salaries and other personnel-related costs and general corporate expenses. Research and development activities include costs of preclinical and clinical studies as well as clinical supplies associated with our product candidates. Salaries and other personnel-related costs include stock-based compensation associated with options and other equity awards granted to employees and non-employees. Our operating results may fluctuate substantially from period to period as a result of the timing of preclinical activities, enrollment rates of clinical studies for our product candidates and our need for clinical supplies.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses for at least the next 12 months. In addition, we may seek in the future to fund our operations through additional public or private equity or debt financings or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain financing or reach profitability, the related lack of liquidity will have a material adverse effect on our operations and future prospects, and we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of simufilam, our lead drug candidate, or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
We expect to continue to use significant cash resources in our operations for the next several years. Our cash requirements for operating activities and capital expenditures may increase substantially in the future as we:
continue our ongoing Phase 3 program with simufilam;
manufacture large-scale supplies for simufilam;
conduct other preclinical and clinical studies for our product candidates;
seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
develop, formulate, manufacture and commercialize our product candidates;
implement additional internal systems and develop new infrastructure;
acquire or in-license additional products or technologies, or expand the use of our technology;
maintain, defend and expand the scope of our intellectual property; and
hire additional personnel.
Product revenue will depend on our ability to receive regulatory approvals for, and successfully market, our product candidates. If our development efforts result in regulatory approval and successful commercialization of our product candidates, we expect to generate revenue from direct sales of our drugs and/or, if we license our drugs to future collaborators, from the receipt of license fees and royalties from sales of licensed products. We conduct our research and development programs through a combination of internal and collaborative programs. We rely on arrangements with universities, certain collaborators, CDMOs, CROs and clinical research sites for a significant portion of our product development efforts.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
We focus substantially all our research and development efforts on research and development in the areas of neurology. The following table summarizes expenses by category for research and development efforts (in thousands):
Research and development expenses include compensation, contractor fees and supplies as well as allocated common costs. Contractor fees and supplies generally include expenses for clinical studies and preclinical studies and costs for formulation and manufacturing activities. Other common costs include the allocation of common costs such as facilities. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we received $3.9 million and $4.2 million in research grants from the NIH, respectively. These reimbursements were recorded as a reduction to our research and development expenses.
Our technology has been applied across certain of our portfolio of product candidates. Data, know-how, personnel, clinical results, research results and other matters related to the research and development of any one of our product candidates also relate to, and further the development of, our other product candidates. As a result, costs allocated to a specific product candidate may not necessarily reflect the actual costs surrounding research and development of such product candidate due to cross application of the foregoing.
Estimating the dates of completion of clinical development, and the costs to complete development, of our product candidates would be highly speculative, subjective and potentially misleading. Pharmaceutical products take a significant amount of time to research, develop and commercialize. The clinical study portion of the development of a new drug alone usually spans several years. We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially during the next few years as we seek to advance our product candidates through the clinical development process and, potentially to seek regulatory approval of simufilam. Over the next few years, we expect our preclinical, clinical and contract manufacturing expenses to increase significantly relative to what we have incurred to date. We expect to reassess our future research and development plans based on our review of data we receive from our current research and development activities. The cost and pace of our future research and development activities are linked and subject to change.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and interest income in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those estimates related to agreements and research collaborations. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The following items in our consolidated financial statements require significant estimates and judgments:
Research Contracts and Accruals. We have entered into various research and development contracts with research institutions and other third-party vendors. Related payments are recorded as research and development expenses as incurred. We record accruals for estimated ongoing research costs. When evaluating the adequacy of the accrued liabilities, we analyze progress of the studies including the phase or completion of events, invoices received and contracted costs. Significant judgments and estimates are made in determining the accrued balances at the end of any reporting period. Actual results could differ from our estimates. Our historical accrual estimates have not been materially different from actual costs.
Legal and other contingencies. The Company is subject to lawsuits, claims, allegations and investigations regarding simufilam. The Company believes the claims are without merit and intends to defend against these lawsuits vigorously. The Company is unable to estimate the possible loss or range of loss, if any, associated with these lawsuits. However, litigation is subject to inherent uncertainties, and unfavorable rulings could occur. If an unfavorable ruling were to occur, it may cause a material adverse impact on the results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition for the period in which the ruling occurs, or future periods. Refer to Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on contingencies.
2020 Cash Incentive Bonus Plan. In 2020, we established the 2020 Cash Incentive Bonus Plan (the “Plan”) to incentivize Plan participants. Awards under the Plan are accounted for as liability awards under ASC 718, “Stock-based Compensation”. The fair value of each potential Plan award will be determined once a grant date occurs and will be remeasured each reporting period. Compensation expense associated with the Plan will be recognized over the expected achievement period for each Plan award, when a Performance Condition is considered probable of being met.
The Plan was established to promote the long-term success of the Company by creating an “at-risk” cash bonus program that rewards Plan participants with additional cash compensation in lockstep with significant increases in our market capitalization. The Plan is considered “at-risk” because Plan participants will not receive a cash bonus unless our market capitalization increases significantly and (1) we complete a merger or acquisition transaction that constitutes a sale of ownership of the Company or its assets (a Merger Transaction) or (2) the Compensation Committee of the Board (the Compensation Committee) determines the Company has sufficient cash on hand, as defined in the Plan, to render payment (each, a “Performance Condition”), neither of which may ever occur. Because of the inherent discretion and uncertainty regarding these requirements, we have concluded that a Plan grant date has not occurred as of December 31, 2021. No actual cash payments were authorized or made to participants under the Plan through December 31, 2021.
Stock-based Compensation. We recognize non-cash expense for the fair value of all stock options and other share-based awards. We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the fair value of stock options, using the single-option award approach and straight-line attribution method. Significant judgments and estimates are made in determining inputs to the Black-Scholes option valuation model. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for significant assumptions regarding stock-based compensation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial condition and results of operations, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consist primarily of costs of drug development work associated with our product candidates, including:
clinical studies,
preclinical testing,
clinical supplies and related formulation and design costs, and
compensation and other personnel-related expenses.
Research and development expenses increased to $24.8 million in 2021 from $3.1 million in 2020, representing a 713% increase. This increase was due primarily to costs related to manufacture of clinical trial supplies for and the initiation of a Phase 3 clinical program with simufilam, costs of an on-going open-label study and cognition maintenance study with simufilam, as well as increased personnel expenses compared to the prior year. Research and development expenses also included stock-based compensation expenses of $1.3 million in 2021 compared to $0.5 million in 2020.
We received NIH reimbursement of $3.9 million from research grants in 2021 recorded as a reduction to research and development expense, as compared to $4.2 million in 2020.
We expect research and development expense to increase in future periods as we manufacture drug supply and continue our Phase 3 clinical program with simufilam.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, human resources, audit and accounting services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonus, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist primarily of existing facility costs. We incur insurance, audit, investor relations, SOX compliance and other administrative and professional services expenses associated with operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and Nasdaq. General and administrative expense increased to $8.1 million in 2021 from $3.7 million in 2020. The 115% increase was due primarily to higher legal fees, personnel costs and insurance expenses compared to the prior year. In addition, 2021 expense included $500,000 of depreciation and amortization for the two-building office complex in Austin, Texas, purchased in third quarter 2021.
We expect general and administrative expense for 2022 will increase in the foreseeable future compared to 2021 due primarily to anticipated higher legal and professional fees related to ongoing securities class action and derivative lawsuits, governmental investigations as well as higher operating costs such as compliance costs and depreciation and amortization.
Gain on Sale of Property and Equipment
There were no sales of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold surplus manufacturing equipment to an non-affiliated third party and received proceeds totaling $360,000. The original cost of the property and equipment was $892,000 and accumulated depreciation was $878,000, resulting in a gain on sale of property and equipment of $346,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Income
Interest and other income, net, was $49,000 in 2021 compared to $112,000 in 2020. The decrease in interest income was due to lower interest rates, which more than offset additional interest from increases in our cash balances compared to the prior period.
Other income, net
We record the activities related to leasing office space to third parties in buildings we own as other income, net, as leasing is not core to the Company’s operations. Other income, net, was $434,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no other income, net, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as we acquired the two-building office complex in August 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through public and private stock offerings, payments received under collaborative agreements and interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents balances. We intend to continue to use our capital resources to fund research and development activities, capital expenditures, working capital requirements and other general corporate purposes. As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $233.4 million.
2021 Registered Direct Offering
On February 12, 2021, we completed a common stock offering pursuant to which certain investors purchased 4,081,633 shares of common stock at a price of $49.00 per share. Net proceeds of the offering were approximately $189.7 million after deducting offering expenses.
2020 Follow-on Public Offering
On November 13, 2020, we completed the sale of 9,375,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $8.00 per share. We received net proceeds from the offering of approximately $70.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
Common Stock Warrants
In August 2018, we issued warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 9.1 million shares of its common stock in conjunction with an offering of our common stock.
During 2021, we received proceeds of $0.7 million from the exercise of 0.6 million shares pursuant to warrants. During 2020, we received proceeds of $4.9 million from the exercise of 4.0 million shares pursuant to warrants.
There were no warrants outstanding following the 2021 exercises.
At the Market (ATM) Common Stock Issuance
On March 27, 2020, we established an at-the-market offering program (ATM) to sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million in transactions pursuant to a shelf registration statement that was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC) on May 5, 2020. We are obligated to pay a commission of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock in the offering. We are not obligated to sell any shares in the offering.
﻿
There were no common stock sales under the ATM during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
NIH Research Grant Awards
Our research has been supported by NIH under multiple research grant awards. Strong, long-term support from NIH has allowed us to advance our two lead product candidates, simufilam and SavaDx, into clinical development.
In May 2021, we were awarded a new research grant award from NIH of up to $2.7 million to support clinical readiness activities for a Phase 3 program with simufilam. In April 2020, we were awarded a research grant from NIH of up to $2.5 million. In March 2020, we were awarded a supplemental research funding grant from NIH of up to $374,000. These non-dilutive research grants are intended to strengthen our clinical program of simufilam, our investigational drug to treat Alzheimer’s disease. All of our NIH research grant awards are paid out on a reimbursement basis and require milestone-based technical progress.
2020 Cash Incentive Bonus Plan Obligations
In August 2020, the Board approved the 2020 Cash Incentive Bonus Plan (the Plan). The Plan was established to promote the long-term success of the Company by creating an “at-risk” cash bonus program that rewards Plan participants with additional cash compensation in lockstep with significant increases in the Company’s market capitalization. The Plan is considered “at-risk” because Plan participants will not receive a cash bonus unless the Company’s market capitalization increases significantly and certain other conditions specified in the Plan are met. Specifically, Plan participants will not be paid any cash bonuses unless (1) the Company completes a merger or acquisition transaction that constitutes a sale of ownership of the Company or its assets (a Merger Transaction) or (2) the Compensation Committee determines the Company has sufficient cash on hand, as defined in the Plan. Plan participants will be paid all earned cash bonuses in the event of a Merger Transaction.
The Company’s market capitalization, including all outstanding stock options, was $89.4 million at the inception of the Plan in August 2020. If the Company were to exceed a $5 billion market capitalization for no less than 20 consecutive trading days, and conditions noted above for payment are met, all Plan milestones would be deemed achieved, in which case total cash bonus awards would range from a minimum of $139.1 million up to a hypothetical maximum of $322.3 million.
The Company’s potential financial obligation to plan participants at December 31, 2021 totaled $7.3 million, based upon the achievement of one Plan milestone in the Company’s market capitalization in 2020. No actual cash bonus payments have been made to any Plan participant, as the Company has not yet satisfied all the conditions necessary for amounts to be paid under the Plan. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s market capitalization increased substantially. These increases triggered the achievement of 11 additional Plan milestones. Collectively, the achievement of such milestones could trigger potential Company obligations to Plan participants ranging from a minimum of $93.7 million up to a hypothetical
maximum of $225.0 million, with exact amounts to be determined by the Compensation Committee and contingent upon future satisfaction of a Performance Condition.
No actual cash payments were authorized or made to participants under the Plan as of December 31, 2021, or through the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Use of Cash
Net cash used in operating activities was $30.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting primarily from the net loss reported of $32.4 million and an increase in prepaid and other assets of $11.0 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $6.2 million, accrued development expense of $2.1 million, accrued compensation and benefits of $1.8 million, other current liabilities of $0.7 million and stock-based compensation expense of $1.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from the net loss reported of $6.3 million and a gain on sale of property and equipment of $0.3 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $1.0 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22.2 million related primarily to the purchase of a two-building office complex in Austin, Texas, which will serve as our future corporate headquarters.
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $360,000 for proceeds received from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $192.3 million, consisting of $189.8 million in proceeds from our registered direct offering of common stock in February 2021, $1.8 million from the exercise of stock options and $0.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $75.4 million consisting of $70.3 million proceeds from our follow-on public offering of common stock in November 2020, $4.9 million proceeds from exercise of common stock warrants and $0.3 million from exercise of stock options.
Realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on future earnings, if any. We are uncertain about the timing and amount of any future earnings. Accordingly, we offset these net deferred tax assets with a valuation allowance.
We lease approximately 6,000 square feet of office space pursuant to a non-cancelable operating lease in Austin, Texas that expires in April 2024. We also lease an additional 3,600 square feet of office space in Austin, Texas that expires on April 30, 2022. Future lease payments are as follows (in thousands):
We have an accumulated deficit of $207.3 million at December 31, 2021. We expect our cash requirements to be significant in the future. The amount and timing of our future cash requirements will depend on regulatory and market acceptance of our product candidates and the resources we devote to researching and developing, formulating, manufacturing, commercializing and supporting our products. We believe that our current resources should be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We may seek additional future funding through public or private financing in the future, if such funding is available and on terms acceptable to us.
If we raise additional funds by issuing debt financing or equity securities, our stockholders will experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds
when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our drug candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves.