ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report. Our discussion and analysis of fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 is included herein. Unless expressly stated otherwise, for discussion and analysis of fiscal year 2019 items and fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 10, 2021 and is incorporated herein by reference.
We evaluate our financial performance utilizing various accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted CASM and Adjusted CASM ex-fuel. These non-GAAP financial measures are provided as supplemental information to the financial information presented in this annual report that is calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP and these non-GAAP financial measures are presented because management believes that they supplement or enhance management’s, analysts’ and investors’ overall understanding of our underlying financial performance and trends and facilitate comparisons among current, past and future periods.
Because the non-GAAP financial measures are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, they should not be considered superior to and are not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related GAAP financial measures presented in this annual report and may not be the same as or comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies due to possible differences in the method of calculation and in the items being adjusted. We encourage investors to review our financial statements and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
The information below provides an explanation of certain adjustments reflected in the non-GAAP financial measures and shows a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures reported in this annual report to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. Within the financial tables presented, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers. Per unit amounts presented are calculated from the underlying amounts.
Operating expenses per available seat mile (“CASM”) is a common metric used in the airline industry to measure an airline’s cost structure and efficiency. We exclude loss on disposal of assets, special charges (credits), federal excise tax recovery adjustments and accelerated depreciation to determine Adjusted CASM. We believe that also excluding aircraft fuel and related taxes ("Adjusted CASM ex-fuel") from certain measures is useful to investors because it provides an additional measure of management’s performance excluding the effects of a significant cost item over which management has limited influence and increases comparability with other airlines that also provide a similar metric. In prior periods, we excluded supplemental rent adjustments related to the modification of aircraft or engine leases from Adjusted CASM and Adjusted CASM ex-fuel. However, we no longer exclude supplemental rent adjustments from our non-GAAP measures. Therefore, 2021 and 2020 non-GAAP measures have been revised to reflect this change and no longer exclude previously reported supplemental rent adjustments.
2021 Year in Review
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced sharp declines in passenger demand and bookings beginning in March 2020 that lasted throughout 2020, and to a lesser extent throughout 2021. Since its initial onset in early 2020, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including any of its variants, has evolved and continues to be fluid. While air travel demand improved during 2021, as compared to the majority of 2020, we still experienced weakened passenger demand and bookings as compared to pre-pandemic levels. However, as the current year has progressed and as described below, we have seen some improvement in our business.
Load factor for 2021 was 78.8% as compared to 69.7% in the prior year. We experienced an increase in capacity of 47.0%, period over period, as air travel demand continued to increase compared to prior year. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, our financial and operational outlook remains subject to change. We continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic on our operations and financial condition, and to adjust our mitigation and operational strategies.
Impact on the Operations
Beginning in March 2020, we began to experience significant fluctuations in demand due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. While we currently estimate that air travel demand will continue to fluctuate in the upcoming months as the effects
of COVID-19 continue to develop, we expect that air travel demand will continue to recover in 2022. However, the situation continues to be fluid and actual capacity adjustments may be different than what we currently expect.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its effects continue to evolve, with developments including:
•Fluctuations in the rate of infections;
•Infections from the identified Delta and Omicron variants;
•The emergency use authorization issued by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for COVID-19 vaccines;
•Increases in the availability of COVID-19 vaccines resulting in expanded eligibility to more groups of people to receive the vaccine;
•The approval of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine for persons aged 5 years and over;
•The requirement, effective November 8, 2021, that all inbound international travelers, that are not U.S. citizens and not an immigrant (not a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, lawful permanent resident, or traveling to the United States on an immigrant visa) provide evidence of being fully vaccinated against COVID-19; and
•The requirement, effective December 6, 2021, that all inbound international travelers (regardless of vaccination status or citizenship) provide a negative COVID-19 test no more than one day before traveling by air into the United States.
On September 9, 2021, President Biden announced his Path Out of the Pandemic plan, which includes mandatory COVID-19 vaccination for certain employees in the private sector, the federal government, and health care settings. For private employers with 100 or more employees, President Biden's plan directed the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to issue an emergency temporary standard (ETS) requiring vaccination or weekly COVID-19 testing of all employees, absent disability or religious accommodations. The attorneys general of several states filed lawsuits challenging the ETS. On January 13, 2022, the Supreme Court blocked the Biden administration from enforcing its vaccine or test requirements for employers with 100 employees or more, however, each state may institute vaccination or testing requirements. We will continue to monitor the developments as it relates to this mandate.
COVID-19 Legislation
On April 20, 2020, we entered into a PSP Agreement with the United States Department of the Treasury ("Treasury"), pursuant to which we received a total of $344.4 million, used exclusively to pay for salaries, wages and benefits for our Team Members through September 30, 2020. Of that amount, $73.3 million is in the form of a low-interest 10-year loan. In addition, in connection with our participation in the PSP, we issued to the Treasury warrants pursuant to a warrant agreement to purchase up to 520,797 shares of our common stock at a strike price of $14.08 per share (the closing price for the shares of our common stock on April 9, 2020) with a fair value of $3.9 million. We registered the resale of the warrants pursuant to the warrant agreement with the Treasury in September and October 2020. The remaining amount of $267.2 million, net of related costs, is in the form of a grant and was recognized in special credits in our consolidated statement of operations in 2020.
On December 27, 2020, the PSP2 was signed into law which extended the PSP portion of the CARES Act through March 31, 2021 and provided an additional $15 billion to fund the PSP2 for employees of passenger air carriers. We entered into the PSP2 payroll support program agreement with the Treasury on January 15, 2021. During the first and second quarters of 2021, We received a total of $212.1 million through the PSP2, used exclusively to pay for salaries, wages and benefits for our Team Members through March 31, 2021.
In addition, the ARP, enacted on March 11, 2021, authorized the Treasury to provide additional assistance through the PSP3. Under the ARP, Treasury provided approximately $14 billion to fund the PSP3 for employees of passenger air carriers. We entered into the PSP3 payroll support program agreement with the Treasury on April 29, 2021. During the second quarter of 2021, we received a total of $197.9 million through the PSP3, to be used exclusively to pay for salaries, wages and benefits for our Team Members through September 30, 2021.
Of the amounts received in 2021 mentioned above, $63.0 million is in the form of a low-interest 10-year loan. In addition, in connection with our participation in the PSP2 and PSP3, we issued to the Treasury warrants pursuant to a warrant agreement to purchase up to 137,753 shares and 80,539 shares of our common stock at a strike price of $24.42 per share (the closing price
for the shares of our common stock on December 24, 2020) and $36.45 (the closing price for the shares of our common stock on March 10, 2021) with fair values of $2.8 million and $1.5 million, respectively. We registered the resale of the warrants pursuant to the warrant agreement with the Treasury in May 2021 and June 2021, respectively. The remaining amount of $342.7 million is in the form of a grant and was recognized in special credits in our consolidated statement of operations in 2021. Total warrants issued in connection with the PSP, PSP2 and PSP3 represent less than 1% of the outstanding shares of our common stock as of December 31, 2021.
In connection with our participation in the PSP2 and PSP3, we are subject to certain restrictions and limitations, including, but not limited to:
•Restrictions on payment of dividends and stock buybacks through September 30, 2022;
•Limits on executive compensation through April 1, 2023;
•Restrictions from conducting involuntary furloughs or reducing pay rates and benefits until September 30, 2021, or the date on which all PSP funding has been expended;
•Requirements to maintain certain levels of scheduled services through March 1, 2022; and
•Reporting requirements.
The CARES Act also provided an employee retention credit (“CARES Employee Retention credit”) which was a refundable tax credit against certain employment taxes. We qualified for the credit beginning on April 1, 2020 and received additional credits for qualified wages through December 31, 2020. The Consolidated Appropriations Act extended and expanded the availability of the CARES Employee Retention credit through June 30, 2021. Subsequently, the ARP extended and expanded the availability of the CARES Employee Retention credit through December 31, 2021, however, certain provisions apply only after December 31, 2020. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we recorded the $37.5 million related to the CARES Employee Retention credit for the first and second quarters of 2021 within special credits on our consolidated statement of operations. We did not qualify for the employee retention credit for the third and fourth quarters of 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $40.8 million remained in accounts receivable, net on our consolidated balance sheet related to the CARES employee retention credit for the fourth quarter of 2020 and first and second quarters of 2021. Refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-5. Special Charges and Credits", for additional information.
Finally, the CARES Act also provided for deferred payment of the employer portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. During 2020, we deferred $23.2 million in social security tax payments. As of December 31, 2021, $11.7 million of deferred social security tax payments remains within other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet.
Balance Sheet, Cash Flow and Liquidity
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. in the first quarter of 2020, we have taken several actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, these actions included the private offering of $850.0 million of the 8.00% senior secured notes, the public offering of $175.0 million in 4.75% convertible notes due 2025, the public offering of 20,125,000 shares of our voting common stock for which we received net proceeds of $192.4 million, the issuance and sale of 9,000,000 shares of our voting common stock through our ATM Program for which we received net proceeds of $156.7 million and the execution of a revolving credit facility with a total commitment of $180.0 million as of December 31, 2020. During the first quarter of 2021, we entered into an amendment to this revolving credit facility which extended the maturity to March 30, 2024 and increased the commitment amount to $240.0 million. During the second quarter of 2021, the revolving credit facility was paid down in full and $240.0 million remained undrawn and available as of December 31, 2021. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we further improved our liquidity and financial position through the public offering of $500.0 million in 1.00% convertible notes due 2026, the issuance of 10,594,073 shares of our voting common stock for which we received net proceeds of $370.8 million, the extinguishment of $146.8 million in principal amount of our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025 and the extinguishment of $340.0 million in principal amount of our 8.00% senior secured notes. Refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-14. Debt and Other Obligations" and "Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-11. Common Stock and Preferred Stock" for additional information. As a result of these actions, as of December 31, 2021, we had $1,679.8 million of liquidity comprised of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, short-term investment securities and funds available under our revolving credit facility due in 2024.
The Omicron variant has significantly impacted staffing levels and disrupted travel across the industry and is expected to temporarily delay the demand recovery in early 2022. However, for purposes of assessing our liquidity needs, we estimate that air travel demand will continue to recover in 2022. We believe the actions taken since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic address our future liquidity needs, but we may implement further discretionary changes and other cost reduction and liquidity preservation and/or enhancement measures, as needed, to address the volatility and quickly changing dynamics of passenger demand and the impact of revenue changes, regulatory and public health directives, prevailing government policy and financial market conditions.
Workforce Actions
As required by the PSP2, during the first quarter of 2021, we offered to rehire all eligible Team Members who were involuntarily terminated during 2020. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $2.0 million in special charges within special credits on our consolidated statement of operations related to the rehiring of Team Members under our involuntary employee separation program. In addition, in response to increased air travel demand, during the first quarter of 2021, we requested the voluntary return to work of certain Team Members on leave under our voluntary leave programs. As of December 31, 2021, all Team Members previously on voluntary leave had returned to work. Expenses related to voluntary leave programs were recorded within salaries, wages and benefits on our consolidated statement of operations. As we continue to monitor the impacts of the pandemic on our operations and financial condition, we will consider and evaluate the need for any additional workforce actions in future periods. In addition, we will continue to monitor any government mandates related to vaccine, testing and other requirements.
Summary of Results
During 2021, we generated a pre-tax loss of $520.3 million and a net loss of $472.6 million, $(4.50) per share, compared to a pre-tax loss of $620.2 million and a net loss of $428.7 million, $(5.06) per share, in 2020. The decrease in pre-tax loss was primarily driven by a 66.3% increase in our traffic and a 7.4% increase in average yield, year over year. In 2021, we increased our capacity by 47.0%, as compared to the prior year period. In addition, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $331.6 million in 2021, that contributed to our net loss, year over year. Partially offsetting the net loss incurred in the period was a $377.7 million special credit recorded within special charges (credits). Refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-5. Special Charges and Credits" for additional information.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a negative operating margin of 1.8% on $3,230.8 million in operating revenues. TRASM in 2021 was 7.93 cents, an increase of 21.4% compared to the prior year. Total revenue per passenger flight segment increased 6.8%, year over year, from $98.14 to $104.80. The increase in total fare revenue per passenger flight segment was primarily due to an increase of 7.4% in average yield, year over year. Fare revenue per passenger flight segment increased 12.6%, while non-ticket revenue per passenger flight segment increased by 2.6%, as compared to the prior year, as the majority of the breakage revenue was recognized within fare revenue. In addition, due to large increases in credit shells issued as well as significant increases in the expiration of those credit shells, we recognized significantly higher credit shell breakage in 2021 as compared to prior year.
Our operating cost structure is a primary area of focus and is at the core of our ULCC business model. Our unit operating costs continue to be among the lowest of any airline in the United States. During 2021, our Adjusted CASM ex-fuel was 6.74 cents as compared to 7.90 cents for 2020. The decrease on a per-ASM basis was primarily due to improved air travel demand, as compared to the prior year period, which drove a significant increase of 47.0% in ASMs, period over period. This increase in ASMs drove a decrease in operating expenses on a per-ASM basis with the greatest impact noted on primarily fixed costs such as salaries, wages, and benefits expense, depreciation and amortization expense and landing fees and other rents expense.
During 2021, we added 8 new destinations: Louisville, Kentucky; St. Louis, Missouri; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Pensacola, Florida; Puerto Vallarta, Mexico; Manchester, New Hampshire; Miami, Florida; Tegucigalpa, Honduras. During 2021, we grew our fleet of Airbus single-aisle aircraft from 157 to 173 aircraft as we took delivery of 10 aircraft under direct operating leases and 6 aircraft under sale-leaseback transactions (1 of which did not qualify to be accounted for as a sale-leaseback). In addition, we purchased 4 previously leased aircraft. We also took delivery of 6 engines under direct, short-term, operating leases, 2 new engines through cash purchases and purchased 2 previously leased engines. As of December 31, 2021, our 173 Airbus A320-family aircraft fleet was comprised of 31 A319ceos, 64 A320ceos, 48 A320neos and 30 A321ceos of which 73 aircraft are financed through secured debt, 67 are financed under operating leases, and 33 are unencumbered. As of December 31, 2021, our aircraft orders consisted of 156 A320 family aircraft scheduled for delivery through 2027.
Operating Revenues
Our operating revenues are comprised of passenger revenues and other revenues.
Passenger revenues
Fare revenues. Tickets sold are initially deferred within air traffic liability on our consolidated balance sheet. Passenger fare revenues are recognized at time of departure when transportation is provided. Generally, all tickets sold by us are nonrefundable. An unused ticket expires at the date of scheduled travel and is recognized as revenue at the date of scheduled travel. Fare revenues are recorded within passenger revenues on our consolidated statement of operations. Refer to our disaggregated revenue table within “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements- 4. Revenue Disaggregation."
Customers may elect to change or cancel their itinerary prior to the date of departure. For changes, a service charge is recognized at time of departure of newly scheduled travel and is deducted from the face value of the original purchase price of the ticket, and the original ticket becomes invalid. For cancellations, a service charge is assessed and the amount remaining after deducting the service charge is called a credit shell. For credit shells that we estimate are not likely to be used prior to expiration, we recognize the associated value proportionally during the period over which the remaining credit shells may be used. Estimating the amount of credits that will go unused involves some level of subjectivity and judgment and can be impacted by several factors including, but not limited to, changes to our ticketing policies, changes to our refund, exchange, and credit shell policies, and economic factors.
Non-fare revenues. Our most significant non-fare revenues generally include revenues generated from air travel-related services paid for baggage, passenger usage fees, advance seat selection, itinerary changes, and loyalty programs. These ancillary items are deemed part of the single performance obligation of providing passenger transportation and as such, are recognized in non-fare revenues within passenger revenues on our consolidated statement of operations. Refer to our disaggregated revenue table within “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements- 4. Revenue Disaggregation." The majority of our passenger non-fare revenues are recognized at time of departure when transportation is provided.
Passenger revenues are recognized once the related flight departs. Accordingly, the value of tickets and non-fare revenues sold in advance of travel is included under our current liabilities as “air traffic liability,” or ATL, until the related air travel is provided.
Guests may earn points based on their spending with the FREE SPIRIT credit card affinity program which we have an agreement to sell points. The contract to sell points under this agreement has multiple performance obligations, as discussed below.
Our co-branded credit card agreement provides for joint marketing where cardholders earn points for making purchases using co-branded cards. During 2020, we extended our agreement with the administrator of the FREE SPIRIT affinity credit card program to extend through March 31, 2024. In connection with the extension of the agreement, in January 2021, we launched a new loyalty program with extended points expiration, additional benefits based on status tiers, and other changes. We account for this agreement consistently with the accounting method that allocates the consideration received to the individual products and services delivered. The value is allocated based on the relative stand-alone selling prices of those products and services, which generally consists of (i) points to be awarded, (ii) airline benefits and (iii) advertising and marketing efforts. We determined the estimate of the stand-alone selling prices by considering discounted cash flow analysis using multiple inputs and assumptions, including: (1) the expected number of points awarded and number of points redeemed, (2) the estimated stand-alone selling price of the award travel obligation and airline benefits and, (3) the costs of advertising and marketing efforts.
Other revenues
Other revenues primarily consist of the marketing component of the sale of frequent flyer points to our credit card partner and commissions revenue from the sale of various items such as hotels and rental cars.
Substantially all of our revenues are denominated in U.S. dollars. We recognize revenues net of certain taxes and airport passenger fees, which are collected by us on behalf of airports and governmental agencies and remitted to the applicable governmental entity or airport on a periodic basis. These taxes and fees include U.S. federal transportation taxes, federal security charges, airport passenger facility charges and foreign arrival and departure taxes. These items are collected from customers at the time they purchase their tickets, but are not included in our revenues. Upon collection from the customer, we record a liability within other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets and relieve the liability when payments are remitted to the applicable governmental agency or airport.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the following line items.
Salaries, Wages and Benefits. Salaries, wages and benefits expense includes the salaries, hourly wages, bonuses and equity compensation paid to employees for their services, as well as the related expenses associated with employee benefit plans and employer payroll taxes.
Aircraft Fuel. Aircraft fuel expense includes the cost of jet fuel, related federal taxes, fueling into-plane fees and transportation fees. It also includes realized and unrealized gains and losses arising from activity on our fuel derivatives, if any.
Landing Fees and Other Rents. Landing fees and other rents include both fixed and variable facilities expenses, such as the fees charged by airports for the use or lease of airport facilities, overfly fees paid to other countries and the monthly rent paid for our headquarters facility.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense includes the depreciation of fixed assets we own and leasehold improvements. It also includes the amortization of capitalized software costs and heavy maintenance. Under the deferral method, the cost of our heavy maintenance is capitalized and amortized on a straight-line or usage basis until the earlier of the next estimated heavy maintenance event or the remaining lease term.
Aircraft Rent. Aircraft rent expense consists of all minimum lease payments under the terms of our aircraft and spare engine lease agreements recognized on a straight-line basis. Aircraft rent expense also includes supplemental rent. Supplemental rent is made up of maintenance reserves paid to aircraft lessors in advance of the performance of major maintenance activities that are not probable of being reimbursed and probable and estimable return condition obligations. As of December 31, 2021, 67 of our 173 aircraft and 12 of our 32 spare engines are financed under operating leases.
Maintenance, Materials and Repairs. Maintenance, materials and repairs expense includes parts, materials, repairs and fees for repairs performed by third-party vendors and in-house mechanics required to maintain our fleet. It excludes direct labor cost related to our own mechanics, which is included under salaries, wages and benefits. It also excludes the amortization of heavy maintenance expenses, which we defer under the deferral method of accounting and amortize as a component of depreciation and amortization expense.
Distribution. Distribution expense includes all of our direct costs, including the cost of web support, our third-party call center, travel agent commissions and related GDS fees and credit card transaction fees, associated with the sale of our tickets and other products and services.
Loss on Disposal of Assets. Loss on disposal of assets includes the net losses on the disposal of our fixed assets as well as the net losses or gains resulting from our aircraft and engine sale-leaseback transactions.
Special Charges (Credits). Special charges and credits include recognition of the grant component of the Payroll Support Program ("PSP") with the Treasury, the CARES Act Employee Retention credit, amounts paid in connection with our voluntary and involuntary employee separation programs and the write-off of aircraft related credits.
Other Operating Expenses. Other operating expenses include airport operations expense and fees charged by third-party vendors for ground handling services and food and liquor supply service expenses, passenger re-accommodation expense, the cost of passenger liability and aircraft hull insurance, all other insurance policies except for employee related insurance, travel and training expenses for crews and ground personnel, professional fees, personal property taxes and all other administrative and operational overhead expenses. No individual item included in this category represented more than 5% of our total operating expenses.
Other (Income) Expense
Interest Expense. Interest expense in 2021 primarily related to the financing of purchased aircraft as well as the interest related to our convertible notes and the interest and accretion related to our 8.00% senior secured notes. Interest expense in 2020 primarily related to the financing of purchased aircraft as well as the interest and accretion related to our convertible notes and 8.00% senior secured notes. Interest expense in 2019 was primarily related to the financing of purchased aircraft.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt in 2021 primarily related to premiums paid to early extinguish a portion of our 8.00% senior secured notes and 4.75% convertible notes due 2025. In addition, it includes the write-off of related deferred financing costs and original issuance discount. Refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -14. Debt and Other Obligations" for more information. We had no loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 and 2019.
Capitalized Interest. We capitalize the interest that is primarily attributable to the outstanding PDP balances as a percentage of the related debt on which interest is incurred. Capitalized interest represents interest cost incurred during the acquisition period of a long-term asset and is the amount which theoretically could have been avoided had we not paid PDPs for the related aircraft or engines. Capitalization of interest ceases when the asset is ready for service. Capitalized interest for 2021, 2020 and 2019 primarily relates to the interest incurred on long-term debt.
Interest Income. For 2021 and 2020, interest income represents interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as well as interest earned on income tax refunds. For 2019, interest income represents interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Other Expense. Other expense primarily includes realized gains and losses related to foreign currency transactions.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets reported if, based on the weight of the evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred taxes are recorded based on differences between the financial statement basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities and available tax loss and credit carryforwards. In assessing the realizability of the deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. In evaluating the ability to utilize our deferred tax assets, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in determining future taxable income on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis.
Trends and Uncertainties Affecting Our Business
We believe our operating and business performance is driven by various factors affecting airlines and their markets, trends affecting the broader travel industry and trends affecting the specific markets and customer base that we target. The following key factors may affect our future performance.
Ability to Execute our Growth Strategy. Over recent years, we have pursued a high-growth strategy, which we expect to continue. Execution of such a strategy requires us to effectively deploy new flying into our network, as new routes or increased frequency of existing routes develop. New flying may not perform as well as expected or may result in a competitive reaction. Moreover, our growth strategy depends on the timely delivery of aircraft and engines in accordance with the intended delivery schedule in accordance with the applicable agreement. Delivery delays, as we have experienced from time to time in recent years, may cause us to scale back our growth, unless we are able to replace delayed aircraft in the secondary market or otherwise. Finally, our growth strategy relies in part on our ability to obtain additional facilities in airports, some of which are constrained, as well as additional flight crew, maintenance, and other personnel. And, given recent staffing and workforce shortages, we expect to experience an increase in our compensation expense to attract and retain qualified personnel.
Ability to Maintain or Grow Capacity. We pursue a high-growth strategy that expands revenue and maintains lower cost due to economies of scale and lower initial expense for aircraft and labor. Execution of such a strategy depends on the ability to maintain efficient utilization of existing capacity and the timely delivery of new aircraft and engines. We previously experienced aircraft operational reliability issues and delivery delays particularly regarding our PW1100G engine on our A320neo aircraft. However, beginning in the second half of 2020, the A320neo aircraft fleet reliability has stabilized and the PW1100G engine technical issues have improved. The new generation aircraft provide fuel burn and other efficiencies, as compared to the older A320ceo aircraft, and the ability to serve additional markets with greater operating range. However, ongoing or expanded reliability and delivery issues could materially impact our operations, costs and net results.
Impact of COVID-19. In 2020, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced sharp declines in passenger demand and bookings. In addition, we had unprecedented levels of cancellations and refunds. Through early 2021,we continued to experience declines in passenger demand and bookings although to a lesser extent than noted at the height of the pandemic during mid-2020. Our operations for 2020 and through mid-2021 were adversely affected by the reduction in air travel demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. With the sudden and significant reduction in air travel demand during these periods, our load factor significantly decreased. Since mid-2021, passenger demand and bookings increased such that operations were nearly back to levels prior to the pandemic. However, the Omicron variant significantly impacted staffing levels and disrupted travel across the industry since its emergence in late November 2021, which negatively impacted our operation during the November and December holiday season. During the period from December 26, 2021 through December 31, 2021,we experienced an irregular operations event due to crew and airport staffing shortages as a result of the rapid spread of the Omicron variant of COVID-19. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, our financial and operational outlook remains subject to change. We continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic on our operations and financial condition, and to implement and adapt mitigation strategies while working to preserve our cash and protect our long-term sustainability. For
more detailed information on the impact of COVID-19, please refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-2. Impact of COVID-19."
Competition. The airline industry is highly competitive. The principal competitive factors in the airline industry are fare pricing, total price, flight schedules, aircraft type, passenger amenities, number of routes served from a city, customer service, safety record, reputation, code-sharing relationships, frequent flyer programs and redemption opportunities. Price competition occurs on a market-by-market basis through price discounts, changes in pricing structures, fare matching, target promotions and frequent flyer initiatives. Airlines typically use discount fares and other promotions to stimulate traffic during normally slower travel periods in efforts to maximize unit revenue. The prevalence of discount fares can be particularly acute when a competitor has excess capacity that it is under financial pressure to sell tickets.
Moreover, the network carriers have developed a fare-class pricing approach, in which a portion of available seats may be sold at or near ULCC prices, but without most product features available to their passengers paying at higher fare levels on the same flight. Broad fare discounting may have the effect of diluting the profitability of revenues of high-cost carriers but the fare-class approach may allow network carriers to continue offering a competitive price to ULCCs on some flights or routes, while maintaining higher pricing to their traditional constituencies of corporate and less price-sensitive travelers. Refer to “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Industry-We operate in an extremely competitive industry."
Seasonality and Volatility. Our results of operations for any interim period are not necessarily indicative of those for the entire year because the air transportation business is subject to significant seasonal fluctuations. We generally expect demand to be greater in the second and third quarters compared to the rest of the year. The air transportation business is also volatile and highly affected by economic cycles and trends. Consumer confidence and discretionary spending, fear of terrorism or war, weakening economic conditions, fare initiatives, fluctuations in fuel prices, labor actions, changes in governmental regulations on taxes and fees, weather, outbreaks of pandemic or contagious diseases, and other factors have resulted in significant fluctuations in revenues and results of operations in the past. We believe demand for business travel historically has been more sensitive to economic pressures than demand for low-price travel. Finally, a significant portion of our operations are concentrated in markets such as South Florida, the Caribbean, Latin America and the Northeast and northern Midwest regions of the United States, which are particularly vulnerable to weather, airport traffic constraints and other delays.
Aircraft Fuel. Fuel costs represents one of our largest operating expenses, as it does for most airlines. Fuel costs have been subject to wide price fluctuations in recent years. Fuel availability and pricing are also subject to refining capacity, periods of market surplus and shortage and demand for heating oil, gasoline and other petroleum products, as well as meteorological, economic and political factors and events occurring throughout the world, which we can neither control nor accurately predict. We source a significant portion of our fuel from refining resources located in the southeast United States, particularly facilities adjacent to the Gulf of Mexico. Gulf Coast fuel is subject to volatility and supply disruptions, particularly in hurricane season when refinery shutdowns have occurred, or when the threat of weather-related disruptions has caused Gulf Coast fuel prices to spike above other regional sources. Our fuel hedging practices are dependent upon many factors, including our assessment of market conditions for fuel, our access to the capital necessary to support margin requirements, the pricing of hedges and other derivative products in the market, our overall appetite for risk and applicable regulatory policies. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding jet fuel derivatives and we have not engaged in fuel derivative activity since 2015. As of December 31, 2021, we purchased approximately half of our aircraft fuel under a single fuel service contract. The cost and future availability of jet fuel cannot be predicted with any degree of certainty.
Labor. The airline industry is heavily unionized. The wages, benefits and work rules of unionized airline industry employees are determined by collective bargaining agreements, or CBAs. Relations between air carriers and labor unions in the United States are governed by the RLA. Under the RLA, CBAs generally contain “amendable dates” rather than expiration dates, subject to standard early opener provisions, and the RLA requires that a carrier maintain the existing terms and conditions of employment following the amendable date through a multi-stage and usually lengthy series of bargaining processes overseen by the NMB. This process continues until either the parties have reached agreement on a new CBA, or the parties have been released to “self-help” by the NMB. In most circumstances, the RLA prohibits strikes; however, after release by the NMB, carriers and unions are free to engage in self-help measures such as strikes and lockouts.
We have five union-represented employee groups comprising approximately 81% of our employees at December 31, 2021. Our pilots are represented by the Air Line Pilots Association, International, or ALPA, our flight attendants are represented by the Association of Flight Attendants, or AFA-CWA, our dispatchers are represented by the Professional Airline Flight Control Association, or PAFCA, our ramp service agents are represented by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, or IAMAW, and our passenger service agents are represented by the Transport Workers Union, or TWU. Conflicts between airlines and their unions can lead to work slowdowns or stoppages.
During 2017, we experienced operational disruption from pilot-related work action which adversely impacted our results. We obtained a temporary restraining order to enjoin further illegal labor action. In January 2018, under the guidance of the NMB assigned mediators, the parties reached a tentative agreement. In February 2018, the pilot group voted to approve the current five-year agreement, which becomes amendable February 2023.
In March 2016, under the supervision of the NMB, we reached a tentative agreement for a five-year contract with our flight attendants. In May 2016, we entered into a five-year agreement with our flight attendants. In February 2021, we entered into a Letter of Agreement with the AFA-CWA to change the amendable date of the collective bargaining agreement from May 4, 2021 to September 1, 2021. All other terms of the collective bargaining agreement remained the same. In June 2021, the AFA-CWA notified us, as required by the Railway Labor Act, that it intended to submit proposed changes to the collective bargaining agreement covering our flight attendants. We commenced negotiations with the AFA-CWA on September 27, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we continued to negotiate with the AFA-CWA.
Our dispatchers are represented by the PAFCA. In October 2018, we reached a tentative agreement with PAFCA for a new five-year agreement, which was ratified by the PAFCA members in October 2018.
In July 2014, certain ramp service agents directly employed by us voted to be represented by the IAMAW. In May 2015, we entered into a five-year interim collective bargaining agreement with the IAMAW, including material economic terms. In June 2016, we reached an agreement on the remaining terms of the collective bargaining agreement that became amendable in 2020. In February 2020, the IAMAW notified us, as required by the Railway Labor Act, that it intended to submit proposed changes to the collective bargaining agreement covering our ramp service agents which became amendable in June 2020. On September 28, 2021, we filed an “Application for Mediation Services” with the NMB. We were able to reach a tentative agreement with the IAMAW with the assistance of the NMB on October 16, 2021. Our ramp service agents ratified the five-year agreement in November 2021.
In June 2018, our passenger service agents voted to be represented by the TWU, but the representation only applies to our Fort Lauderdale station where we have direct employees in the passenger service classification. We began meeting with the TWU in late October 2018 to negotiate an initial collective bargaining agreement. During February 2022, we reached a tentative agreement with the TWU, which will need to be ratified by the passenger service agents.
We believe the five-year term of our CBAs is valuable in providing stability to our labor costs and provide us with competitive labor costs compared to other U.S.-based low-cost carriers. If we are unable to reach agreement with any of our unionized work groups in current or future negotiations regarding the terms of their CBAs, we may be subject to work interruptions or stoppages, such as the strike by our pilots in June 2010. A strike or other significant labor dispute with our unionized employees is likely to adversely affect our ability to conduct business. Any agreement we do reach could increase our labor and related expenses.
In 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was passed into law. This law may be repealed in its entirety or certain aspects may be changed or replaced. If the law is repealed or modified or if new legislation is passed, such action could potentially increase our operating costs, with healthcare costs increasing at a higher rate than our employee headcount.
Maintenance Expense. Maintenance expense grew through 2021 mainly as a result of increased aircraft utilization compared to the prior year, a growing fleet and the gradual increase of required maintenance for the older aircraft in our fleet. However, in 2020, maintenance expense decreased year over year mainly as a result of decreased aircraft utilization due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As our fleet ages, we expect that maintenance costs will increase in absolute terms. The amount of total maintenance costs and related amortization of heavy maintenance (included in depreciation and amortization expense) is subject to many variables such as future utilization rates, average stage length, the interval between heavy maintenance events, the size and makeup of the fleet in future periods and the level of unscheduled maintenance events and their actual costs. Accordingly, we cannot reliably quantify future maintenance expenses for any significant period of time particularly in the current period given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our airline.
As a result of a majority of our fleet being acquired over a relatively short period of time, heavy maintenance scheduled on certain aircraft will overlap, meaning we will incur our most expensive scheduled maintenance obligations on certain aircraft at roughly the same time. These more significant maintenance activities will result in out-of-service periods during which our aircraft will be dedicated to maintenance activities and unavailable to fly revenue service. When accounting for maintenance expense under the deferral method, heavy maintenance is amortized over the shorter of either the remaining lease term or the next estimated heavy maintenance event. As a result, deferred maintenance events occurring closer to the end of the lease term will generally have shorter amortization periods than those occurring earlier in the lease term. This will create higher depreciation and amortization expense specific to any aircraft related to heavy maintenance during the final years of the lease as compared to earlier periods.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our consolidated financial statements. For a detailed discussion of our significant accounting policies, refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
Critical accounting policies are defined as those policies that reflect significant judgments or estimates about matters both inherently uncertain and material to our financial condition or results of operations.
Loyalty Points earned with Co-branded credit card. Customers may earn points based on their spending with our co-branded credit card company with which we have an agreement to sell points. The contract to sell points under this agreement has multiple performance obligations. The agreement provides for joint marketing and we account for this agreement consistently with the accounting method that allocates the consideration received to the individual products and services delivered. The value is allocated based on the relative stand-alone selling prices of those products and services, which generally consists of (i) points to be awarded, (ii) airline benefits and (iii) advertising and marketing efforts. We determined the estimate of the stand-alone selling prices by considering discounted cash flow analysis using multiple inputs and assumptions, including: (1) the expected number of points awarded and number of points redeemed, (2) the estimated stand-alone selling price of the award travel obligation and airline benefits, and (3) advertising and marketing efforts.
We defer the amount for award travel obligation as part of loyalty deferred revenue within air traffic liability on our consolidated balance sheet and recognize loyalty travel awards in passenger revenue as the points are used for travel. Revenue allocated to the remaining performance obligations, primarily marketing components, is recorded in other revenue over time as points are delivered. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, total cash sales from this agreement were $48.0 million and $33.2 million, respectively, which are allocated to travel and other performance obligations.
Aircraft Maintenance Deposits. Some of our aircraft and engine master lease agreements provide that we pay maintenance reserves to aircraft lessors to be held as collateral in advance of our performance of major maintenance activities. These lease agreements generally provide that maintenance reserves are reimbursable to us upon completion of the maintenance event. A majority of these maintenance reserve payments are calculated based on a utilization measure, such as flight hours or cycles, and are used solely to collateralize the lessor for maintenance time run off the aircraft until the completion of the maintenance of the aircraft.
Maintenance reserve payments are reflected as aircraft maintenance deposits in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. We make certain assumptions to determine the recoverability of maintenance deposits. These assumptions are based on various factors such as the estimated time between the maintenance events and the utilization of the aircraft is estimated before it is returned to the lessor. When it is not probable we will recover amounts currently on deposit with a lessor, such amounts are expensed as supplemental rent. We did not expense any paid maintenance reserves as supplemental rent in 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had aircraft maintenance deposits of $48.9 million and $126.3 million, respectively, on our consolidated balance sheets.
Leased Aircraft Return Costs. Our aircraft lease agreements often contain provisions that require us to return aircraft airframes and engines to the lessor in a certain condition or pay an amount to the lessor based on the airframe and engine's actual return condition. Lease return costs include all costs that would be incurred at the return of the aircraft, including costs incurred to repair the airframe and engines to the required condition as stipulated by the lease. Lease return costs are recognized beginning when it is probable that such costs will be incurred and they can be estimated. When costs become both probable and estimable, they are accrued as a component of supplemental rent, through the remaining lease term. We expensed $31.7 million and $3.3 million of supplemental rent recorded within aircraft rent during 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021, we expensed $22.9 million in lease return costs within supplemental rent related to the purchase of four aircraft off lease and two spare engines off lease made during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by the release of an accrual related to an engine lease modification.
When determining the need to accrue lease return costs, there are various factors which need to be considered such as the contractual terms of the lease agreement, current condition of the aircraft, the age of the aircraft at lease expiration, and projected number of hours run on the engine at the time of return, among others. In addition, typically near the lease return date, the lessors may allow reserves to be applied as return condition consideration or pass on certain return provisions if they do not
align with their current plans to remarket the aircraft. As a result of the different factors listed above, management assesses the need to accrue lease return costs periodically throughout the year or whenever facts and circumstances warrant an assessment. Lease return costs will generally be estimable closer to the end of the lease term but may be estimable earlier in the lease term depending on the contractual terms of the lease agreement and the timing of maintenance events for a particular aircraft. As a result of COVID-19, we are currently operating our aircraft at lower utilization levels. If we continue flying our aircraft at lower utilization levels beyond our current projections, the timing of future maintenance events may change such that we will be required to accrue lease return costs and/or record reserves against our maintenance deposits earlier than we would have expected and such amounts could be significant. We expect lease return costs and unrecoverable maintenance deposits will increase as individual aircraft lease agreements approach their respective termination dates and we begin to accrue the estimated cost of return conditions for the corresponding aircraft. Upon a termination of the lease due to a breach by us, we would be liable for standard contractual damages, possibly including damages suffered by the lessor in connection with remarketing the aircraft or while the aircraft is not leased to another party.
Results of Operations
In 2021, we generated operating revenues of $3,230.8 million and had an operating loss of $56.9 million resulting in a negative operating margin of 1.8% and a net loss of $472.6 million. In 2020, we generated operating revenues of $1,810.0 million and an operating loss of $507.8 million resulting in a negative operating margin of 28.1% and a net loss of $428.7 million. The increase in operating revenues, year over year, is primarily due to an increase in traffic of 66.3%, year over year, driven by increased air travel demand as compared to the prior year period. Increased operations resulted in higher operating expenses across the board. Aircraft fuel expense alone increased by 112.1%, year over year, due to an increase in both fuel price per gallon and gallons consumed. The fluctuation in air travel demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be uncertain as the Omicron variant has significantly impacted staffing levels and disrupted travel across the industry and is expected to temporarily delay the demand recovery in early 2022. We estimate that air travel demand will continue to recover in 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents was $1,333.5 million, a decrease of $456.2 million compared to the prior year. Cash and cash equivalents is generally driven by cash from our operating activities offset by cash used to fund PDPs and capital expenditures and principal payments related to our long-term debt. In addition to cash and cash equivalents, as of December 31, 2021, we had $106.3 million in short-term investment securities.
Comparative Operating Statistics
The following tables set forth our operating statistics for the twelve month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(A) See "Glossary of Airline Terms" elsewhere in this annual report for definitions used in this table.
Operating Revenues
Operating revenues increased by $1,420.8 million, or 78.5%, to $3,230.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase in traffic of 66.3%, and an increase in average yield of 7.4%, year over year, driven by increased air travel demand as compared to prior year period
TRASM for 2021 was 7.93 cents, an increase of 21.4% compared to 2020. This increase was primarily a result of a 7.4% increase in operating yields and a load factor increase of 9.1 percentage points, year over year.
Total revenue per passenger flight segment increased 6.8% from $98.14 in 2020 to $104.80 in 2021. The increase in total revenue per passenger flight segment was primarily due to an increase of 7.4% in average yield, year over year. Fare revenue per passenger flight segment increased 12.6%, as compared to the prior year period, while non-ticket revenue per passenger flight segment increased 2.6%, as compared to the prior year period, as the majority of breakage revenue was recognized within fare revenue. Breakage revenue is comprised of unredeemed flight credits that expired unused, no show revenue and cancellations fees. During 2021, we recognized $167.7 million in revenue related to credit shells which expired unused or we expect to expire unused.
Operating Expenses
Since adopting our ULCC model, we have continuously sought to reduce our unit operating costs and have created one of the industry's lowest cost structures in the United States. In prior periods, we excluded supplemental rent adjustments related to the modification of aircraft or engine leases from Adjusted CASM and Adjusted CASM ex-fuel. However, we no longer exclude supplemental rent adjustments from our non-GAAP measures. Therefore, 2021 and 2020 non-GAAP measures have been revised to reflect this change and no longer exclude previously reported supplemental rent adjustments. The table below presents our unit operating costs (CASM) and year-over-year changes.
(1)Reconciliation of CASM to Adjusted CASM:
(2)Excludes aircraft fuel expense, loss on disposal of assets, special charges (credits), federal excise tax recovery adjustments and accelerated depreciation.
Operating expenses increased by $969.9 million, or 41.8%, in 2021 primarily due to an increase in operations as reflected by a 66.3% increase in traffic and a 47.0% increase in capacity, as a result of increased travel demand as compared to the prior year. Period over period, we had an increase of $75.0 million in special credits that partially offset the increase noted in other operating expenses. For additional information, refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-5. Special Charges and Credits."
Our Adjusted CASM ex fuel for 2021 decreased by 14.7% as compared to 2020. The decrease on a per-ASM basis was primarily due to improved air travel demand, as compared to the prior year period, which drove a significant increase of 47.0% in ASMs, period over period. This increase in ASMs drove a decrease in operating expenses on a per-ASM basis with the greatest impact noted on primarily fixed costs such as salaries, wages, and benefits expense, depreciation and amortization expense and landing fees and other rents expense.
Aircraft fuel expenses includes both into-plane expense (as defined below) and realized and unrealized net gains or losses from fuel derivatives, if any. Into-plane fuel expense is defined as the price that we generally pay at the airport, including taxes and fees. Into-plane fuel prices are affected by the global oil market, refining costs, transportation taxes and fees, which can vary by region in the United States and other countries where we operate. Into-plane fuel expense approximates cash paid to the supplier and does not reflect the effect of any fuel derivatives. We had no activity related to fuel derivative instruments during 2021 and 2020.
Aircraft fuel expense increased by 112.1% from $431.0 million in 2020 to $913.9 million in 2021. This increase was due to a 50.4% increase in fuel gallons consumed and a 40.9% increase in fuel price per gallon
The elements of the changes in aircraft fuel expense are illustrated in the following table:
Gulf Coast Jet indexed fuel is the basis for a substantial majority of our fuel consumption and is impacted by both the price of crude oil as well as increases or decreases in refining margins associated with the conversion of crude oil to jet fuel.
Labor costs in 2021 increased by $155.6 million, or 17.1%, compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher salaries, crew overtime and per diem pay, 401(k), bonus and health insurance expense, period over period. The increase in salaries and crew overtime and per diem pay was mainly driven by increased operations that drove higher pay to our pilot and flight attendant workforce, period over period. The increase in 401(k) expense was mainly driven by higher average pay rates and 401(k) employer contribution rates to our pilots as compared to the prior year period and the increase in bonus expense was driven by bonus-based performance metrics being met during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The increase in health insurance was mainly driven by higher volume of claims as compared to the prior year period.
Landing fees and other rents for 2021 increased by $65.0 million, or 25.9%, compared to 2020. On a dollar basis, landing fees and other rents expense primarily increased as a result of higher landing fees and overfly fees driven by increased operations and higher rates. A portion of our landing fees and other rents are variable in nature and vary based on factors such as the number of departures. As compared to the prior year period, departures increased by 47.9% and passenger flight segments increased by 67.1%. In addition, as compared to the prior year period, we had an increase in facility rent driven by higher rent rates and expansions in existing stations. These increases were partially offset by an increase in signatory adjustment credits as compared to the prior year period. In the prior year period, airports were recovering operating losses from lower utilization fees as well as increased market share at certain airports where other airlines had decreased flying due to the impact of COVID-19 on air travel demand resulting in signatory adjustment costs. On a per-ASM basis, higher landing fee rates and higher rent rates, period over period, partially offset the decrease noted on a per-ASM basis.
Depreciation and amortization increased by $18.6 million, or 6.7%, compared to the prior year. The increase in depreciation expense on a dollar basis was primarily driven by the purchase of four previously leased aircraft and the addition of one new aircraft during 2021. In addition, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $3.5 million in accelerated depreciation related to the retrofit of 36 aircraft with new Acro6 seats.
We account for heavy maintenance under the deferral method. Under the deferral method, the cost of heavy maintenance is capitalized and amortized as a component of depreciation and amortization expense in the consolidated statements of operations until the earlier of the next heavy maintenance event or end of the lease term. The amortization of heavy maintenance costs was $91.9 million and $88.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in amortization of heavy maintenance was primarily due to the timing and number of maintenance events in the current year, as compared to the prior year. As our fleet continues to age, we expect that the amount of deferred heavy maintenance events will increase and will result in an increase in the amortization of those costs. If heavy maintenance events were amortized within maintenance, materials and repairs expense in the consolidated statements of operations, our maintenance, materials and repairs expense would have been $251.4 million and $200.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Aircraft rent expense in 2021 increased by $50.2 million, or 25.6%, compared to 2020. This increase in aircraft rent expense was primarily a result of an increase in supplemental rent, period over period, driven by the accrual of $22.9 million in lease return costs related to the purchase of four aircraft off lease and two spare engines off lease made during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by the release of an accrual related to an engine lease modification. In addition, aircraft rent expense increased due to an additional 15 aircraft financed under operating leases throughout the current period, as compared to the prior year period. The increases generated by the new leased aircraft were partially offset by the purchase of four previously leased aircraft made during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The decrease on a per-ASM basis was partially offset by the increase in supplemental rent noted above.
Maintenance, materials and repairs expense increased by $48.3 million, or 43.4%, in 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase on a dollar basis was mainly due to a higher volume of aircraft and rotable maintenance events as a result of an increase of 40.6% in average daily aircraft utilization in the current period as compared to the prior year period. On a per-ASM basis, maintenance expense remained relatively stable, period over period.
Distribution expense increased by $47.4 million, or 55.8%, in 2021, compared to 2020. The increase on a dollar and per-ASM basis was primarily due to increased sales volume, resulting from increased air travel demand, which impacts our variable distribution costs such as credit card fees and costs related to our call center.
The following table shows our distribution channel usage:
Loss on disposal of assets totaled $3.3 million for the year ended 2021. This loss on disposal of assets mainly consists of $2.3 million related to the loss on five aircraft sale leaseback transactions completed during 2021 and $1.1 million related to the loss on the sale of auxiliary power units ("APUs"). Loss on disposal of assets totaled $2.3 million for the year ended 2020. This loss on disposal of assets mainly consists of $1.5 million related to the write-off of certain unrecoverable costs previously capitalized with a project to upgrade our enterprise accounting software which was subsequently suspended and $0.8 million related to the disposal of excess and obsolete inventory.
Special charges (credits) for the year ended 2021 consisted of a $342.2 million credit, net of the related costs, related to the grant component of the PSP2 and PSP3 agreements with the Treasury. In addition, we recorded $37.5 million related to the CARES Employee Retention credit. These special credits were partially offset by $2.0 million in special charges recorded in connection with the rehire of Team Members previously terminated under our involuntary employee separation program which were rehired in compliance with the restrictions mandated by our participation in the PSP. For additional information, refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-5. Special Charges and Credits." Special charges (credits) for the year ended 2020 consisted of a $266.8 million credit of deferred salaries, wages and benefits, net of the related costs, recognized in connection with the grant component of the PSP with the Treasury and $38.5 million related to the CARES Employee Retention credit. These special credits were partially offset by $2.5 million in special charges recorded in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 related to our voluntary and involuntary employee separation programs.
Other operating expenses in 2021 increased by $175.6 million, or 49.5%, compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in overall operations and an increase in passenger reaccomodation expense, period over period. As compared to the prior year period, departures increased by 47.9% and we had 67.1% more passenger flight segments, which drove increases in variable other operating expenses. In addition, we had higher passenger reaccomodation expense, period over period, related to
significant irregular operations during the third and fourth quarters of 2021 due to a series of overlapping challenges, primarily adverse weather and airport staffing shortages, leading to severe crew dislocations.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense, net increased from $112.4 million in 2020 to $463.4 million in 2021 primarily driven by an increase in loss on extinguishment of debt of $331.6 million which consisted of premiums paid to early extinguish a portion of our 8.00% senior secured notes and 4.75% convertible notes due 2025 as well as the write-off of related deferred financing costs and original issuance discount. In addition, the increase in other (income) expense was attributed to an increase in interest expense of $21.1 million which primarily consisted of the interest and accretion related to our 8.00% senior secured notes and the interest related to our convertible notes. Refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-14. Debt and Other Obligations” for additional information. The increase in other (income) expense was also attributed to a decrease in interest income of $0.9 million offset by an increase in capitalized interest of $3.0 million.
Income Taxes
In 2021, our effective tax rate was 9.2% compared to 30.9% in 2020. The decrease in tax rate, as compared to the prior year period, is primarily due to a $56.1 million discrete federal tax benefit recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 related to the passage of the CARES Act. The 2020 discrete federal tax benefit reflects the impact of the CARES Act which allowed for the carryback of net operating losses generated at a 21% tax rate to recover taxes paid at a 35% tax rate. In addition, we recorded an unfavorable permanent tax adjustment during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, related to the repurchase of a portion of our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025. Excluding this unfavorable permanent tax adjustment, our effective tax rate for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 would have been 20.6%. While we expect our tax rate to be fairly consistent in the near term, it will tend to vary depending on recurring items such as the amount of income we earn in each state and the state tax rate applicable to such income. Discrete items particular to a given year may also affect our effective tax rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since its initial onset in early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved and continues to be fluid. As a result, our financial and operational outlook still remains subject to change and fluctuation. We continue to monitor the impacts of the pandemic on our liquidity and financial condition, and to adjust our mitigation and operational strategies. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken certain actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position. Please refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-2. Impact of COVID-19," "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 11. Common Stock and Preferred Stock," and "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 14. Debt and Other Obligations" for additional information on the PSP and the measures we have implemented to focus on the safety of our Guests and employees as well as the impact on our liquidity, financial position and operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,679.8 million in liquid assets comprised of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, short-term investment securities and funds available under our revolving credit facility due in 2024.
Our primary sources of liquidity generally include cash on hand, cash provided by operations and capital from debt and equity financing. Primary uses of liquidity are for working capital needs, capital expenditures, aircraft and engine pre-delivery deposit payments and debt and lease obligations. We expect to meet our cash needs for the next twelve months with cash and cash equivalents, financing arrangements and cash flows from operations.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States in the first quarter of 2020, we have taken several actions to increase liquidity and strengthen our financial position. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, these actions included the private offering of $850.0 million of the 8.00% senior secured notes, the public offering of $175.0 million in convertible notes, the public offering of 20,125,000 shares of our voting common stock for which we received net proceeds of $192.4 million, the issuance and sale of 9,000,000 shares of our voting common stock through our ATM Program for which we received net proceeds of $156.7 million and the execution of a revolving credit facility with a total commitment of $180.0 million as of December 31, 2020 for which the commitment amount was increased to $240.0 million during the first quarter of 2021. During the second quarter of 2021, the revolving credit facility was paid down in full and $240.0 million remained undrawn and available as of December 31, 2021. In addition, we received a total of $754.4 million from the Treasury in connection with our participation in the PSP, PSP2 and PSP3 agreements.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we further improved our liquidity and financial position through the public offering of $500.0 million in 1.00% convertible notes due 2026, the issuance of 10,594,073 shares of our voting common stock for which we received net proceeds of $370.8 million, the extinguishment of $146.8 million in principal amount of our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025 and the extinguishment of $340.0 million in principal amount of our 8.00% senior secured notes. Refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-14. Debt and Other Obligations," and "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-11. Common Stock and Preferred Stock," for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $28.2 million recorded within current maturities of long-term debt and finance leases on our consolidated balance sheets related to our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025. As of December 31, 2021, the 4.75% convertible notes due 2025 may be converted by noteholders through March 31, 2022. No notes were converted during twelve months ended December 31, 2021 with the exception of the redemption of $146.8 million in principal of our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025. Refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-14. Debt and Other Obligations," for additional information on our extinguishment of debt.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $500.0 million recorded within long-term debt and finance leases, less current maturities on our consolidated balance sheets related to our 1.00% convertible notes due 2026. As of December 31, 2021, the 1.00% convertible notes due 2026 did not qualify for conversion by noteholders through March 31, 2022. Refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -14. Debt and Other Obligations" for additional information on the conversion criteria for the 1.00% convertible notes due 2026.
Currently, one of our largest capital expenditure needs is funding the acquisition costs of our aircraft. Aircraft are acquired through debt financing, cash purchases, direct leases or sale leaseback transactions. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we took delivery of 10 aircraft financed through direct operating leases, 6 aircraft under sale-leaseback transactions (1 of which did not qualify to be accounted for as a sale-leaseback), 2 spare engines purchased with cash and 6 engines under direct, short-term, operating leases. In addition, we purchased 4 previously leased aircraft and 2 previously leased engines. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we made $274.2 million in debt payments (principal, interest and fees) on our outstanding aircraft debt obligations.
Under our purchase agreements for aircraft and engines, we are required to pay PDPs relating to future deliveries at various times prior to each delivery date. During 2021, we paid $119.4 million in PDPs, net of refunds, and $17.3 million of capitalized interest for future deliveries of aircraft and spare engines. As of December 31, 2021, we had $484.8 million of pre-delivery deposits on flight equipment, including capitalized interest, on our consolidated balance sheet.
As of December 31, 2021, we had secured financing for 36 aircraft to be leased directly from third-party lessors, scheduled for delivery through 2024, and 17 aircraft which will be financed through sale-leaseback transactions, scheduled for delivery through 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have financing commitments in place for the remaining 103 Airbus firm aircraft orders, scheduled for delivery through 2027. However, we have signed a financing letter of agreement with Airbus which provides backstop financing for a majority of the aircraft included in the A320 NEO Family Purchase Agreement. The agreement provides a standby credit facility in the form of senior secured mortgage debt financing. Future aircraft deliveries may be paid in cash, leased or otherwise financed based on market conditions, our prevailing level of liquidity, and capital market availability.
As of December 31, 2021, we were compliant with our credit card processing agreements, and not subject to any credit card holdbacks. The maximum potential exposure to cash holdbacks by our credit card processors, based upon advance ticket sales and Spirit Saver$ ClubTM memberships, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, was $371.8 million and $423.7 million, respectively.
Net Cash Flows Provided (Used) By Operating Activities. Operating activities in 2021 provided $208.9 million in cash compared to $225.3 million used in 2020. During 2021, we had a net loss in the period, which included a $342.2 million credit, net of the related costs, related to the grant component of the PSP2 and PSP3, as well an increase in non cash adjustments related to depreciation and amortization and a loss on extinguishment of debt. In addition, we had an increase in accounts receivable, net offset by a decrease in income tax receivable.
Operating activities in 2020 used $225.3 million in cash compared to $551.3 million provided in 2019. Cash provided by operating activities decreased, year over year, primarily due to a net loss during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we had decreases in income tax receivable, deferred income tax expense and deferred heavy maintenance, net, offset by increases in accounts receivable, net, and air traffic liability, as well as a higher non-cash expense of depreciation and amortization, as compared to the prior year. Due to the impact of COVID-19 on our operations, we may experience negative cash flows from operations in the future.
Net Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities. During 2021, investing activities used $352.4 million, compared to $554.0 million used in 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by a decrease in purchases of property and equipment, year over year, as well as a decrease in PDPs paid, net of refunds, driven by timing of future aircraft deliveries.
During 2020, investing activities used $554.0 million, compared to $456.9 million used in 2019. The increase was mainly due to an increase in purchases of property and equipment, year over year, as well as an increase in PDPs paid, net of refunds, driven by timing of future aircraft deliveries.
Net Cash Provided (Used) By Financing Activities. During 2021, financing activities used $288.7 million. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we received $614.5 million, primarily related to the issuance of the 1.00% convertible notes due 2026 and the unsecured term loans in connection with the PSP2 and PSP3. In addition, we received an additional $375.7 million, in connection with the issuance of common stock and issuance of warrants in connection with the PSP2 and PSP3. We paid $470.0 million in debt principal payment obligations, $146.8 million related to the extinguishment of principal of our 4.75% convertible notes due 2025 and $340.0 million related to the extinguishment of principal of our 8.00% senior secured notes. In addition, we paid $317.9 million in premiums in connection with the debt extinguishments. Refer to "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - 14. Debt and Other Obligations" for more information on the debt extinguishments.
During 2020, financing activities provided $1,661.4 million. We received $1,585.7 million, net of issuance costs, primarily related to the debt financing of 8 aircraft delivered during 2020, the revolving credit facilities, the unsecured term loan in connection with the PSP, the issuance of convertible notes and the issuance of the 8.00% senior secured notes. In addition, during 2020, we received an additional $353.0 million, net of issuance costs, in connection with the issuance of common stock and issuance of warrants in connection with the PSP. We paid $254.3 million in debt principal payment obligations and $25.4 million in finance lease obligations. The payments on finance lease obligations were primarily related to an aircraft purchase agreement for the purchase of two A319 aircraft.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Our contractual purchase commitments consist primarily of aircraft and engine acquisitions through manufacturers and aircraft leasing companies. As of December 31, 2021, our firm aircraft orders consisted of 120 A320 family aircraft with Airbus, including A319neos, A320neos and A321neos, with deliveries expected through 2027. In addition, we had orders for 36 direct operating leases for A320neos and A321neos with third-party lessors, with deliveries expected through 2024.
During the third quarter of 2021, we entered into an Engine Purchase Support Agreement which requires us to purchase a certain number of spare engines in order to maintain a contractual ratio of spare engines to aircraft in the fleet. As of December 31, 2021, we are committed to purchase 16 PW1100G-JM spare engines, with deliveries through 2027. During the third quarter of 2019, the United States announced its decision to levy tariffs on certain imports from the European Union, including commercial aircraft and related parts. These tariffs include aircraft and other parts that we are already contractually obligated to purchase including those reflected below. In June 2021, the United States Trade Representative announced that the United States and European Union had agreed to suspend reciprocal tariffs on large civilian aircraft for five years, pending discussions to resolve their trade dispute. For further discussion on this topic, please refer to "Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - Any tariffs imposed on commercial aircraft and related parts imported from outside the United States may have a material adverse effect on our fleet, business, financial condition and our results of operations."
We have significant obligations for aircraft and spare engines as 67 of our aircraft and 12 of our spare engines are financed under operating leases. These leases expire between 2022 and 2039. Aircraft rent payments were $252.2 million and $172.0 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have contractual obligations and commitments primarily with regard to future purchases of aircraft and engines, payment of debt, and lease arrangements. The following table discloses aggregate information about our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the periods in which payments are due (in millions):
(1)Includes principal only associated with our 8.00% senior secured notes, senior term loans, fixed-rate loans, unsecured term loans, Class A, Class B, and Class C Series 2015-1 EETCs, Class AA, Class A, Class B, and Class C Series 2017-1 EETCs, convertible notes and our revolving credit facilities. Refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-14. Debt and Other Obligations.”
(2)Related to our 8.00% senior secured notes, senior term loans, fixed-rate loans, unsecured term loans and Class A, Class B, and Class C Series 2015-1 EETCs, and Class AA, Class A, Class B, and Class C Series 2017-1 EETCs and convertible debt. Includes interest accrued as of December 31, 2021 related to our variable-rate revolving credit facilities.
(3)Includes estimated amounts for contractual price escalations and PDPs.
(4)Primarily related to our reservation system and other miscellaneous subscriptions and services. Refer to “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements-18. Commitments and Contingencies.”
As of December 31, 2021, we had secured financing for 36 aircraft to be leased directly from third-party lessors, scheduled for delivery through 2024. Aircraft rent commitments for future aircraft deliveries to be financed under these direct leases from third-party lessors and sale leaseback transactions are expected to be approximately $40.8 million in 2022, $119.8 million in 2023, $189.4 million in 2024, $217.9 million in 2025, $217.9 million in 2026, and $1,829.2 million in 2027 and beyond. These future commitments are not included in the table above.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had secured financing for 17 aircraft, scheduled for delivery from Airbus from through 2022, which will be financed through sale leaseback transactions. The contractual purchase amounts for these aircraft from Airbus are included within the flight equipment purchase obligations in the table above. We did not have financing commitments in place for the remaining 103 Airbus aircraft currently on firm order, which are scheduled for delivery through 2027. However, we have signed a financing letter of agreement with Airbus which provides backstop financing for a majority of the aircraft included in the A320 NEO Family Purchase Agreement. The agreement provides a standby credit facility in the form of senior secured mortgage debt financing.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we purchased an 8.5-acre parcel of land for $41.0 million and entered into a 99-year lease agreement for the lease of a 2.6-acre parcel of land, in Dania Beach, Florida, where we are building a new headquarters campus. During January 2021, we began building our new headquarters campus with an expected completion during the fall season of 2023. Operating lease commitments related to this lease are included in the table above under the caption "Finance and operating lease obligations." For more detailed information, please refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements- 15. Leases and Aircraft Maintenance Deposits."
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a line of credit for $10.1 million and $3.1 million, respectively, related to corporate credit cards. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had drawn $5.6 million and $0.6 million, respectively, which is included within accounts payable on our consolidated balance sheets.
As of December 31, 2021, we had lines of credit with counterparties for both physical fuel delivery and derivatives in the amount of $41.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had drawn $16.4 million on these lines of credit for physical fuel delivery. We are required to post collateral for any excess above the lines of credit if the derivatives, if any, are in a net liability position and make periodic payments in order to maintain an adequate undrawn portion for physical fuel delivery. As of December 31, 2021, we did not hold any derivatives.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $7.4 million in uncollateralized surety bonds and $85.0 million standby letters of credit collateralized by $75.0 million of restricted cash, representing an off balance-sheet commitment, of which $26.7 million had been drawn upon for issued letters of credit.
GLOSSARY OF AIRLINE TERMS
Set forth below is a glossary of industry terms:
“Adjusted CASM” means operating expenses, excluding loss on disposal of assets, special charges (credits), accelerated depreciation and federal excise tax recovery adjustments, divided by ASMs.
“Adjusted CASM ex fuel” means operating expenses excluding aircraft fuel expense, loss on disposal of assets, special charges (credits), accelerated depreciation and federal excise tax recovery adjustments, divided by ASMs.
“AFA-CWA” means the Association of Flight Attendants-CWA.
“Air traffic liability” or “ATL” means the value of tickets sold in advance of travel.
“ALPA” means the Air Line Pilots Association, International.
“ASIF” means an Aviation Security Infrastructure Fee assessed by the TSA on each airline.
“Available seat miles” or “ASMs” means the number of seats available for passengers multiplied by the number of miles the seats are flown, also referred to as "capacity."
“Average aircraft” means the average number of aircraft in our fleet as calculated on a daily basis.
“Average daily aircraft utilization” means block hours divided by number of days in the period divided by average aircraft.
“Average fuel cost per gallon” means total aircraft fuel expense divided by the total number of fuel gallons consumed.
“Average stage length” represents the average number of miles flown per flight.
“Average yield” means average operating revenue earned per RPM, calculated as total revenue divided by RPMs, also referred to as "passenger yield."
“Block hours” means the number of hours during which the aircraft is in revenue service, measured from the time of gate departure before take-off until the time of gate arrival at the destination.
“CASM” or “unit costs” means operating expenses divided by ASMs.
“CBA” means a collective bargaining agreement.
“CBP” means United States Customs and Border Protection.
“DOT” means the United States Department of Transportation.
"EETC" means enhanced equipment trust certificate.
“EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
“FAA” means the United States Federal Aviation Administration.
“Fare revenue per passenger flight segment” means total fare passenger revenue divided by passenger flight segments.
“FCC” means the United States Federal Communications Commission.
"FLL Airport" means the Fort Lauderdale Hollywood International Airport.
“GDS” means Global Distribution System (e.g., Amadeus, Galileo, Sabre and Worldspan).
"IAMAW" means the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers.
“Into-plane fuel cost per gallon” means into-plane fuel expense divided by number of fuel gallons consumed.
“Into-plane fuel expense” represents the cost of jet fuel and certain other charges such as fuel taxes and oil.
“Load factor” means the percentage of aircraft seats actually occupied on a flight (RPMs divided by ASMs).
“NMB” means the National Mediation Board.
"Non-ticket revenue" means total non-fare passenger revenue and other revenue.
“Non-ticket revenue per passenger flight segment” means total non-fare passenger revenue and other revenue divided by passenger flight segments.
“OTA” means Online Travel Agent (e.g., Orbitz and Travelocity).
"PAFCA" means the Professional Airline Flight Control Association.
“Passenger flight segments” means the total number of passengers flown on all flight segments.
“PDP” means pre-delivery deposit payment.
“Revenue passenger mile” or “RPM” means one revenue passenger transported one mile. RPMs equals revenue passengers multiplied by miles flown, also referred to as "traffic."
“RLA” means the United States Railway Labor Act.
“Total operating revenue per ASM,” “TRASM” or “unit revenue” means operating revenue divided by ASMs.
“TWU” means the Transport Workers Union of America.
“TSA” means the United States Transportation Security Administration.
“ULCC” means “ultra low-cost carrier.”