ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on January 24, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
On November 8, 2021, Tuatara Capital Acquisition Corporation, a Cayman Islands exempted company (“TCAC”), entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Merger Agreement”), by and among TCAC, HighJump Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), and SpringBig, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“SpringBig”).
The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of TCAC and SpringBig.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $7,707,350, which consists of a change in the fair value of warrant liability of $12,960,000 and interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $35,810, offset by transaction costs allocated to warrants of $853,386, compensation expense of $2,400,000 and formation and operating cost of $2,035,074.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,064 which consists of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
On February 17, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units, which includes a partial exercise by the underwriters of their overallotment option in the amount of 2,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,000,000 Private Placement Warrant at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $200,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $11,766,856 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $4,000,000 of underwriting fees, $7,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $766,856 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $739,608. Net income of $7,707,350 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $35,810, a change in the fair value of warrant liability of $12,960,000, compensation expense of ($2,400,000) and transaction costs allocable to warrants ($853,386). Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1,295,466 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from January 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $64. Net loss of $5,064 was offset by formation cost paid by Sponsor in exchange for issuance of founder shares of $5,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $200,035,810 (including $35,810 of interest income) consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S. Treasury securities. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $621,472. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until February 17, 2023, to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 17, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor up to $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon completion of a Business Combination or its liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $7,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Merger Agreement
On November 8, 2021, Tuatara Capital Acquisition Corporation (“TCAC”) entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Merger Agreement”), by and among TCAC, HighJump Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), and SpringBig, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“SpringBig”).
The Merger Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on or prior to the closing date: (i) TCAC will become a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”) and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) TCAC’s name will be changed as mutually agreed to between the parties, (B) each then-issued and outstanding TCAC Class A Ordinary Share will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into one share of common stock of TCAC (the “New SpringBig Common Stock”), (C) each then-issued and outstanding TCAC Class B Ordinary Share will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into one share of New SpringBig Common Stock, and (D) each then-issued and outstanding common warrant of TCAC will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a warrant to purchase one share of New SpringBig Common Stock; and (ii) following the Domestication, Merger Sub will merge with and into SpringBig, with SpringBig as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly-owned subsidiary of TCAC (the “Merger”).
The Business Combination is expected to close in mid-2022, following the receipt of the required approval by TCAC’s shareholders, required regulatory approvals and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement, based on an implied equity value of $245 million, (i) each share of SpringBig common stock (other than dissenting shares) will be canceled and converted into the right to receive the applicable portion of the merger consideration comprised of New SpringBig Common Stock, as determined in the Merger Agreement (the “Share Conversion Ratio”), and (ii) vested and unvested options of SpringBig outstanding and unexercised immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger will convert into comparable options that are exercisable for shares of New SpringBig Common Stock, with a value determined in accordance with the Share Conversion Ratio.
As part of the aggregate consideration payable to the SpringBig’s securityholders pursuant to the Merger Agreement, holders of SpringBig’s common stock (including those holders of converted preferred stock of SpringBig) and holders of options of SpringBig’s common stock will also have the right to receive their pro rata portion of up to an aggregate of 9,000,000 shares of New SpringBig Common Stock (“Contingent Shares”) if any of the following stock price conditions are met: (i) 5,500,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of New SpringBig Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date; (ii) 2,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of New SpringBig Common Stock equals or exceeds $15.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date; and (iii) 1,250,000 Contingent Shares if the closing price of the New SpringBig Common Stock equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, and recapitalizations) on any twenty (20) trading days in a thirty (30)-trading-day period at any time after the closing date and by the third anniversary of the closing date.
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
In connection with the signing of the Merger Agreement, TCAC entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”). Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and TCAC agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the closing date, an aggregate of 1,310,000 shares of New SpringBig Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $13,100,000 (the “PIPE Financing”).
Advisory Service Agreement
On August 12, 2021 TCAC entered into an agreement (the “Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“CF&CO) to act as a capital markets advisor in connection with the proposed business combination (the “Business Combination”) with SpringBig, Inc. CF&CO acknowledges that the Company may engage additional advisors in the same capacity (together with CF&CO, the “Capital Markets Advisors”), provided that CF&CO will be the “lead” capital markets advisor and CF&CO shall not be responsible for the actions or inactions of any other capital markets advisor. In consideration of our services pursuant to this Agreement, the Company agrees to pay CF&CO a fee of $5,000,000 (the “Advisory Fee”) upon the consummation of the Business Combination (“Closing”). $2,000,000 of the Advisory Fee shall be payable in cash, and the remainder of the Advisory Fee (“Redemption Dependent Portion”) payable in cash and common stock of the Company (“Common Stock”), with the portions of each to depend on the final amount of redemptions from the Company’s trust account established for the benefit of the Company’s public stockholders (the “Trust Account”) in connection with the Business Combination.
Subsequent to the Agreement, TCAC entered into a second agreement (“Second Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“CF&CO) to receive one or more financing(s) through the private placement, offering or other sale of equity instruments in any form, including, without limitation, (i) equity instruments in any form, including, without limitation, preferred or common equity, or instruments convertible into preferred or common equity or other related forms of interests or capital of the Company in one or a series of transactions (an “Equity Financing”) and (ii) debt in any form, including, but not limited to, bank debt, high yield debt or mezzanine debt, notes, bonds, debentures or other debt securities, of the Company in one transaction or a series of transactions (a “Debt Financing” and any Equity Financing or Debt Financing, (a “Financing”), in the cases of (i) and (ii), in connection with the business combination contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger between the Company and SpringBig, Inc., dated as of November 8, 2021 (the “Business Combination,” and such agreement, the “Merger Agreement”). The Company hereby engages CF&CO to act as the Company’s financial advisor, placement agent and arranger in connection with any Financing for the Business Combination. In consideration of our services pursuant to this Second Agreement, the Company agrees to pay CF&CO the following compensation:
(a)
Upon the closing of any Financing (which is contemplated to fund and close concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination), the Company shall pay to CF&CO a non-refundable cash fee equal to 4% of the aggregate maximum gross proceeds received or receivable in connection with such Financing, including, without limitation, aggregate amounts committed by investors to purchase securities, whether or not all securities are issued on the closing date of the Equity Financing.
(b)
In no event shall the aggregate amount of the fees payable to CF&CO pursuant to this section 3 be less than $1,500,000.
(c)
The fees payable pursuant to this section 3 shall be in addition to any other fees that the Company may be required to pay directly to any prospective investor to secure its financing commitment.
(d)
For the avoidance of doubt, if the structure of a Financing contemplates multiple issuances, financing availability that is contingent upon the occurrence of some future event or any other delayed consideration structure, such Financing shall be considered a single Financing, and not multiple Financings, and all fees payable pursuant to this section 3 for such Financing shall be payable in full on the closing date of such Financing.
(e)
All fees payable hereunder will be payable in U.S. dollars in immediately available funds to CF&CO for its own account, or as directed by it, free and clear of and without deduction for any and all present or future applicable taxes, levies, imposts, deductions, charges or withholdings and all liabilities with respect thereto (with appropriate gross-up for withholding taxes) and will not be subject to reduction by way of setoff or counterclaim. Once paid, no fee will be refundable under any circumstances.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s condensed financial statements.