Item 7. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sabine Royalty Trust (the “Trust”) makes monthly distributions to its Unit holders of the excess of the preceding month’s revenues received over expenses incurred. Upon receipt, royalty income is invested in short-term investments until its subsequent distribution. In accordance with the Trust Agreement, the Trust’s only long-term assets consist of royalty interests in producing oil and gas properties. Although the Trust is permitted to borrow funds if necessary to continue its operations, borrowings are not anticipated in the foreseeable future. Accordingly the Trust is dependent on its operations to generate excess cash flows utilized in making distributions. These operating cash flows are largely dependent on such factors as oil and gas prices and production volumes, which are influenced by many factors beyond the control of the Trust. As a royalty owner, the Trust does not have access to certain types of information that would be disclosed by a company with oil and gas operations. See “Item 2. Properties” for a discussion of the types of information not available to the Trust.
The amount to be distributed to Unit holders (“Monthly Income Amount”) is determined on a monthly basis. The Monthly Income Amount is an amount equal to the sum of cash received by the Trust during a monthly period (the period commencing on the day after a monthly record date and continuing through and including the next succeeding monthly record date) attributable to the Royalty Properties, any reduction in cash reserves and any other cash receipts of the Trust, including interest, reduced by the sum of liabilities paid and any increase in cash reserves. Unit holders of record as of the monthly record date (the 15th day of each calendar month, except in limited circumstances) are entitled to have distributed to them the calculated Monthly Income Amount for such month on or before 10 business days after the monthly record date. The Monthly Income Amount per Unit is declared by the Trust no later than 10 days prior to the monthly record date. The cash received by the Trust is primarily from purchasers of the Trust’s oil and gas production and consists of gross sales of production less applicable severance taxes.
Results of Operations
Distributable income consists of royalty income plus interest income plus any decrease in cash reserves established by the Trustee less general and administrative expenses of the Trust less any increase in cash reserves established by the Trustee. The Trust’s royalty income represents payments received during a particular time period for oil and gas production from the Trust’s properties. Because of various factors which influence the timing of the Trust’s receipt of payments, royalty income for any particular time period will usually include payments for oil and gas produced in prior periods. The price and volume figures that follow represent the volumes and prices for which the Trust received payment during 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Royalty income during 2021 increased approximately $24,571,000, or 67.6 percent, compared to 2020 royalty income, which had decreased approximately $10,394,000, or 22.2 percent, from 2019 royalty income.
Revenues generated by sales of oil and gas increased in 2021 from 2020 as a result of higher oil and gas prices ($23.5 million) and increased production of natural gas ($6.6 million); offset somewhat by decreased oil production volumes ($4.0 million) and higher operating expenses and taxes ($1.5 million).
Gas volumes increased from 8,015,576 thousand cubic feet (“Mcf”) in 2020 to 10,070,366 Mcf in 2021 after increasing from 7,516,325 Mcf in 2019. The average price per Mcf of gas received by the Trust increased from $1.70 in 2020 to $3.20 in 2021 after decreasing from $2.27 in 2019. Robust production in the U.S. led to sustained high inventories which kept the price of natural gas low throughout 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic that hit in March 2020 and the subsequent sharp decrease in demand due to lockdowns worldwide caused the price of natural gas to decrease significantly. The restrictions in activity through the rest of 2020 and the economic uncertainty that went with it continued to put pressure on natural gas prices. When the lockdowns began to ease in 2021, the subsequent rise in demand allowed natural gas prices to rise. Cold weather in the last quarter of 2021 also contributed to higher prices.
Oil volumes sold decreased to 631,660 barrels (“Bbls”) in 2021 from 700,177 Bbls in 2020 after increasing from 697,089 Bbls in 2019. The average sales price of oil increased to $57.95 per Bbl in 2021, from $41.63 per Bbl in 2020 after decreasing from $51.44 per Bbl in 2019. The price of oil in 2019 was affected by downward pressure on oil prices due mainly to the shale oil production boom that continues to the present. Geopolitical tensions in the Middle East during the latter part of 2019 caused an increase in oil prices, however short-lived that increase was. For the first two months of 2020, oil prices stayed at higher levels until COVID-19 was discovered in the U.S. in March. The subsequent lockdowns led to a steep decrease in demand, causing the spot price of oil briefly to go negative. The price of oil recovered somewhat in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as restrictions began to ease. This price recovery continued throughout 2021 as COVID restrictions continued to be eased around the U.S., resulting in an increase in the demand of oil.
Louis Werner Sawmill Audit and Review
Sabine Royalty Corporation purchased the producing mineral interests of Louis Werner Sawmill Corporation (“LWSM”) in November 1969 for $460,000. The purchase consisted of approximately 33,468 acres located in Panola County, Texas (covering 120 Surveys and containing approximately 107 producing units at the time of purchase) and approximately 1,360 acres located in Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. All of the acreage under lease had a royalty rate of 12.5% except for a small number of properties which had been released by LWSM prior to the sale. These few leases had a 25% royalty rate. However, almost all of the acreage is held by production clauses resulting in a 12.5% royalty rate.
During 2021, the Trust has conducted an extensive review of the remittances received to determine if the amounts remitted are being paid at the correct royalty interest and if deductions are being properly deducted. Recent activity in Panola County has resulted in 27 new wells in 2021 totaling approximately $7.4 million in net revenue to the Trust, an increase of 32% over the prior 2020 remittances.
Interest income was approximately $6,000 in 2021, which had decreased from approximately $31,000 in 2020, which had decreased from approximately $166,000 in 2019. Changes in interest income are the result of changes in interest rates and funds available for investment.
General and administrative expenses decreased to approximately $3,054,000 in 2021 from approximately $3,057,000 in 2020. This is caused mainly by a decrease of approximately $118,000 in revenue processing. This decrease was partially offset by increases in Unitholder Services of approximately $42,800, an increase in the expense to digitize certain permanent files of approximately $38,300, Escrow Agent/Trustee fees of approximately $26,300, as well as an increase in oil and gas software fees of approximately $16,000.
General and administrative expenses increased to approximately $3,057,000 in 2020 from approximately $2,857,000 in 2019. This is due mainly to increases of approximately $145,800 for digitizing certain permanent files of the Trust and an increase in revenue processing of approximately $88,600. These increases were offset somewhat by decreases in Escrow Agent/Trustee fees of approximately $17,800 and professional fees of approximately $12,100.
The cash received by the Trust is primarily from purchasers of the Trust's oil and gas production and consists of gross sales of production less applicable severance taxes. In August 2020, the Trust received a refund of $122,556 (tax year 2018) from the State of New Mexico. In January 2019, the Trust received refunds of $309,879 (tax year 2015) from the State of Oklahoma and a refund of $140,474 (tax year 2015) from the State of New Mexico. In March 2019, the Trust received a refund of $334,624 (tax year 2017) from the State of Oklahoma. In December 2019, the Trust received a refund of $86,535 (tax year 2017) from the State of New Mexico. These refunds represented taxes that were withheld from the proceeds of production from the Royalty Properties and remitted to the State of Oklahoma and State of New Mexico by the applicable payors of such proceeds. Income taxes are not payable by the Trust, but are the responsibility of the individual Unit holders. Therefore, the State of Oklahoma and the State of New Mexico refunded the withheld taxes, and the refunds were included as royalty income in the Trust's September 2020, February 2019, April 2019 and January 2020 distributions, respectively.
The Trust did file tax returns for 2019 and 2020 with the States of Oklahoma and New Mexico requesting refunds. The Trust will file tax returns for 2021 with the States of Oklahoma and New Mexico requesting refunds. The refunds represent taxes that were withheld from the proceeds of production from the Royalty Properties and remitted to the State of Oklahoma and the State of New Mexico by the applicable payors of such proceeds.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Trust’s financial statements reflect the selection and application of accounting policies that require the Trust to make significant estimates and assumptions. The following are some of the more critical judgement areas in the application of accounting policies that currently affect the Trust’s financial condition and results of operations.
1. Basis of Accounting
The financial statements of the Trust are prepared on the following basis and are not intended to present financial position and results of operations in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America:
•
Royalty income, net of severance and ad valorem taxes, and interest income are recognized in the month in which amounts are received by either the escrow agent or the Trust, pending verification of ownership and title.
•
Trust expenses, consisting principally of routine general and administrative costs, include payments made during the accounting period. Expenses are accrued to the extent of amounts that become payable on the next monthly record date following the end of the accounting period. Reserves for liabilities that are contingent or uncertain in amount may also be established if considered necessary.
•
Royalties that are producing properties are amortized using the unit-of-production method. This amortization is shown as a reduction of Trust corpus.
•
Distributions to Unit holders are recognized when declared by the Trustee.
The financial statements of the Trust differ from financial statements prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America because of the following:
•
Royalty income is recognized in the month received, pending verification of ownership and title, rather than in the month of production.
•
Expenses other than those expected to be paid on the following monthly record date are not accrued.
•
Amortization of the royalties is shown as a reduction to Trust corpus and not as a charge to operating results.
•
Reserves may be established for contingencies that would not be recorded under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
This comprehensive basis of accounting other than GAAP corresponds to the accounting permitted for royalty trusts by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, as specified by Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 12:E, Financial Statements of Royalty Trusts.
2. Revenue Recognition
Revenues from royalty interests are recognized in the period in which amounts are received and verified by the Trust or escrow agent. Royalty income received by the Trust or escrow agent in a given calendar year will generally reflect the proceeds, on an entitlements basis, from natural gas produced for the twelve-month period ended September 30th in that calendar year and from oil produced for the twelve-month period ended October 31st in the same calendar year.
3. Reserve Disclosure
The SEC and the Financial Accounting Standards Board requires supplemental disclosures for oil and gas producers based on a standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved oil and gas reserve quantities. Under this disclosure, future cash inflows are computed by applying the average prices during the 12-month period prior to the fiscal year-end, determined as an unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within such period, unless prices are defined by contractual arrangements, excluding escalations based upon future conditions. Future price changes are only considered to the extent provided by contractual arrangements in existence at year end. The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows is achieved by using a discount rate of 10% a year to reflect the timing of future cash flows relating to proved oil and gas reserves. Numerous uncertainties are inherent in estimating volumes and the value of proved reserves and in projecting future production rates and the timing of development of non-producing reserves. Such reserve estimates are subject to change as additional information becomes available. The reserves actually recovered and the timing of production may be substantially different from the reserve estimates. See Note 8 of the Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8 hereof for additional information regarding the proved oil and gas reserves of the Trust. Other than those filed with the SEC, our estimated reserves have not been filed with or included in any reports to any federal agency.
4. Contingencies
Contingencies related to the Royalty Properties that are unfavorably resolved would generally be reflected by the Trust as reductions to future royalty income payments to the Trust with corresponding reductions to cash distributions to Unit holders. The Trustee is aware of no such items as of December 31, 2021.
New Accounting Pronouncements
There are no new pronouncements that are expected to have a significant impact on the Trust’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As stipulated in the Trust Agreement, the Trust is intended to be passive in nature and the Trustee does not have any control over or any responsibility relating to the operation of the Royalty Properties. The Trustee has powers to collect and distribute proceeds received by the Trust and to pay Trust liabilities and expenses, and its actions have been limited to those activities. Therefore, the Trust has not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
Prices obtained for oil and gas production depend upon numerous factors that are beyond the control of the Trust, including the extent of domestic and foreign production, imports of foreign oil, market demand, domestic and worldwide economic and political conditions, storage capacity and government regulations and tax laws. Prices for both oil and gas have fluctuated between 2019 and 2021. The following table presents the weighted average prices received per year by the Trust:
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbor created thereby. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report are forward-looking statements. Such statements include, without limitation, factors affecting the price of oil and natural gas contained in Item 1, “Business,” certain reserve information and other statements contained in Item 2, “Properties,” certain statements regarding the Trust’s financial position, industry conditions and other matters contained in this Item 7. Although the Trustee believes that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, such expectations are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties and the Trustee can give no assurance that they will prove correct. There are many factors, none of which is within the Trustee’s control, that may cause such expectations not to be realized, including, among other things, factors identified in this Annual Report affecting oil and gas prices (including, without limitation, the domestic and foreign supply of oil and gas and the price of foreign imports, market demand, the price and availability of alternative fuels, the availability of pipeline capacity, instability in oil-producing regions and the effect of governmental regulations or pandemics), the recoverability of reserves, general economic conditions, actions and policies of petroleum-producing nations and other changes in the domestic and international energy markets and the factors identified in Item 1A, “Risk Factors”.