ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis are not guarantees of future performance and may involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above and “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for discussions of these risks and uncertainties. A comparative discussion of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is provided in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 and is incorporated by reference herein.
Executive Summary
Internal Review, Investigations and Regulatory Matters Related to the Advantage Loan Program
On December 9, 2019, the Company announced it had voluntarily suspended its Advantage Loan Program in connection with the Internal Review. The primary focus of the Internal Review, which has been led by outside legal counsel under the direction of the Special Committee, has involved the origination of residential real estate loans under the Advantage Loan Program and related matters. The Internal Review has indicated that certain employees engaged in misconduct in connection with the origination of a significant number of such loans, including with respect to verification of income and employment, the amount of income reported for borrowers, reliance on third parties, and related documentation. As a result, the Company permanently discontinued the Advantage Loan Program, and a significant number of officers and employees have been terminated or resigned, including the top loan producers within the Advantage Loan Program. While the Internal Review is substantially complete, the Company expects it to remain open during the pendency of the government investigations discussed below, and it is possible additional work will be required in connection with the Internal Review.
The Bank is currently under formal investigation by the OCC, is responding to grand jury subpoenas from the DOJ and is responding to a formal investigation by the SEC, all of which are related to the Advantage Loan Program and, with respect to the DOJ and the SEC, the related disclosures of that program in the Company’s federal securities law filings. The Bank also continues to be subject to the OCC Agreement, which relates primarily to certain aspects of the Bank’s BSA/AML compliance program as well as its credit administration. The OCC Agreement requires the Bank to: (i) establish a compliance committee to monitor and oversee the Bank’s compliance with the provisions of the OCC Agreement; (ii) develop a revised customer due diligence and enhanced due diligence program; (iii) develop a revised suspicious activity monitoring program; (iv) engage an independent, third-party consultant to review and provide a written report on the Bank’s suspicious activity monitoring; (v) develop revised policies and procedures to ensure effective BSA/AML model risk management for the Bank’s automated suspicious activity monitoring system, which must be validated by a qualified, independent third party; (vi) ensure that the Bank’s BSA Department maintains sufficient personnel; and (vii) develop revised policies and procedures to ensure effective controls over loan underwriting. In addition to these requirements, while the OCC Agreement remains in effect, the Bank is subject to certain restrictions on expansion activities, such as growth through acquisition or branching to supplement organic growth of the Bank.
The Company incurred significant legal, consulting and other third-party expenses during the years 2020 and 2021 in connection with the Internal Review; the OCC, DOJ and SEC investigations; compliance with the OCC Agreement; and defending litigation related to the Advantage Loan Program. For additional information regarding risks related to the Internal Review, the government investigations and the OCC Agreement, as well as other aspects of and consequences arising from the Advantage Loan Program, see the risk factors under “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to the Advantage Loan Program.”
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create extensive disruptions to U.S. and global economic conditions and financial markets and to businesses and the lives of individuals throughout the world. Federal and state governments have taken unprecedented actions to contain the spread of the disease, including quarantines, travel bans, shelter-in-place orders, closures of businesses and schools, fiscal stimuli, and legislation designed to deliver monetary aid and other relief to businesses and individuals impacted by the pandemic. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company determined it qualified for the employee retention credit (“ERC”) under the CARES Act for the first three quarters of 2021 because the Company’s gross receipts in 2021 decreased more than 20% from each of the respective quarters of 2019. The Company recorded an ERC of $6.5 million, resulting in a net reduction of salaries and employee benefits for the third quarter of 2021. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which was signed into law by President Biden during the fourth quarter of 2021, terminated the availability of the ERC for periods following the third quarter of 2021.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our business practices, including curtailing employee travel, changing employee work locations and cancelling in-person participation in meetings, events and conferences. We have many employees working remotely, and we may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and business partners. We continue to actively monitor developments related to COVID-19 and its impact on our business, customers, employees, counterparties, vendors, and service providers. For further discussion regarding risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Selected Financial Data
The following table sets forth our financial information for the years indicated.
(1)(2) Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. The Company has (1) reclassified custodial escrow balances maintained with serviced loans of $6,051 and $7,688 from accrued expenses and other liabilities to noninterest-bearing deposits in the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and (2) reclassified accrued interest on outstanding time deposits of $25,496 and $27,560 from accrued expenses and other liabilities to interest-bearing deposits in the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(3) Efficiency ratio is computed as the ratio of non-interest expense divided by the sum of net interest income and non-interest income.
(4) Nonperforming loans include nonaccrual loans and loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest.
(5) Troubled debt restructurings exclude those loans presented as nonaccrual or past 90 days or more and still accruing interest.
(6) Nonperforming assets include nonperforming loans, nonaccrual loans held for sale, loans modified under troubled debt restructurings and other repossessed assets.
Overview of 2021 Performance
In 2021, we returned to profitability while completing several major undertakings. These major undertakings include making significant progress on our credit risk exposure, completing the lookback project pursuant to the OCC Agreement, completing an IT platform conversion and an entire AML monitoring system installation, settling the class action lawsuit and laying the groundwork for the settlement of the derivative action in early 2022, selling the Bellevue, Washington branch office and making significant progress in repurchasing Advantage Loan Program loans previously sold to third-party investors. In addition to these undertakings, during 2021, we continued to manage our excess liquidity and ultimately used a substantial portion of that liquidity to allow higher cost deposits to run-off and reduce our FHLB borrowings as we continued to experience significant repayments in our loan portfolio. This resulted in an overall significant decline of our balance sheet, with total assets declining 26% from $3.9 billion at December 31, 2020 to $2.9 billion at December 31, 2021. While remaining subject to the OCC Agreement and under government investigation, we continue to be unable to launch any new loan origination initiatives. Accordingly, absent the ability to replace higher yielding loans as they pay off with an acceptable interest earning asset, we felt it prudent to allow the balance sheet to reduce while we built capital from earnings and utilized a significant portion of our excess liquidity. Total shareholders’ equity increased by $24.0 million, or 8%, to $343.6 million at December 31, 2021.
Net income was $23.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $(13.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by our improved credit metrics helping to result in a recovery for loan losses as compared to the significant provision taken during 2020, as well as improved non-interest income and a reduction in non-interest expense driven in part by the realization of employee retention credits enabled by the CARES Act and reduced professional fees. These improvements were offset in part by a reduction in net interest income reflecting our reduced balance sheet and a narrowing of our net interest margin for the year. Although our average net interest margin of 2.71% for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased from that of 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020, our average net interest margins for the three months ended September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021 were 2.83% and 2.94%, respectively, reflecting a stronger net interest margin during the second half of 2021.
Our improved credit metrics during 2021 include a decrease in our nonaccrual commercial real estate loans from $20.0 million at December 31, 2020 to $4.4 million at December 31, 2021, and a decrease in our nonaccrual construction loans from $41.9 million at December 31, 2020 to $12.5 million at December 31, 2021, although our nonaccrual residential real estate loans have increased from $20.7 million at December 31, 2020 to $45.7 million at December 31, 2021. Further, our loans classified as Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful decreased from $198.2 million at December 31, 2020 to $117.2 million at December 31, 2021. Our ratio of the allowance for loan losses to our loan portfolio decreased slightly from 2.89% at December 31, 2020 to 2.81% at December 31, 2021.
On September 23, 2021, the final settlement agreement for the class action lawsuit, entered into on April 16, 2021, was granted approval by the court. The settlement provided for a single cash payment of $12.5 million, which was fully funded by our insurance carriers, in exchange for the release of all defendants from all alleged claims. Also, in early 2022, we completed the negotiations that begun in 2021 and entered into a settlement agreement for the derivative action originally threatened by a demand letter received in 2020. The settlement agreement, which remains subject to court approval and other customary conditions, provides for a number of corporate governance enhancements, many of which have been implemented, and a $650,000 cash payment for the reimbursement of the plaintiff’s legal fees. See “Item 3. Legal Proceedings.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates, and the potential sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses, increased or decreased by the provision for loan losses and decreased by charge offs less recoveries. Loan losses are charged against the allowance for loan losses when a loan is considered partially or fully uncollectible or has such little value that continuance as an asset is not warranted. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance for loan losses. Management estimates the allowance for loan losses balance using past loan loss experience, the nature and volume of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations, estimated collateral values, economic conditions and other factors. Allocations of the allowance for loan losses may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance for loan losses is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired. The general component covers all other loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for general economic conditions and other qualitative factors by portfolio segment. The historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history experienced over the most recent three-year period. This actual loss experience is supplemented with economic and other factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These economic and other risk factors include consideration of the following: levels of and trends in delinquencies and impaired loans; levels of and trends in charge offs and recoveries; trends in portfolio volume; effects of any changes in underwriting standards; other changes in lending policies, procedures and practices; experience, ability and depth of lending management and other relevant staff; national and local economic trends and conditions; industry conditions; and effects of changes in credit concentrations.
Commercial real estate loans, construction loans and commercial lines of credit that are classified loans, including all nonaccrual loans and troubled debt restructurings, are individually evaluated for impairment. See “Asset Quality-Classified Loans” for a discussion of our classified loans. These evaluations are based upon a quarterly systematic review utilizing, among other components, our internal risk rating system, similar to those employed by banking regulators. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance for loan losses is allocated so that the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the collateral or operations of collateral. Large groups of homogeneous loans, including residential real estate loans with an aggregate principal balance representing the vast majority of our loan portfolio, are collectively evaluated for impairment and, accordingly, are not separately identified for impairment disclosures. Loans with aggregate principal balances representing 99% and 97% of our loan portfolio were collectively evaluated for impairment as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans that have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered troubled debt restructurings. Troubled debt restructurings are separately identified for impairment disclosures and are measured at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s effective rate at inception. If a troubled debt restructuring is considered a collateral-dependent loan, the loan is reported, net, at the fair value of the collateral. For loans that are considered troubled debt restructurings that subsequently go into default, the Bank determines the amount of the allowance for loan losses in accordance with the accounting policy for the allowance for loan losses on loans individually identified as impaired.
The degree of risk in residential real estate lending depends primarily on the loan amount in relation to collateral value, the interest rate and the borrower’s ability to repay in an orderly fashion. Economic trends determined by unemployment rates and other key economic indicators are closely correlated to the credit quality of these loans. Weak economic trends indicate that the borrowers’ capacity to repay their obligations may be deteriorating. The classes in the residential real estate portfolio segment consist of residential first mortgages and residential second mortgages.
Adverse economic developments or an overbuilt market impact commercial real estate projects and may result in troubled loans. Trends in vacancy rates of commercial properties impact the credit quality of these loans. High vacancy rates reduce operating revenues and the ability for the properties to produce sufficient cash flow to service debt obligations. The segmentation classes in the commercial real estate portfolio consist of retail, multifamily, offices, hotels/SROs, industrial and other.
The construction loan portfolio is comprised of loans to builders and developers primarily for residential, commercial and mixed-use development. In addition to general commercial real estate risks, construction loans have additional risk of cost overruns, market deterioration during construction, lack of permanent financing and no operating history.
The commercial lines of credit portfolio is comprised of loans to businesses such as sole proprietorships, partnerships, limited liability companies and corporations for the daily operating needs of the business. The risk characteristics of these loans vary based on the borrowers’ business and industry as repayment is typically dependent on cash flows generated from the underlying business. These loans may be secured by real estate or other assets or may be unsecured. The segmentation classes in the commercial lines of credit portfolio consist of private banking loans and commercial & industrial lending.
Our allowance for loan losses is sensitive to management's assessment of various quantitative and qualitative factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, net charge-offs, delinquent and nonaccrual loans, foreclosures, Bank-specific factors (e.g., staff experience, underwriting guidelines etc.), national and local business conditions, historical loss experience, an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral and other external factors. Management utilizes significant professional judgment in assessing the foregoing qualitative factors, as they are inherently subjective, and changes in management's assumptions and forecasts of economic conditions could significantly affect its estimate of our allowance for loan losses. Further, certain qualitative components within our allowance for loan losses methodology have taken on increased significance as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is difficult to estimate or predict how potential changes in management's assessment of any of our qualitative factors may affect our overall allowance for loan losses, as changes in such qualitative factors may not occur at the same rate or be consistent across different loan types, and changes may also be directionally inconsistent, such that improvement in one qualitative factor may offset deterioration in others.
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Allowance for Loan Losses to our consolidated financial statements for further information on how we recognize and measure our allowance for loan losses.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is defined as the exit price, the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date under current market conditions.
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain financial instruments and to determine fair value disclosures. For example, debt securities available for sale are carried at fair value each period. Other financial instruments, including substantially all of our loans held for sale, are not carried at fair value each period but may require nonrecurring fair value adjustments due to application of lower-of-cost-or-market accounting. We also disclose our estimate of fair value for financial instruments not recorded at fair value, such as loans held for investment or issuances of long-term debt.
The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is nominal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate fair value.
When developing fair value measurements, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. When available, we use quoted prices in active markets to measure fair value. If quoted prices in active markets are not available, fair value measurement is based upon models that use primarily market-based or independently sourced market parameters, such as interest rate yield curves and prepayment speeds.
In certain cases, when market observable inputs for model-based valuation techniques are not readily available, we are required to make judgments about assumptions market participants would use to estimate fair value.
Significant judgment is also required to determine whether certain assets measured at fair value are classified as Level 2 or Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. When making this judgment, we consider available information, including observable market data, indications of market liquidity and orderliness, and our understanding of the valuation techniques and significant inputs used. The classification of Level 2 or Level 3 is based upon the specific facts and circumstances of each instrument or instrument category and judgments are made regarding the significance of the Level 3 inputs to the instruments’ fair value measurement in its entirety. If Level 3 inputs are considered significant, the instrument is classified as Level 3.
See Note 15-Fair Value of Financial Instruments to our consolidated financial statements for more information on our use of fair value estimates.
Valuation of Mortgage Servicing Rights
Mortgage servicing rights are recognized separately when residential real estate loans are sold with servicing rights retained by the Bank. Mortgage servicing rights are initially recorded at fair value, which is determined based on an internal valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income based on an analysis of future cash flows, incorporating estimates of assumptions market participants would use in determining fair value, including market discount rates, prepayment speeds, servicing income, servicing costs and default rates. Mortgage servicing rights are subsequently measured using the amortization method, which requires mortgage servicing rights to be amortized into non-interest income in the consolidated statements of operations in proportion to, and over the period of, the estimated future net servicing income of the underlying loans.
On a quarterly basis, mortgage servicing rights are evaluated for impairment based upon the fair value of the mortgage servicing rights compared to their carrying amount. Impairment is determined by stratifying rights into groupings based on predominant risk characteristics, such as interest rate, loan type and investor type. If the carrying amount of an individual grouping exceeds fair value, impairment is recorded on that grouping so that the mortgage servicing rights is carried at fair value. Impairment is recognized through an addition to a valuation allowance for an individual grouping. If it is later determined that all or a portion of the impairment no longer exists for a particular grouping, a reduction of the valuation allowance may be recorded as an increase to income.
At December 31, 2021, our mortgage servicing rights had a carrying value of $2.7 million, which is net of a valuation allowance of $0.6 million, and an estimated fair value of $2.9 million based on expected future cash flows considering a weighted average discount rate of 10.8%, a weighted average constant prepayment rate on mortgages of 17.6% and a weighted average life of 4.3 years. At December 31, 2020 our mortgage servicing rights had a carrying value of $5.7 million, which is net of a valuation allowance of $2.2 million, and an estimated fair value of $5.8 million based on expected future cash flows considering a weighted average discount rate of 11.2%, a weighted average constant prepayment rate on mortgages of 22.5% and a weighted average life of 3.6 years.
The fair value of mortgage servicing rights is highly sensitive to changes in assumptions. Changes in prepayment speed assumptions generally have the most significant impact on the fair value of our mortgage servicing rights. Generally, as interest rates decline, mortgage loan prepayments accelerate due to increased refinance activity, which results in a decrease in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights. As interest rates rise, mortgage loan prepayments slowdown, which results in an increase in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights. Thus, any measurement of the fair value of our mortgage servicing rights is limited by the conditions existing and the assumptions utilized as of a particular point in time, and those assumptions may not be appropriate if they are applied at a different point in time.
Mortgage Repurchase Liability
In connection with portfolio loans sold in the secondary market, we make customary representations and warranties about certain characteristics of each loan. We establish a liability which may result from breaches in such representations and warranties. The mortgage repurchase liability reflects management’s estimate of such losses based on a combination of factors. Our estimation process requires management to make subjective and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain, such as expectations of future repurchase demands, economic factors, and findings from the Internal Review. The actual losses on repurchases could vary significantly from the recorded repurchase liability, depending on the outcome of various factors.
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Mortgage Repurchase Liability to our consolidated financial statements for further information on how we recognize and measure our mortgage repurchase liability.
Legal Contingencies and Litigation Accruals
We are involved in several material legal proceedings, as described in more detail in Note 19-Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements. On a quarterly basis, we assess potential losses in relation to these and other pending or threatened legal matters. If a loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we recognize an expense for the estimated loss. Estimates of any such loss are subjective in nature and require the evaluation of numerous facts and assumptions as to future events, including the application of legal precedent that may be conflicting. To the extent these estimates are more or less than the actual liability resulting from the resolution of these matters, our net income will be increased or decreased accordingly. If the differences are material, our consolidated financial statements could be materially impacted.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total assets of $2.9 billion, which reflected a decrease of $1.0 billion, or 26%, from $3.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. The Company’s assets declined due in part to its utilization of excess liquidity during 2021. The Company also completed several major undertakings that were a goal of the Company for the year. Cash and due from banks decreased to $411.7 million at December 31, 2021 from $998.5 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease is in part the result of Company’s continued repurchase of Advantage Loan Program loans and reflects our efforts to restructure the balance sheet to better manage net interest margin. Total loans, net of allowance for loan losses, decreased $478.1 million, or 20%, to $2.0 billion at December 31, 2021, as compared to $2.4 billion at December 31, 2020. The investment securities portfolio increased $8.9 million, or 3%, to $313.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $305.0 million at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total deposits of $2.3 billion, which reflected a decrease of $868.8 million, or 28%, from December 31, 2020. The decrease in deposits is due in part to the Company’s reduction of its cost of interest-bearing liabilities. Borrowings, excluding subordinated notes, decreased $168.0 million, or 53%, to $150.0 million at December 31, 2021. This decrease in borrowings reflects the Company’s repayment of $168.0 million in FHLB borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total shareholders’ equity of $343.6 million, compared to $319.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
Loan Portfolio Composition. The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan at the dates indicated.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the balances for each of our loan types decreased from the year ended December 31, 2020, as we look to improve our overall credit profile. We engaged in a concerted effort to work-out, sell or write-down problem assets in the commercial and construction loan portfolios, while ceasing to eliminate construction lending and bringing a new discipline to the commercial real estate loans we are willing to originate. We continue to experience accelerated paydowns of our residential real estate portfolio.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates. The following table sets forth the contractual maturities of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021. Overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less. The table does not include any estimate of prepayments that could significantly shorten the average life of all loans and may cause our actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below.
The following table sets forth fixed and adjustable-rate loans in our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021 that are contractually due after December 31, 2022:
The table set forth below contains the repricing dates of the adjustable-rate loans included within our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021:
At December 31, 2021, we have adjustable-rate loans totaling $1.3 billion, or 71%, in our loan portfolio that are LIBOR-indexed currently and will reprice to an interest rate based on LIBOR. At December 31, 2021, $215.8 million, or 11%, of our adjustable-rate loans were at their interest rate floor.
Asset Quality
Nonperforming Assets. Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, loans that are past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest, troubled debt restructurings, nonaccrual loans held for sale and other loan collateral acquired through foreclosures and repossessions. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $39 thousand and $46 thousand, respectively, of accruing loans that were past due 90 or more days. For nonaccrual loans, interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed and charged against income at the time a loan is placed on nonaccrual status. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Troubled debt restructurings are modified loans in which a borrower demonstrated financial difficulties and for which a concession has been granted. However, not all troubled debt restructurings are placed on nonaccrual status. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had troubled debt restructurings totaling $18.4 million and $28.3 million, respectively. Troubled debt restructurings on nonaccrual status at such dates totaled $15.8 million and $20.1 million, respectively, and are included in the nonaccrual loan categories in the following table. See Note 4-Loans-Troubled Debt Restructurings to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our troubled debt restructurings.
The following table sets forth information regarding our nonperforming assets at the dates indicated. In addition to the exclusions and presentation conventions described in the footnotes to the table, the categories of nonperforming assets in the following table do not include COVID-19-related loan forbearances that may be excluded from troubled debt restructurings under the CARES Act.
(1) Loans are classified as held for investment and are presented before the allowance for loan losses.
(2) Total nonaccrual loans exclude nonaccrual loans held for sale but include troubled debt restructurings on nonaccrual status.
(3) Other troubled debt restructurings exclude those loans presented above as nonaccrual or past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest.
At December 31, 2021, nonperforming assets totaled $83.3 million, reflecting a decrease of $31.0 million, from $114.3 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease is attributable primarily to nonaccrual loans, which totaled $62.6 million at December 31, 2021, reflecting a decrease of $23.8 million, from a balance of $86.4 million at December 31, 2020. Our ratio of nonaccrual loans to total loans decreased from 3.45% at December 31, 2020 to 3.11% at December 31, 2021. This decrease is partially due to the decrease in total loans, but also due to the greater decrease in nonaccrual loans.
The decrease in nonaccrual loans is driven, in part, by decreases in nonaccrual commercial real estate loans and nonaccrual construction loans. Nonaccrual commercial real estate loans totaled $4.4 million at December 31, 2021, reflecting a decrease of $15.6 million from $20.0 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in nonaccrual commercial real estate loans occurred primarily as a result of four loans totaling $12.4 million that were paid in full and three loans totaling $8.5 million that were reclassified to held for sale, which was partially offset by a loan of $4.4 million that was transferred from construction loans. Nonaccrual construction loans totaled $12.5 million at December 31, 2021, reflecting a decrease of $29.4 million from $41.9 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in nonaccrual construction loans occurred primarily as a result of ten construction loans totaling $21.2 million which were paid in full and two construction loans totaling $6.8 million were modified as commercial real estate loans, with one loan of $2.4 million then classified as nonaccrual loans held for sale and the remaining loan of $4.4 million classified as a nonaccrual commercial real estate loan.
Nonaccrual residential real estate loans totaled $45.7 million at December 31, 2021, reflecting an increase of $25.0 million from $20.7 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in nonaccrual residential real estate loans occurred primarily as a result of loans becoming 90 days past due, which we believe reflects the uncertain economic environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by loans that were paid in full and loans that returned to accrual status. The increase is also partially due to the eviction moratorium mandate imposed by the government related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed the foreclosure process of certain nonaccrual loans. At December 31, 2021, residential real estate loans with an aggregate unpaid balance totaling $6.6 million are waiting to commence the foreclosure process. Nonaccrual residential real estate loans include $16.9 million of contractually current loans that will return to accrual status if maintained for six consecutive months.
Other troubled debt restructurings also decreased, totaling $2.7 million at December 31, 2021, a decrease of $5.5 million from $8.2 million at December 31, 2020. Other troubled debt restructurings decreased primarily as a result of two loans classified as troubled debt restructurings at December 31, 2020 that were paid in full in 2021.
Nonaccrual loans held for sale include residential real estate loans of $8,671 and commercial real estate loans of $9,355 at December 31, 2021 and residential real estate loans of $19,375 at December 31, 2020.
The total amount of additional interest income on nonaccrual loans that would have been recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 if interest on all such loans had been recorded based upon original contract terms was approximately $2.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Unlike larger financial institutions that are more geographically diversified, a large portion of our business is concentrated primarily in the state of California, specifically in the San Francisco and Los Angeles areas. As of December 31, 2021, 85% of our loan portfolio was based in California with concentrations in the San Francisco and Los Angeles areas of 54% and 31%, respectively. Nonaccrual loans related to the California market comprise 90% of total nonaccrual loans as of December 31, 2021.
COVID-19-Related Forbearances. Under the CARES Act, COVID-19-related loan forbearances could be excluded from treatment as a troubled debt restructuring if such forbearances met certain criteria. Further, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had offered forbearance under the CARES Act to customers facing COVID-19-related financial difficulties. The principal balance of loans modified due to the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and still in forbearance declined in 2021 from peak levels in 2020. The Bank terminated its COVID-19 Hardship Forbearance Program in July 2021 and, therefore any forbearance loans held at that time remained in forbearance until January 1, 2022, the date the national CARES Act program terminated. The remaining forbearance loans at December 31, 2021 were not significant. The following table sets forth such loans in forbearance at selective period-ends indicated:
Delinquent Loans. The following table sets forth our loan delinquencies, including nonaccrual loans but excluding loan forbearances related to the COVID-19 pandemic, by type and amount at the dates indicated.
Total loans 90 days or more past due, including nonaccrual loans but excluding loan forbearances related to the COVID-19 pandemic, decreased $23.8 million, or 28%, from $86.5 million at December 31, 2020 to $62.7 million at December 31, 2021. This decrease is primarily attributable to the reduced levels of past due amounts in our construction and commercial real estate loan portfolios.
Five construction loans that were 30 days or more past due totaled $23.0 million at December 31, 2021, compared to 21 loans totaling $53.0 million at December 31, 2020. This improvement is primarily due to 15 loans with balances that totaled $32.2 million, which were paid in full during the year ending December 31, 2021, two loan modifications to commercial real estate bridge loans of $6.8 million and a partial loan charge off of $2.0 million. These decreases in our construction loan portfolio were partially offset by the addition of $10.5 million related to two matured loans. There was one commercial real estate loan totaling $4.4 million that was 30 days or more past due at December 31, 2021, compared to nine loans totaling $24.8 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to four loans totaling $12.5 million which paid in full during the year, three loans totaling $8.5 million reclassified as held for sale and two loans totaling $3.8 million entering current status. This decrease was partially offset by the modification of a nonaccrual construction loan to a commercial real estate bridge loan of $4.4 million.
While total past due residential real estate loans were relatively stable compared to the prior year, there was an increase in those loans past due 90 days or more from $20.8 million at December 31, 2020 to $45.7 million at December 31, 2021. The residential real estate loans at December 31, 2021 include $16.9 million in contractually current loans that will return to accrual status if maintained for six consecutive months.
Classified Loans. We categorize loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information and current economic trends, among other factors. The four risk categories utilized are Pass, Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful. Loans in the Pass category are considered to be of satisfactory quality, while the remaining three categories indicate varying levels of credit risk. See Note 4-Loans-Credit Quality to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our risk categories.
Loans classified as Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful were as follows at the dates indicated:
Total Special Mention, Substandard and Doubtful loans were $117.2 million, or 5.8% of total loans, at December 31, 2021, compared to $198.2 million, or 7.9% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. All of the three loan classifications decreased from the prior year. The decrease of $31.9 million in special mention loans was primarily attributable to 11 commercial real estate loans totaling $21.4 million that were reclassified as loans held for sale, seven loans totaling $12.3 million that were paid in full during the year, two loans totaling $3.4 million that were upgraded and two loans totaling $10.3 million that were downgraded. This decrease was offset in part by the addition of seven loans totaling $14.6 million and net advances on existing special mention loans totaling $0.9 million.
The decrease in substandard loans of $48.2 million was primarily attributable to 22 loans totaling $53.5 million that were paid in full during the year, 11 commercial real estate loans totaling $35.9 million that were reclassified to loans held for sale, 14 loans totaling $15.1 million that were upgraded and net payments of $1.7 million. These decreases were offset in part by the addition of 56 residential real estate loans of $36.8 million, one commercial real estate loan of $3.8 million and two construction loans of $7.1 million, totaling $47.7 million and the aforementioned two downgrades of $10.3 million.
Impaired Loans. A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance for loan losses is allocated so that the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan's existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the collateral or operations of collateral. See Note 4-Loans to our consolidated financial statements for tables presenting additional data regarding the allowance for loan losses and impaired loans.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 10 and 31 impaired loans with recorded investments of $19.9 million and $74.0 million, respectively. Total impaired loans decreased $54.1 million, or 73%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to a $33.9 million decrease in total impaired construction loans, a $16.5 million decrease in total impaired commercial real estate loans and a $3.9 million decrease in total impaired commercial lines of credit. Impaired construction loans as a percentage of total impaired loans increased from 66% as of December 31, 2020 to 75% as of December 31, 2021, while impaired commercial real estate loans as a percentage of total impaired loans decreased from 28% as of December 31, 2020 to 22% as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $19.6 million of impaired loans, or 99% of total impaired loans, did not have any related allowance for loan losses recorded. Of total impaired loans with no related allowance for loan losses recorded as of December 31, 2021, $15.0 million, or 76%, comprised of four construction loans, of which two loans, representing $7.8 million, were for residential construction, one loan, representing $5.9 million, was for commercial construction and one loan, representing $1.3 million, was secured by commercial land.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various quantitative and qualitative factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, net charge-offs, delinquent and nonaccrual loans, foreclosures, Bank-specific factors (e.g., staff experience, underwriting guidelines etc.), national and local business conditions, historical loss experience, an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral and other external factors. Certain qualitative components within our allowance for loan losses methodology have taken on increased significance as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These qualitative components include increased unemployment, commercial property vacancy rates, uncertainty in property values and deterioration in the overall macro-economic environment. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion of our allowance for loan losses policy.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Our total allowance for loan losses decreased by $15.9 million, or 22%, from $72.4 million at December 31, 2020 to $56.5 million at December 31, 2021, primarily due to our overall reduction in our loan portfolio that has resulted from the decline in our loan production as a result of the discontinuation of the Advantage Loan Program and the absence of new loan products, as well as improvement in the credit quality of our loans held for investment during 2021. Our net charge offs during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $7.6 million compared to $4.2 million for the same period in 2020. Our net charge offs during the year ended December 31, 2021 include $7.9 million in write-downs of our recorded investment in commercial real estate loans reclassified to loans held for sale from loans held for investment, and our net charge offs during the same period in 2020 includes $3.5 million in write-downs of our recorded investment in nonaccrual residential real estate loans reclassified as loans held for sale from loans held for investment. The increase in net charge offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 also contributed to the decrease in our allowance for loan losses.
Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of our loan portfolio was 2.81% and 2.89% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of nonaccrual loans was 90% and 84% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase is primarily attributable to our significant decline in nonaccrual loans during 2021. See “Results of Operations-Provision (Recovery) for Loan Losses” for additional information about our provision for loan losses.
The following table sets forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category at the dates indicated. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance for loan losses to absorb losses in other categories.
(1) Nonaccrual loans exclude nonaccrual loans held for sale but include troubled debt restructurings on nonaccrual status.
(2) Nonperforming loans and troubled debt restructurings exclude nonaccrual loans and troubled debt restructurings in loans held for sale.
Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary and our results of operations could be adversely affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in determining the allowance for loan losses. Furthermore, while we believe we have established our allowance for loan losses in conformity with U.S. GAAP, there can be no assurance that regulators, in reviewing our loan portfolio, will not require us to increase our allowance for loan losses. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted with certainty, there can be no assurance that the existing allowance for loan losses is adequate or that increases will not be necessary should the quality of any loans deteriorate. Any material increase in the allowance for loan losses may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Investment Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our available-for-sale debt securities portfolio at the dates indicated.
We increased the size of our available-for-sale debt securities portfolio (on an amortized-cost basis) by $10.8 million, or 4%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily due to purchases of securities exceeding maturities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we purchased U.S. Treasury securities, mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations of $50.0 million, $24.9 million and $75.4 million, respectively, and there were maturities of U.S. Treasury and Agency securities, mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations of $65.0 million, $8.7 million and $63.3 million, respectively.
We review the debt securities portfolio on a quarterly basis to determine the cause, magnitude and duration of declines in the fair value of each security. In estimating other-than-temporary impairment, we consider many factors including: (1) the length of time and extent that fair value has been less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near term prospects of the issuer, (3) whether the market decline was affected by macroeconomic conditions and (4) whether we have the intent to sell the security or more likely than not will be required to sell the security before its anticipated recovery. If either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met, the entire difference between amortized cost and fair value is recorded through income as an impairment. For debt securities that do not meet the aforementioned criteria, the amount of impairment is split into two components as follows: (1) other-than-temporary impairment related to credit loss, which must be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and (2) other-than-temporary impairment related to other factors, which is recognized in other comprehensive income (loss). The credit loss is measured as the difference between the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected and the amortized cost basis. The assessment of whether any other-than-temporary decline exists may involve a high degree of subjectivity and judgment and is based on the information available to management at a point in time. We evaluate debt securities for other-than-temporary impairment at least on a quarterly basis and more frequently when economic or market conditions warrant such an evaluation.
At December 31, 2021, gross unrealized losses on debt securities totaled $2.0 million. We do not consider the debt securities to be other-than-temporarily impaired at December 31, 2021, since (i) the decline in fair value of the debt securities is attributable to changes in interest rates and illiquidity, not credit quality, (ii) we do not have the intent to sell the debt securities and (iii) it is likely that we will not be required to sell the debt securities before their anticipated recovery.
Our equity securities consist of an investment in a qualified community reinvestment act investment fund, which is a publicly-traded mutual fund, and an investment in the common equity of Pacific Coast Banker’s Bank, a thinly traded restricted stock. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, equity securities totaled $5.2 million and $5.4 million, respectively.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The composition and maturity distribution schedule, with corresponding weighted-average yields, of the available-for-sale debt securities portfolio not carried at fair value through earnings at December 31, 2021, are summarized in the following table. The weighted average yields were calculated using the amortized cost of the debt securities (on a pre-tax basis). Maturities are based on final contractual payment dates and do not reflect the impact of prepayments or early redemptions that may occur.
Deposits
Deposits are the primary source of funding for the Company. We regularly review the need to adjust our deposit offering rates on various deposit products in order to maintain a stable liquidity profile and a competitive cost of funds.
Total deposits were $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2021, a decrease of $868.8 million, or 28%, compared to $3.1 billion at December 31, 2020, which reflects our decision to continue to reduce our significant liquidity position through planned deposit runoff. Our time deposits decreased by $780.2 million, or 47%, our money market, savings and NOW accounts decreased by $87.8 million, or 6%, and our noninterest-bearing demand deposits decreased by $0.8 million, or 1%, from December 31, 2020. Brokered deposits totaled $20.1 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $42.8 million at December 31, 2020. We continue to focus on core deposits, which we define as all deposits except for time deposits greater than $250,000 and brokered deposits. Core deposits totaled $2.0 billion, or 88% of total deposits, at December 31, 2021 compared to $2.62 billion, or 85% of total deposits, at December 31, 2020.
On July 23, 2021, the Bank completed the sale of its Bellevue, Washington branch office pursuant to a definitive agreement the Bank entered into on March 19, 2021. This transaction included the transfer of $65.4 million in total deposits at a premium of $1.4 million, representing 2.1% of the total balance of deposits transferred.
The following table sets forth the distribution of average deposits by account type at the dates indicated.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank had $440.0 million and $730.0 million, respectively, in uninsured deposits. The insured deposit data does not reflect an evaluation of all of the account styling distinctions that would determine the availability of deposit insurance to individual accounts based on FDIC regulations.
The portion of our U.S. time deposits, by account, that are in excess of the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 was $92.9 million at December 31, 2021. See “Item 1. Business-Supervision and Regulation-Federal Banking Regulation-Federal Insurance of Deposit Accounts” for additional discussion of the FDIC insurance limits. The following table presents the amount of time deposits that are in excess of the FDIC insurance limit, segregated by time remaining until maturity, as of December 31, 2021:
Borrowings
In addition to deposits, we use short-term borrowings, such as FHLB advances and an FHLB overdraft credit line, as sources of funds to meet the daily liquidity needs of our customers. Our short-term FHLB advances consist primarily of advances of funds for one- or two-week periods.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, outstanding FHLB borrowings totaled $150.0 million and $318.0 million, respectively. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Bank used a portion of its excess cash to repay $157.0 million in FHLB borrowings before their maturity dates without incurring a prepayment penalty. There were no amounts outstanding on lines of credit with other banks. In addition, $65.0 million in principal amount of our Subordinated Notes, due April 15, 2026, remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
At December 31, 2021, we had the ability to borrow an additional $385.5 million from the FHLB, which included an available line of credit of $20.0 million. In addition, we have standby letters of credit, totaling $11.5 million, which provide credit support for certain of our obligations related to our commitments to repurchase certain pools of Advantage Loan Program loans. We also had available credit lines with other banks totaling $80.0 million.
Shareholders’ Equity
Total shareholders’ equity was $343.6 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $24.0 million, or 8%, from December 31, 2020. In May 2021, we issued and sold 300,000 shares of common stock to our Chief Executive Officer pursuant to the terms of the stock purchase agreement entered into with our Chief Executive Officer at the time of his employment for total cash proceeds of $1.4 million.
In 2020, we repurchased 10,912 shares of common stock for $82, including commissions and fees (average repurchase price of $7.57 per share).
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Average Balance Sheet and Related Yields and Rates. The following table presents average balance sheet information, interest income, interest expense and the corresponding average yields earned and rates paid for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The average balances are daily averages and, for loans, include both performing and nonperforming balances. Interest income on loans includes the effects of discount accretion and net deferred loan origination costs accounted for as yield adjustments.
(1) Nonaccrual loans are included in the respective average loan balances. Income, if any, on such loans is recognized on a cash basis.
(2) Interest income does not include taxable equivalence adjustments.
(3) (4) Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. The Company has (3) reclassified accrued interest on outstanding time deposits from other liabilities to interest-bearing deposits and (4) reclassified custodial escrow balances maintained with serviced loans from other liabilities to noninterest-bearing deposits in the average consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the periods indicated. The table distinguishes between: (1) changes attributable to volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior period’s rate), (2) changes attributable to rate (change in rate multiplied by the prior period’s volume) and (3) total increase (decrease) (the sum of the previous columns). Changes attributable to both volume and rate are allocated ratably between the volume and rate categories.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income represents the difference between income on interest-earning assets and expense on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest income depends primarily upon the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the corresponding interest rates earned or paid. Our net interest income is significantly impacted by changes in interest rates and market yield curves and their related impact on cash flows.
Net interest income was $91.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $14.6 million, or 14%, from $105.8 million for the same period in 2020.
Interest income was $116.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $34.8 million, or 23%, from the same period in 2020. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to a shift in the balance sheet mix as average balance of loans decreased $418.5 million from the year ended December 31, 2020, while the average balance of lower-yielding securities and other interest-earning liquid assets increased $185.7 million during the same period. Our average yield on interest-earning assets decreased 74 basis points, to 3.47%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The yield on our loan portfolio decreased primarily due to our variable rate loans resetting at lower interest rates in the current low interest rate environment and the origination of new loans at lower interest rates.
The decrease in our average balance of loans is primarily due to our loan repayments continuing to outpace loan production. The impact of the excess loan repayments was partially offset by the repurchase of Advantage Loan Program loans pursuant to previously disclosed offers to repurchase 100% of previously sold Advantage Loan Program loans from third-party investors. Such repurchases of Advantage Loan Program loans totaled $173.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. For greater detail regarding the changes to the balances of our loan types, see “-Financial Condition-Loan Composition.” The repurchased Advantage Loan Program loans were evaluated and considered to be performing at the acquisition date. Such repurchases have been funded through our cash on hand.
The average balance of our investment securities and other interest-earning assets, which generally are lower-yielding and more liquid than our loans, was $1.0 billion for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $836.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These assets had an average yield of 0.27% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Although our cash and cash equivalents declined significantly at year end, much of this liquidity was utilized in the fourth quarter; therefore, for a significant portion of the year, we carried a higher balance of lower-earning liquid assets.
Interest expense was $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $20.2 million, or 44%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the rate paid, as our average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased 58 basis points, to 0.86%. The rate paid on money market, savings and Now accounts have been lower due to the low interest rate environment and our time deposits have been repricing downward as they renew or are replaced at lower offering rates as part of our strategy to reduce our significant liquidity position. Our average balance of interest-bearing deposits decreased $213.4 million, or 8%, from the year ended December 31, 2020, to $2.6 billion. The decrease in deposits from December 31, 2020, reflects our decision to reduce our liquidity position.
Net Interest Margin and Interest Rate Spread. Net interest margin was 2.71% for the year ended December 31, 2021, down 23 basis points from 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The interest rate spread was 2.61% for the year ended December 31, 2021, down 16 basis points from 2.77% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net interest margin and interest rate spread were negatively impacted during the year ended December 31, 2021 by a substantial increase in highly liquid, lower yielding interest-earning assets on our balance sheet, as part of our strategy commenced in 2020 to increase liquidity in order to reduce our risk profile. The significant decline in this excess liquidity occurred in the second half of 2021, thus leading to increases in our interest spread and interest margin in the third and fourth quarters of 2021 while the overall interest spread and net interest margin declined for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The declines in net interest margin and interest rate spread were also impacted by a decrease in the average rate on interest earning assets of 74 basis points, partially offset by a decrease in the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities of 58 basis points. A discussion of the effects of changing interest rates on net interest income is set forth in “