ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section includes a discussion of our operations for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021. The following discussion and analysis provide information which management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related Notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
For discussion of our results of operations for fiscal year 2020 including comparison to fiscal 2021, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended August 31, 2021.
Business
Founded in 1906, Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. is one of North America’s largest recyclers of ferrous and nonferrous metal, including end-of-life vehicles, and a manufacturer of finished steel products. As a vertically integrated organization, we offer a range of products and services to meet global demand through our network that includes 51 retail self-service auto parts stores, 54 metals recycling facilities, and an electric arc furnace (“EAF”) steel mill. Our internal organizational and reporting structure includes a single operating and reportable segment.
We sell recycled ferrous and nonferrous metal in both foreign and domestic markets. We also sell a range of finished steel long products produced at our steel mill. Our results of operations depend in large part on the demand and prices for recycled metal in foreign and domestic markets and on the supply of raw materials, including end-of-life vehicles, available to be processed at our facilities. Our results of operations also depend substantially on our operating leverage from processing and selling higher volumes of recycled metal as well as our ability to efficiently extract ferrous and nonferrous metals from the shredding process. We respond to changes in selling prices for processed metal by seeking to adjust purchase prices for unprocessed scrap metal in order to manage the impact on our operating results. We believe we generally benefit from sustained periods of stable or rising recycled metal selling prices, which allow us to better maintain or increase both operating results and unprocessed scrap metal flow into our facilities. When recycled metal selling prices decline, either sharply or for a sustained period, our operating margins typically compress. With respect to finished steel products produced at our steel mill, our results of operations are impacted by demand and prices for these products, which are sold to customers located primarily in the Western U.S. and Western Canada.
Our quarterly operating results fluctuate based on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, changes in market conditions for recycled ferrous and nonferrous metal and finished steel products, the supply of scrap metal in our domestic markets, and varying demand for used auto parts from our self-service retail stores. Certain of these factors are influenced, to a degree, by the impact of seasonal changes including severe weather conditions, which can impact the timing of shipments and inhibit construction activity utilizing our products, scrap metal collection and production levels at our facilities, and retail admissions and parts sales at our auto parts stores. Further, sanctions, trade actions, and licensing and inspection requirements can impact the level of profitability on sales of our products and, in certain cases, impede or restrict our ability to sell to certain export markets or require us to direct our sales to alternative market destinations, which can cause our quarterly operating results to fluctuate.
36 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Strategic Priorities
As we continue to closely monitor economic conditions, we remain focused on the following core strategies and plans to meet our business goals and objectives:
•Long-term expansion of ferrous and nonferrous scrap metal supply and processing, sales volumes, and operating margins;
•Technology investments and process improvements to increase the separation and recovery of metal materials from our shredding process and to expand product optionality;
•Development of new products and use of our core competencies in adjacent recycling businesses to expand recycling services and capabilities to reach a broader market, enhance customer value, and increase operating margins;
•Increase market share through initiatives to maximize volumes and through selective partnerships, alliances, and acquisitions;
•Productivity and continuous improvement initiatives to ensure the safety of our employees, increase operating efficiency and effectiveness, advance sustainable business practices, improve natural resource stewardship, and reduce operating expense;
•Use of our seven deepwater ports and ground-based logistics network to directly access customers domestically and internationally to meet demand for our products wherever it is greatest; and
•Further optimization of our integrated recycling and steel manufacturing operating platforms to maximize opportunities for synergies, cost efficiencies, and volumes.
Key economic factors and trends affecting the industries in which we operate
We sell recycled metals to the global steel industry for the production of finished steel. Our financial results largely depend on supply of raw materials in the U.S. and Western Canada and demand for recycled metal in foreign and domestic markets and for finished steel products in the Western U.S. and Western Canada. Demand for most of our products is cyclical in nature and sensitive to changes in general economic conditions. The timing and magnitude of the economic cycles in the industries in which our products are used, including global steel manufacturing and nonresidential and infrastructure construction in the U.S., are difficult to predict. Global economic conditions, including impacts of geopolitical instability and the COVID-19 pandemic, structural and cyclical changes in supply and demand conditions, inflation, rising interest rates and the strength of the U.S. dollar, the availability and price of raw material alternatives, and trade actions such as tariffs affect market prices for and sales volumes of recycled ferrous and nonferrous metal in global markets and steel products in the Western U.S. and Western Canada and can have a significant impact on the results of our operations.
During the first eight months of fiscal 2022 through April, market demand for recycled ferrous metals was strong, with selling prices reaching multi-year highs in early spring before declining rapidly and steeply in May through June of 2022. Export net selling prices for recycled ferrous metal decreased by approximately $230 per ton, or approximately 40%, between May and June 2022, reflecting weaker demand primarily from slower global growth, including due to the impact of China COVID-19 lockdowns, inflationary pressure including high energy prices, the strength of the U.S. Dollar, and steel inventory destocking. Similarly, market demand for most recycled nonferrous metals was also strong during the first eight months of fiscal 2022 before softening, resulting in selling prices declining sharply for a period followed by a partial recovery near the end of fiscal 2022.
For our full 2022 fiscal year, the average net selling prices for our ferrous and nonferrous products increased by 19% and 23%, respectively, compared to the prior year. In fiscal 2021, these average net selling prices increased by 61% and 60%, respectively, compared to fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2022, ferrous sales volumes increased by 5% and nonferrous sales volumes increased by 16%, compared to the prior year. In fiscal 2021, sales volumes for these products increased by 11% and 8%, respectively, compared to fiscal 2020. Our ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes in fiscal 2022 included additional volumes arising from the Columbus Recycling business acquired on October 1, 2021, and the Encore Recycling business acquired on April 29, 2022. The deterioration in global economic conditions that occurred in fiscal 2020 in large part due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic reflected among other things the curtailment of many commercial and government-sponsored activities using steel and other metal materials, causing metal commodity prices to decrease sharply and widespread destocking of inventories. As global economies revived and commercial and investment activities resumed, including throughout fiscal 2021, continuing into fiscal 2022, demand for recycled metals and finished steel increased substantially, which contributed to periods of sharp increases in market selling prices for these products during those periods. Further, increased focus on decarbonization strategies by governments and businesses around the world, including investments in infrastructure and technologies that minimize carbon dioxide emissions from the use of fossil fuels, among other factors, also contributed to strong demand for most of our products during these periods and support global long-term demand for recycled ferrous and nonferrous metal. Average selling prices for our finished steel products, which are produced in our steel mill using EAF technology, increased by 46% compared to the prior fiscal year, reflecting robust market demand for these products including record-high selling prices that peaked during the second half of fiscal 2022.
37 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Steel Mill Fire
On May 22, 2021, we experienced a fire at our steel mill in McMinnville, Oregon. Direct physical loss or damage to property from the incident was limited to the mill’s melt shop, with no bodily injuries and no physical loss or damage to other buildings or equipment. The rolling mill production ceased in early June 2021. In August 2021, our steel mill began ramping up operations following the substantial completion of replacement and repairs of property and equipment in the melt shop that had been lost or damaged by the fire. We experienced the loss of business income during the shutdown of the steel mill and the subsequent ramp-up phase which was substantially completed during the second quarter of fiscal 2022. We have insurance that we believe is fully applicable to the losses and have filed initial insurance claims, which are subject to deductibles and various conditions, exclusions, and limits, for the property that experienced physical loss or damage and business income losses resulting from the matter. The property damage deductible under the policies insuring our assets in this matter is $1 million, while the deductible for lost business income is 10 times the Average Daily Gross Earnings which would have been earned had no interruption occurred, calculated subject to judgments and uncertainties. As of August 31, 2021, prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets included an initial $10 million insurance receivable recognized in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, primarily offsetting applicable losses including capital purchases of $10 million that we had incurred as of August 31, 2021. In fiscal 2022, we increased the amount of this insurance receivable to $25 million and recognized a related $15 million insurance recovery gain within cost of goods sold on the Consolidated Statements of Operations, reflecting recovery of applicable losses incurred as a result of the fire to date. In addition, during fiscal 2022, we received advance payments from insurers totaling approximately $30 million towards our claims, and not reflecting any final or full settlement of claims with the insurers, which amount reduced the $25 million insurance receivable to zero with the remaining amount of advance payments of $5 million reported within other accrued liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of August 31, 2022. These amounts do not reflect potential additional recoveries of business income losses resulting from this matter that may be recognized in the future when settlements of the business interruption claims are resolved.
Everett Facility Shredder Fire
On December 8, 2021, we experienced a fire at our metals recycling facility in Everett, Massachusetts. Direct physical loss or damage to property from the incident was limited to the facility’s shredder building and equipment, with no bodily injuries and no physical loss or damage to property reported at other buildings or equipment. As a result of the fire, shredding operations ceased, while all non-shredding operations at the facility continued, including torching, shearing, separating, and sorting purchased non-shreddable recycled ferrous metals. On January 28, 2022, shredding operations at the facility began ramping up following the replacement and repairs to shredder equipment that had been damaged. Completion of the remainder of repair and replacement of property that experienced physical loss or damage, primarily buildings and improvements, will occur over a longer period and impacts on business income may continue. For example, as of June 18, 2022, shredder operations temporarily ceased at the facility pending completion of discussions with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and the Massachusetts Attorney General's office regarding installation and operation of temporary emission capture and controls that would allow operation of the shredder prior to completion of the repair and replacement of the shredder enclosure building. Non-shredding operations at the facility continue. We have insurance that we believe is fully applicable to the losses, including but not limited to the costs of installing the temporary capture and controls system and any associated loss of business income, and have filed initial insurance claims, which are subject to deductibles and various conditions, exclusions, and limits, for the property damage or loss and business income losses resulting from the matter. The property damage deductible under the policies insuring our assets in this matter is $0.5 million, while the deductible for lost business income is 10 times the Average Daily Gross Earnings which would have been earned had no interruption occurred, calculated subject to judgments and uncertainties. The insurance claims resolution process may extend significantly beyond completion of repair and replacement of the physical plant property that experienced physical loss or damage and the restart of production activities. In fiscal 2022, we recognized an aggregate $17 million insurance receivable and related insurance recovery gain, reported within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and within cost of goods sold in the Consolidated Statement of Income, respectively, reflecting recovery of applicable losses including impairment charges of $7 million related to the carrying value of plant and equipment assets lost in or damaged by the fire and initial capital purchases, non-capitalizable repair and replacement costs, and other applicable losses totaling $10 million that we had incurred as of August 31, 2022. Also during fiscal 2022, we received advance payments from insurers totaling approximately $7 million towards our claims, and not reflecting any final or full settlement of claims with the insurers, which amount reduced the insurance receivable to $10 million as of August 31, 2022. These amounts do not reflect potential additional recoveries of costs for the repair and replacement of property that experienced physical loss or damage or of business income losses resulting from this matter that may be recognized in the future when settlements of the claims are resolved.
38 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (“COVID-19”)
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business. We are a company operating in a critical infrastructure industry, as defined by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Consistent with federal guidelines and with state and local orders to date, we have continued to operate across our footprint throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the onset of COVID-19 and its negative effects on our business, most prominently reflected in our fiscal 2020 results, global economic conditions improved beginning in fiscal 2021 and continued to improve through most of fiscal 2022. However, there are ongoing global impacts resulting directly or indirectly from the pandemic including labor shortages, logistical challenges such as increased port congestion, and increases in costs for certain goods and services, which have negatively impacted our sales volumes, operating costs, and financial results to varying degrees. The ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic could negatively impact our results of operations, cash flows, and financial position in the future.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this management’s discussion and analysis, we use supplemental measures of our performance, liquidity, and capital structure which are derived from our consolidated financial information but which are not presented in our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing these non-GAAP financial measures adds a meaningful presentation of our operating and financial performance, liquidity, and capital structure. We use adjusted EBITDA as one of the measures to compare and evaluate financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA is the sum of our net income before results from discontinued operations, interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, charges for legacy environmental matters (net of recoveries), business development costs not related to ongoing operations including pre-acquisition expenses, restructuring charges and other exit-related activities, charges related to non-ordinary course legal settlements, asset impairment charges, and other items which are not related to underlying business operational performance. See the reconciliations of supplemental financial measures, including adjusted EBITDA, in Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7.
Our non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures. Although we find these non-GAAP financial measures useful in evaluating the performance of our business, our reliance on these measures is limited because they often materially differ from our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, we typically use these adjusted amounts in conjunction with our GAAP results to address these limitations. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
39 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Financial Highlights of Results of Operations for Fiscal 2022
•Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders in fiscal 2022 was $5.72, compared to $5.66 in the prior fiscal year.
•Adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders in fiscal 2022 was $6.07, compared to $6.13 in the prior fiscal year.
•Net income in fiscal 2022 was $172 million, compared to $170 million in the prior fiscal year.
•Adjusted EBITDA in fiscal 2022 was $313 million, compared to $289 million in the prior fiscal year.
Market demand for our recycled metal products was strong during the first eight months of fiscal 2022, with selling prices reaching multi-year highs in early spring, before declining sharply for most products in the remainder of the fiscal year due to lower demand. For our full 2022 fiscal year, the average net selling prices for our ferrous and nonferrous products increased by 19% and 23%, respectively, and sales volumes for these products increased by 5% and 16%, respectively, compared to the prior fiscal year. Our ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes included additional volumes arising from the Columbus Recycling business acquired on October 1, 2021, and the Encore Recycling business acquired on April 29, 2022. Market demand for our finished steel products improved in fiscal 2022, which contributed to finished steel average selling prices increasing by 46% compared to the prior fiscal year. Finished steel volumes were 5% lower in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year in part due to the impact of supply chain disruptions on volumes including logistical restraints and delays to construction projects related to a four-month concrete industry strike in the Pacific Northwest that ended in April 2022. Our results in fiscal 2022 reflected benefits from the higher price environment for most of our products including a significant expansion in our ferrous metal and finished steel spreads and increased ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes compared to the prior fiscal year. Our results in fiscal 2022 also reflected an unfavorable impact from average inventory accounting due to the sharp decline in selling prices for recycled metals during the second half of the fiscal year compared to a favorable impact in the prior fiscal year, disruptions due to an extended shredding operation outage at our Everett facility to replace equipment damaged by the December 2021 fire, the impact of the ramp-up of steel mill operations that began in August 2021 and which was substantially completed during the second quarter, the effects of ongoing supply chain disruptions, lower year-over-year platinum group metals (“PGM”) prices, and the impact of inflation. Contributions from recent acquisitions and productivity initiatives helped to partially offset the effects of inflationary pressure on operating costs.
The following items further highlight selected liquidity and capital structure metrics:
•Net cash provided by operating activities of $238 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $190 million in the prior fiscal year.
•Debt was $249 million as of August 31, 2022, compared to $75 million as of August 31, 2021.
•Debt, net of cash, was $205 million as of August 31, 2022, compared to $47 million as of August 31, 2021.
See the reconciliations of adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders, adjusted EBITDA, and debt, net of cash in Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7.
40 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Results of Operations
Selected Financial Measures and Operating Statistics
NM = Not Meaningful
LT = Long Ton, which is equivalent to 2,240 pounds. ST = Short Ton, which is equivalent to 2,000 pounds.
(1)Steel revenues include predominantly sales of finished steel products, in addition to sales of semi-finished goods (billets) and steel manufacturing scrap.
(2)See the reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7.
(3)Price information is shown after netting the cost of freight incurred to deliver the product to the customer.
(4)Ferrous and nonferrous volumes sold externally and delivered to our steel mill for finished steel production.
(5)May not foot due to rounding.
(6)Average sales price and volume information excludes platinum group metals in catalytic converters.
(7)Cars purchased by auto parts stores only.
(8)Rolling mill utilization is based on effective annual production capacity under current conditions of 580 thousand tons of finished steel products.
41 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Revenues
Market demand for our recycled metal products was strong during the first eight months of fiscal 2022, with selling prices reaching multi-year highs in early spring, before declining sharply for most products in the remainder of the fiscal year due to lower demand. Revenues for our full 2022 fiscal year increased by 26% compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to significantly higher average net selling prices for our ferrous, nonferrous, and finished steel products driven by strong market demand during most of the fiscal year. The average net selling prices for our ferrous and nonferrous products increased by 19% and 23%, respectively, compared to the prior fiscal year. Ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes increased by 5% and 16%, respectively, compared to the prior fiscal year. Our ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes in fiscal 2022 included additional volumes arising from the Columbus Recycling business acquired on October 1, 2021, and the Encore Recycling business acquired on April 29, 2022. Finished steel average selling prices were 46% higher in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year, reflecting robust market demand for these products. The impact of the higher average selling prices on steel revenues in fiscal 2022 was partially offset by lower sales volumes compared to the prior fiscal year in part due to the impact of supply chain disruptions on volumes including logistical restraints and delays to construction projects related to a four-month concrete industry strike in the Pacific Northwest that ended in April 2022.
Operating Performance
Net income in fiscal 2022 was $172 million, compared to $170 million in the prior fiscal year. Adjusted EBITDA in fiscal 2022 was $313 million, compared to $289 million in the prior fiscal year. Our results for fiscal 2022 reflected benefits from the higher price environment for the majority of the fiscal year for most of our products and increased ferrous and nonferrous sales volumes compared to the prior fiscal year supported by stronger demand. Ferrous metal spreads in fiscal 2022 increased by approximately 14%, and average net selling prices for our nonferrous joint products that are recovered from the shredding process, comprising primarily zorba, increased by approximately 22% compared to the prior fiscal year, driven by significantly higher selling prices for a majority of the fiscal year. The expansion in ferrous metal spreads compared to the prior fiscal year in part reflected higher spreads on ferrous sales contracted prior to the decline in market selling prices that occurred during the second half of fiscal 2022. Finished steel spreads also expanded significantly in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. Our results in fiscal 2022 also reflected an unfavorable impact from average inventory accounting due to the sharp decline in selling prices for recycled metals during the second half of the fiscal year compared to a favorable impact in the prior fiscal year, disruptions due to extended shredding operation outages at our Everett facility to replace equipment damaged by the December 2021 fire, the effects of ongoing supply chain disruptions, lower year-over-year PGM prices, and the impact of inflation. Contributions from recent acquisitions and productivity initiatives helped to partially offset the effects of inflationary pressure on operating costs. See the reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7.
In fiscal 2022, we recognized insurance recoveries of $15 million in connection with the May 2021 fire at our steel mill in McMinnville, Oregon, reflecting recovery of applicable costs incurred by the mill operations following the incident. In fiscal 2022, we also recognized insurance recoveries of $17 million in connection with the December 2021 fire at our Everett shredder facility, reflecting recovery of applicable losses including asset impairment charges, initial capital purchases, non-capitalizable repair and replacement costs, and other applicable losses that we had incurred as of August 31, 2022. These amounts do not reflect potential additional recoveries of business income losses due to the interruptions that may be recognized in the future when settlements of the business interruption claims are resolved.
Selling, general, and administrative expense in fiscal 2022 increased by 9% compared to the prior year primarily due to higher employee-related expenses, including from increased competition for employees in a tight labor market, and increased outside and professional services, insurance, and travel expenses, partially from higher costs resulting from our acquisitions and other growth-related initiatives, as well as the impact of inflation, partially offset by benefits from productivity initiatives. Accruals in connection with our annual incentive compensation plans and charges related to legacy environmental matters were lower in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year.
Income Taxes
42 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Our effective tax rate from continuing operations for fiscal 2022 was an expense on pre-tax income of 20.6%, compared to 18.2% for fiscal 2021. Our effective tax rate from continuing operations for fiscal 2022 approximated the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, reflecting primarily discrete tax benefits resulting from vesting of share-based awards during the fiscal year and other discrete items, as well as the benefit from the foreign derived intangible income ("FDII") deduction in fiscal 2022 and research and development credits, offset by the aggregate impact of state taxes and permanent differences from non-deductible expenses. Our effective tax rate from continuing operations for fiscal 2021 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the benefit from the FDII deduction in fiscal 2021 and the impacts of research and development credits, release of the valuation allowance against Puerto Rico deferred tax assets, and other discrete items.
We assess the realizability of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis through an analysis of potential sources of future taxable income, including prior year taxable income available to absorb a carryback of tax losses, reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and forecasts of taxable income. We consider all negative and positive evidence, including the weight of the evidence, to determine if valuation allowances against deferred tax assets are required. We continue to maintain valuation allowances against certain deferred tax assets related to certain jurisdictions as a result of negative objective evidence, including the effects of historical losses in these tax jurisdictions, outweighing positive objective and subjective evidence, indicating that it is more-likely-than-not that the associated tax benefit will not be realized. Realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in the associated tax jurisdictions in future years to benefit from the reversal of net deductible temporary differences and from the utilization of net operating losses. We will continue to regularly assess the realizability of deferred tax assets. Changes in historical earnings performance and future earnings projections, among other factors, may cause us to adjust our valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, which would impact our results of operations in the period we determine that these factors have changed.
Inflation Reduction Act
On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 ("IRA") was signed into law, with tax provisions primarily focused on implementing a 15% Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax ("CAMT") and a 1% excise tax on corporate share repurchases. As of August 31, 2022, we did not meet the threshold to be subject to the CAMT. We may be subject to the 1% excise tax on future share repurchases.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We rely on cash provided by operating activities as a primary source of liquidity, supplemented by current cash on hand and borrowings under our existing credit facilities.
Sources and Uses of Cash
We had cash balances of $44 million and $28 million as of each August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Cash balances are intended to be used primarily for working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, investments, and acquisitions. We use excess cash on hand to reduce amounts outstanding under our credit facilities. As of August 31, 2022, debt was $249 million, compared to $75 million as of August 31, 2021, and debt, net of cash, was $205 million as of August 31, 2022, compared to $47 million as of August 31, 2021, which increases were primarily due to increased borrowings from our credit facilities to fund the acquisitions of the assets of the Columbus Recycling business on October 1, 2021, and the Encore Recycling business on April 29, 2022, and higher net working capital needs. See the reconciliation of debt, net of cash, in Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was $238 million, compared to $190 million in fiscal 2021.
Sources of cash other than from earnings in fiscal 2022 included a $21 million increase in accounts payable primarily due to higher raw material purchase prices and the timing of purchases and payments. Uses of cash in fiscal 2022 included a $37 million increase in inventories due to higher raw material purchase costs and the timing of purchases and sales, a $19 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to increased receivables from insurers, a $15 million decrease in environmental liabilities primarily due to payments in connection with legacy environmental matters, and a $14 million decrease in accrued payroll and related liabilities primarily due to decreased incentive compensation liabilities. The sources and uses of cash related to operating activities described above also reflect higher net working capital needs during the ramp-up of steel mill operations that began in August 2021 following completion of repair and replacement of damaged property arising from the May 2021 steel mill fire.
43 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Sources of cash other than from earnings in fiscal 2021 included a $65 million increase in accounts payable primarily due to higher raw material purchase prices and the timing of payments, a $28 million increase in accrued payroll and related liabilities primarily due to increased incentive compensation liabilities, and a $23 million increase in income tax accruals. Uses of cash in fiscal 2021 included a $89 million increase in inventories due to higher raw material purchase prices, higher volumes on hand, and the timing of purchases and sales, and a $84 million increase in accounts receivable primarily due to increases in selling prices and higher sales volumes for recycled metals, as well as the timing of sales and collections.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 was $316 million, compared to $118 million in fiscal 2021.
Cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 included $117 million paid to acquire the Columbus Recycling business on October 1, 2021, which amount included $10 million paid primarily for net working capital in excess of an agreed-upon benchmark. Cash used in investing activities also included $63 million paid to acquire the Encore Recycling business on April 29, 2022, which amount included $8 million paid at closing for estimated net working capital in excess of an agreed-upon benchmark. We funded these acquisitions using cash on hand and borrowings under our existing credit facilities. See Note 7 - Business Acquisitions in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for further detail.
Cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 also included capital expenditures of $150 million to upgrade our equipment and infrastructure and for investments in advanced metals recovery technology and environmental and safety-related assets, compared to $119 million in the prior year. Cash flows from investing activities in fiscal 2022 included proceeds of $17 million representing the portion of advance payments from insurers deemed a recovery of capital purchases incurred for repair and replacement of damaged property arising from the May 2021 steel mill fire and the December 2021 Everett facility shredder fire. Cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 also included the purchase of an investment in the equity of a privately-held Canadian recycling entity for $5 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2022 was $95 million, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $63 million in fiscal 2021.
Cash flows from financing activities in fiscal 2022 included $166 million in net borrowings of debt, compared to $31 million in net repayments of debt in the prior fiscal year (refer to Non-GAAP Financial Measures at the end of this Item 7). Uses of cash in fiscal 2022 and 2021 included $11 million and $6 million, respectively, for payment of employee tax withholdings resulting from vesting of share-based awards and $21 million in each fiscal year for the payment of dividends. Uses of cash in fiscal 2022 also included $34 million for share repurchases.
Debt
Following is a summary of our outstanding balances and availability on credit facilities and long-term debt, exclusive of finance lease obligations (in thousands):
(1)Remaining availability is net of $8 million of outstanding stand-by letters of credit as of August 31, 2022.
On August 22, 2022, the Company and certain of our subsidiaries entered into the Third Amendment to the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Amended Credit Agreement"), by and among Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc., as the U.S. borrower, Schnitzer Steel Canada Ltd., as the Canadian borrower, Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, and other lenders party thereto, which amended and restated our previously existing credit agreement (the "Prior Credit Agreement"). The Amended Credit Agreement provides for $800 million and C$15 million in senior secured revolving credit facilities maturing in August 2027. The $800 million credit facility includes a $50 million sublimit for letters of credit, a $25 million sublimit for swingline loans, and a $50 million sublimit for multicurrency borrowings. The Prior Credit Agreement provided for $700 million and C$15 million in senior secured credit facilities maturing in August 2023. We incurred $2 million in debt issuance costs in connection with the Amended Credit Agreement, which are amortized to interest expense over the five-year term of the arrangement.
44 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Interest rates on outstanding indebtedness under the Amended Credit Agreement are based, at our option, on either the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) (or the Canadian Dollar Offered Rate, "CDOR" for C$ loans), plus a spread of between 1.25% and 2.00%, with the amount of the spread based on a pricing grid tied to our ratio of consolidated net funded debt to EBITDA (as defined by the Amended Credit Agreement), or the greater of (a) the prime rate, (b) the federal funds rate plus 0.50% or (c) the daily rate equal to Term SOFR plus 1.00%, in each case, plus a spread of between 0.25% and 1.00% based on a pricing grid tied to our consolidated net funded debt to EBITDA ratio. In addition, commitment fees are payable on the unused portion of the credit facilities at rates between 0.175% and 0.30% based on a pricing grid tied to our ratio of consolidated net funded debt to EBITDA.
Under the Amended Credit Agreement, we may establish one or more key performance indicators (“KPIs”) to measure our performance with respect to certain of our environmental, social and governance targets. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Amended Credit Agreement, we may propose to amend the Amended Credit Agreement to modify (i) the pricing spread and (ii) the commitment fee rate. Such modifications would be tied to our performance against the KPIs and would allow for (i) the pricing spread to be increased or decreased by no more than (a) 0.025% per KPI and (b) 0.05% for all KPIs, and (ii) the commitment fee rate to be increased or decreased by no more than 0.005% for all KPIs. Such adjustments would be determined on an annual basis and would not be cumulative.
We had borrowings outstanding under our credit facilities of $230 million and $60 million as of August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The weighted average interest rate on amounts outstanding under our credit facilities was 3.65% and 1.75% as of August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
We use the credit facilities to fund working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, investments, and acquisitions. Our credit agreement contains various representations and warranties, events of default, and financial and other customary covenants which limit (subject to certain exceptions) our ability to, among other things, incur or suffer to exist certain liens, make investments, incur or guaranty additional indebtedness, enter into consolidations, mergers, acquisitions, and sales of assets, make distributions and other restricted payments, change the nature of our business, engage in transactions with affiliates, and enter into restrictive agreements, including agreements that restrict the ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions. As of August 31, 2022, the financial covenants under the credit agreement included (a) a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio, defined as the four-quarter rolling sum of consolidated EBITDA less defined maintenance capital expenditures and certain environmental expenditures divided by consolidated fixed charges, and (b) a consolidated leverage ratio, defined as consolidated funded indebtedness divided by the sum of consolidated net worth and consolidated funded indebtedness.
As of August 31, 2022, we were in compliance with the financial covenants under our credit agreement. The consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio was required to be no less than 1.50 to 1.00 and was 7.04 to 1.00 as of August 31, 2022. The consolidated leverage ratio was required to be no more than 0.55 to 1.00 and was 0.21 to 1.00 as of August 31, 2022.
Our obligations under our credit agreement are guaranteed by substantially all of our subsidiaries. The credit facilities and the related guarantees are secured by senior first priority liens on certain of our and our subsidiaries’ assets, including equipment, inventory, and accounts receivable.
While we currently expect to remain in compliance with the financial covenants under the credit agreement, we may not be able to do so in the event market conditions, COVID-19, or other negative factors have a significant adverse impact on our results of operations and financial position. If we do not maintain compliance with our financial covenants and are unable to obtain an amendment or waiver from our lenders, a breach of a financial covenant would constitute an event of default and allow the lenders to exercise remedies under the agreements, the most severe of which is the termination of the credit facility under our committed bank credit agreement and acceleration of the amounts owed under the agreement. In such case, we would be required to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate steps to obtain alternative funds. We cannot assure that any such alternative funds, if sought, could be obtained or, if obtained, would be adequate or on acceptable terms.
Other debt obligations, which totaled $13 million and $8 million as of August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, primarily relate to equipment purchases, the contract consideration for which includes an obligation to make future monthly payments to the vendor in the form of licensing fees. For accounting purposes, such obligations are treated as a partial financing of the purchase price by the equipment vendor. Monthly payments commence when the equipment is placed in service and achieves specified minimum operating metrics, with payments continuing for a period of four years thereafter. In fiscal 2022, we recorded $7 million of additional debt obligations with these terms generally.
45 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures totaled $150 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $119 million for fiscal 2021. Capital expenditures included approximately $51 million for investments in growth in both fiscal 2022 and 2021. We currently plan to invest in the range of $120 million to $140 million in capital expenditures in fiscal 2023. These capital expenditures include investments in growth, including new nonferrous processing technologies, and to support volume initiatives as well as post-acquisition and other growth projects, and investments to upgrade our equipment and infrastructure and for environmental and safety-related assets, using cash generated from operations and available credit facilities. Supply chain disruptions, including those created directly or indirectly by the COVID-19 pandemic, have contributed to some delays in construction activities and equipment deliveries related to our capital projects, and to the time required to obtain permits from government agencies, resulting in the deferral of certain capital expenditures. Given the continually evolving nature of such disruptions and other factors impacting the timing of project completion, the extent to which forecasted capital expenditures could be deferred is uncertain.
Environmental Compliance
Building on our commitment to recycling and operating our business in an environmentally responsible manner, we continue to invest in facilities that improve our environmental presence in the communities in which we operate. As part of our capital expenditures discussed in the prior paragraph, we invested approximately $35 million in capital expenditures for environmental projects in fiscal 2022, and we currently plan to invest in the range of $40 million to $50 million for such projects in fiscal 2023. These projects include investments in equipment to ensure ongoing compliance with air quality and other environmental regulations and storm water systems.
We have been identified by the EPA as one of the potentially responsible parties that own or operate or formerly owned or operated sites which are part of or adjacent to Portland Harbor. See Note 10 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for a discussion of this matter, as well as other legacy environmental loss contingencies. We believe it is not possible to reasonably estimate the amount or range of costs which we are likely to or which it is reasonably possible that we will incur in connection with Portland Harbor, although such costs could be material to our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity. We have insurance policies that we believe will provide reimbursement for costs we incur for defense, remediation, and mitigation for natural resource damages claims in connection with Portland Harbor, although there are no assurances that those policies will cover all of the costs which we may incur. Significant cash outflows in the future related to Portland Harbor could reduce the amounts available for borrowing that could otherwise be used for working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, investments, and acquisitions and could result in our failure to maintain compliance with certain covenants in our debt agreements, and could adversely impact our liquidity.
Dividends
On June 29, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a dividend for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 of $0.1875 per common share, which equates to an annual cash dividend of $0.75 per common share. Dividends of $0.75 per common share, totaling $21 million, were declared and paid during fiscal 2022, and $21 million in dividends were also declared and paid during fiscal 2021.
Share Repurchase Program
For information regarding the authorization of a new share repurchase program by our Board of Directors on June 27, 2022, and share repurchases during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2020, see “Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities" above in Part II of this report, incorporated by reference herein. We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock during fiscal 2021.
Assessment of Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, our available cash resources, internally generated funds, credit facilities, and equity offerings have financed our acquisitions, capital expenditures, working capital, and other financing needs.
We generally believe our current cash resources, internally generated funds, existing credit facilities, and access to the capital markets will provide adequate short-term and long-term liquidity needs for working capital, capital expenditures, dividends, share repurchases, investments and acquisitions, joint ventures, debt service requirements, environmental obligations, and other contingencies. However, in the event of a sustained market deterioration, we may need additional liquidity which would require us to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate steps to obtain sufficient additional funds. There can be no assurances that any such supplemental funding, if sought, could be obtained or, if obtained, would be adequate or on acceptable terms.
46 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Contractual Obligations
We have certain contractual obligations to make future payments. The following table summarizes future obligations related to debt and leases as of August 31, 2022 (in thousands):
(1)Credit facilities include the principal amount of borrowings outstanding under bank secured revolving credit facilities, which mature in August 2027.
(2)Interest payments on credit facilities are based on interest rates in effect as of August 31, 2022. As contractual interest rates and the amount of debt outstanding is variable in certain cases, actual cash payments may differ from the estimates provided.
(3)Other debt obligations primarily relate to equipment purchases, the contract consideration for which includes an obligation to make future monthly payments to the vendor in the form of licensing fees. For accounting purposes, such obligation is treated as a partial financing of the purchase price by the equipment vendor. Monthly payments commence when the equipment is placed in service and continue for a period of four years thereafter.
(4)Operating lease payments reflect those embedded in the measurement of our operating lease liabilities and, thus, include future lease payments for the remaining non-cancellable period of the lease together with periods covered by renewal (or termination) options which we are reasonably certain to exercise (or not to exercise). These operating lease payments do not include certain tax, insurance, and maintenance costs, which are also required contractual obligations under our operating leases but are generally not fixed and can fluctuate from year to year. Also, we have excluded future minimum lease payments for leases that have been executed but have not commenced as of August 31, 2022.
In addition to future obligations related to debt and leases presented in the table above, we have certain material cash requirements, including but not limited to commitments for capital expenditures. See “Capital Expenditures” within “Liquidity and Capital Resources” above in this Item 7 for discussion of our planned investment in capital expenditures in fiscal 2023, a portion of which represents contractual commitments that existed as of the end of our fiscal 2022. We also had open purchase orders as of August 31, 2022 for purchases of primarily fuels and lubricants, machinery and equipment components and parts, and consumables used in our operations of approximately $80 million, nearly all of which require payment of cash in our fiscal 2023.
See Note 13 - Employee Benefits in Part II, Item 8 of this report for disclosure related to qualified and nonqualified retirement plans, which include a defined benefit pension plan, a supplemental executive retirement benefit plan, multiemployer pension plans, defined contribution plans, and a deferred compensation plan.
We maintain stand-by letters of credit to provide support for certain obligations, including workers’ compensation and performance bonds. At August 31, 2022, we had $8 million outstanding under these arrangements.
47 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make certain judgments, estimates, and assumptions regarding uncertainties that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. An accounting estimate is deemed to be critical if it is made based on assumptions and judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact our consolidated financial statements. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results could differ from the estimates we use. We are not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in materially different amounts being reported.
Our critical accounting estimates include those related to inventories, business acquisitions, long-lived assets, goodwill, environmental costs, and income taxes.
Inventories
Our inventories consist of processed and unprocessed scrap metal (ferrous, nonferrous, and mixed nonferrous recovered joint products arising from the manufacturing process), semi-finished steel products (billets), finished steel products (primarily rebar, wire rod, and merchant bar), used and salvaged vehicles, and supplies. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. We consider estimated future selling prices when determining the estimated net realizable value of our inventory. As we generally sell our recycled ferrous metal under contracts that provide for shipment within 30 to 60 days after the price is agreed, we utilize the selling prices under committed contracts and sales orders for determining the estimated net realizable value of quantities on hand that will be shipped under these contracts and sales orders.
The accounting process we use to record ferrous scrap metal quantities relies on significant estimates. With respect to estimating the quantities of unprocessed ferrous scrap metal inventory that are moved into production, we rely on weighed quantities of the processed ferrous material, adjusted for estimated metal recoveries and yields that are based on historical trends and other judgments by management. Actual recoveries and yields can vary depending on product quality, moisture content, and the source of the unprocessed metal. The Company’s estimates are intended to reasonably reflect the quantities of unprocessed ferrous scrap metal that are used in the production of processed ferrous metal. To assist in validating the reasonableness of these estimates, we periodically review shrink factors and perform monthly physical inventories. Due to the inherent nature of our scrap metal inventories, including variations in product density, holding period, and production processes utilized to manufacture the products, physical inventories will not necessarily detect all variances for scrap metal inventory such that estimates of quantities are required. To mitigate this risk, we further adjust our ferrous physical inventories when the volume of a commodity is low and a physical inventory count is deemed to more accurately estimate the remaining volume.
Business Acquisitions
We recognize the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date, measured at their fair values as of that date. Contingent purchase consideration is recorded at fair value at the date of acquisition. Any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Within one year from the date of acquisition, we may update the value allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, and the resulting goodwill balance, based on information received regarding the valuation of such assets and liabilities that was not available at the time of purchase. Measuring assets and liabilities at fair value requires us to determine the price that would be paid by a third-party market participant based on the highest and best use of the assets or interests acquired. See Note 7 - Business Acquisitions in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for disclosure of our acquisition of the Columbus Recycling business on October 1, 2021, and our acquisition of the Encore Recycling business on April 29, 2022. As of August 31, 2022, with respect to our acquisition of the Encore Recycling business, measurement of actual acquired net working capital, as well as the fair values of certain other acquired assets and assumed liabilities, is still preliminary and subject to change based on the completion of valuation procedures.
48 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Long-Lived Assets
We test long-lived tangible and intangible assets for impairment at the asset group level, which is determined based on the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. We test our asset groups for impairment when certain triggering events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset group may be impaired. If the carrying value of the asset group is not recoverable because it exceeds the estimate of future undiscounted cash flows from the use and eventual disposition of the asset group, an impairment loss is recognized by the amount the carrying value exceeds its fair value, if any. The impairment loss is allocated to the long-lived assets of the group on a pro rata basis using the relative carrying amounts of those assets, except that the loss allocated to an individual long-lived asset of the group shall not reduce the carrying amount of that asset below its fair value. Fair value is determined using one or more of the income, market, or cost approaches, depending on the nature of the asset group. Determination of fair value is considered a critical accounting estimate. In fiscal 2022, we did not identify any triggering events or changes in circumstances indicating that the carrying value of a material asset group may be impaired.
Goodwill
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually on July 1 and upon the occurrence of certain triggering events or substantive changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value of goodwill may be impaired. Impairment of goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment (referred to as a “component”).
When testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more-likely-than-not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more-likely-than-not, we are then required to perform the quantitative impairment test, otherwise no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. When performing the quantitative impairment test, we apply a one-step quantitative test and record the amount of goodwill impairment as the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using an income approach based on the present value of expected future cash flows utilizing a market-based weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) determined separately for the reporting unit. To estimate the present value of the cash flows that extend beyond the final year in the discounted cash flow analysis, we employ a terminal value technique, whereby we use estimated operating cash flows minus capital expenditures, adjust for changes in working capital requirements in the final year of the analysis, and then discount these estimated cash flows by the WACC to establish the terminal value.
The determination of fair value using the income approach requires judgment and involves the use of estimates and assumptions about expected future cash flows derived from internal forecasts and the impact of market conditions on those assumptions. Assumptions primarily include revenue growth rates driven by future ferrous and nonferrous commodity price and sales volume expectations, automobile scrap and core price and sales volume expectations, gross margins, selling, general and administrative expense relative to total revenues, capital expenditures, working capital requirements, discount rate (WACC), tax rate, terminal growth rate, benefits associated with a taxable transaction, and synergistic benefits available to market participants.
We also use a market approach based on earnings multiple data and our Company’s market capitalization to corroborate our reporting units’ valuations. We reconcile the Company’s market capitalization to the aggregated estimated fair value of all reporting units, including consideration of a control premium representing the estimated amount a market participant would pay to obtain a controlling interest in the Company.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we performed the annual goodwill impairment test as of July 1, 2022. As of the testing date, the balance of our goodwill was $254 million, which was carried by three reporting units. Although we performed the annual goodwill impairment test for fiscal 2021 as of July 1, 2021, we had last performed the quantitative impairment test of goodwill in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 using a measurement date of July 1, 2020. Based on the changes in market conditions related to the general economy and the metals recycling industry, the extent of time that had passed since the last quantitative goodwill impairment test as of July 1, 2020, and the realignment of reporting units as of September 1, 2020, we elected to not perform the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test for goodwill carried by two of the reporting units to identify potential impairment and measure an impairment loss, if necessary.
49 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
The two reporting units for which we performed the quantitative assessment consist of a regional metals recycling operation and our network of auto parts stores. For the metals recycling and autos reporting units subject to the quantitative impairment test, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 32% and 44%, respectively, as of July 1, 2022. The projections used in the income approach for the metals recycling and autos reporting units took into consideration, as applicable, the impact of recent and current market conditions for ferrous and nonferrous recycled metals, the cost of obtaining adequate supply flows of scrap metal including end-of-life vehicles, and recent trends in retail auto parts sales. The projections assumed a limited recovery of operating margins from the levels experienced around the time of the July 1, 2022 measurement date over a multi-year period. The WACC rates used in the income approach valuation for the metals recycling and autos reporting units were 13.33% and 12.13%, respectively, and the terminal growth rate used for both reporting units was 2.0%. A company-specific risk premium is embedded in the WACC to reflect the perceived level of uncertainty inherent in each reporting unit's expected future cash flows. Assuming all other components of the fair value estimates were held constant, an increase in the WACC of 100 basis points for each of the metals recycling reporting unit and the autos reporting units would have decreased the indicated headroom to 21% and 29%, respectively. See Note 8 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report for further detail.
As a result of the inherent uncertainty associated with forming the estimates described above, actual results could differ from those estimates. Future events and changing market conditions may impact our assumptions as to future revenue and operating margin growth, WACC, and other factors that may result in changes in our estimates of the reporting units’ fair value. Although we believe the assumptions used in testing our reporting units’ goodwill for impairment are reasonable, a lack of recovery or further deterioration in market conditions from current levels, a trend of weaker than anticipated financial performance for the reporting units with allocated goodwill, a decline in our share price from current levels for a sustained period of time, or an increase in the WACC, among other factors, could significantly impact our impairment analysis and may result in future goodwill impairment charges that, if incurred, could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Environmental Costs
We operate in industries that inherently possess environmental risks. To manage these risks, we employ both our own environmental staff and outside consultants. Environmental management and finance personnel meet regularly to discuss environmental risks. We estimate future costs for known environmental remediation requirements and accrue for them on an undiscounted basis when it is probable that we have incurred a liability and the related costs can be reasonably estimated but the timing of incurring the estimated costs is unknown. The regulatory and government management of these projects is complex, which is one of the primary factors that make it difficult to assess the cost of potential and future remediation. When only a wide range of estimated amounts can be reasonably established and no other amount within the range is better than any other, the low end of the range is recorded in the financial statements. If further developments or resolution of an environmental matter result in facts and circumstances that are significantly different than the assumptions used to develop these liabilities, the accrual for environmental remediation could be materially understated or overstated. Adjustments to these liabilities are made when additional information becomes available that affects the estimated costs to study or remediate any environmental issues or when expenditures for which accruals are established are made. The factors we consider in the recognition and measurement of environmental liabilities include:
•Current regulations, both at the time the liability is established and during the course of the investigation or remediation process, which specify standards for acceptable remediation;
•Information about the site which becomes available as the site is studied and remediated;
•The professional judgment of senior level internal staff and outside consultants, who take into account similar, recent instances of environmental remediation issues, and studies of our sites, among other considerations;
•Available technologies that can be used for remediation; and
•The number and financial condition of other potentially responsible parties and the extent of their responsibility for the costs of study and remediation.
50 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Our accrued environmental liabilities as of August 31, 2022 included $6 million related to the Portland Harbor Superfund site. Because the final remedial actions have not yet been designed and there has not been a determination of the amount of natural resource damages or of the allocation among the potentially responsible parties of costs of the investigations, remedial action costs, or natural resource damages, we believe it is not possible to reasonably estimate the amount or range of costs which we are likely or which it is reasonably possible that we may incur in connection with Portland Harbor, although such costs could be material to our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity. Therefore, no additional amounts have been accrued. Further, we have been notified that we are or may be a potentially responsible party at sites other than Portland Harbor which are currently or formerly owned or operated by us or at other sites where we may have responsibility for such costs due to past disposal or other activities. See “Contingencies - Environmental” in Note 10 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Income Taxes
Valuation Allowances
We assess the realizability of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis through an analysis of potential sources of future taxable income, including prior year taxable income available to absorb a carryback of tax losses, reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and forecasts of taxable income. We consider all negative and positive evidence, including the weight of the evidence, to determine if valuation allowances against deferred tax assets are required. Due to the significant judgment involved, realizability of our deferred tax assets is considered a critical accounting estimate. We continue to maintain valuation allowances against certain state and Canadian deferred tax assets.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may have an impact on our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows, see Note 3 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Debt, net of cash
Debt, net of cash is the difference between (i) the sum of long-term debt and short-term borrowings (i.e., total debt) and (ii) cash and cash equivalents. We believe that presenting debt, net of cash is useful to investors as a measure of our leverage, as cash and cash equivalents can be used, among other things, to repay indebtedness.
The following is a reconciliation of debt, net of cash (in thousands):
Net borrowings (repayments) of debt
Net borrowings (repayments) of debt is the sum of borrowings from long-term debt and repayments of long-term debt. We present this amount as the net change in our borrowings (repayments) for the period because we believe it is useful for investors as a meaningful presentation of the change in debt.
The following is a reconciliation of net borrowings (repayments) of debt (in thousands):
51 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted selling, general, and administrative expense, adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders, and adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders
Management believes that providing these non-GAAP financial measures adds a meaningful presentation of our results from business operations excluding adjustments for legacy environmental matters (net of recoveries), business development costs not related to ongoing operations including pre-acquisition expenses, asset impairment charges (net of recoveries), charges related to non-ordinary course legal settlements, restructuring charges and other exit-related activities, and the income tax benefit allocated to these adjustments, items which are not related to underlying business operational performance, and improves the period-to-period comparability of our results from business operations.
Following are reconciliations of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA, and adjusted selling, general, and administrative expense (in thousands):
(1)Legal and environmental charges, net of recoveries, for legacy environmental matters including those related to Portland Harbor and to other legacy environmental loss contingencies. See Note 10 - Commitments and Contingencies, "Portland Harbor" and "Other Legacy Environmental Loss Contingencies" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
(2)Charges related to legal settlements in fiscal 2022 and 2021 relate to a claim by a utility provider for past charges, and in fiscal 2020 relate to the settlement of a wage and hour class action lawsuit.
52 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022
Following are reconciliations of adjusted income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders (in thousands, except per share data):
(1)Legal and environmental charges, net of recoveries, for legacy environmental matters including those related to the Portland Harbor Superfund site and to other legacy environmental loss contingencies. See Note 10 - Commitments and Contingencies, "Portland Harbor" and "Other Legacy Environmental Loss Contingencies" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
(2)Charges related to legal settlements in fiscal 2022 and 2021 relate to a claim by a utility provider for past charges, and in fiscal 2020 relate to the settlement of a wage and hour class action lawsuit.
(3)Income tax allocated to the aggregate adjustments reconciling reported and adjusted income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders and diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations attributable to SSI shareholders is determined based on a tax provision calculated with and without the adjustments.
(4)May not foot due to rounding.
53 / Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. Form 10-K 2022