Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Company
We are North America’s largest provider of deathcare products and services, with a network of funeral service locations and cemeteries unequaled in geographic scale and reach. At December 31, 2021, we operated 1,471 funeral service locations and 488 cemeteries (including 299 funeral service/cemetery combination locations), which are geographically diversified across 44 states, eight Canadian provinces, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Our funeral and cemetery operations consist of funeral service locations, cemeteries, funeral service/cemetery combination locations, crematoria, and other related businesses, which enable us to serve a wide array of customer needs. We sell cemetery property and funeral and cemetery merchandise and services at the time of need and on a preneed basis. Our Dignity Memorial® brand serves over 500,000 families each year with professionalism, compassion, and attention to detail.
Our financial position is enhanced by our $13.7 billion backlog of future revenue from both trust and insurance-funded preneed sales at December 31, 2021. Preneed selling provides us with a strategic opportunity to gain future market share. We also believe it adds to the stability and predictability of our revenue and cash flows. While revenue on the majority of preneed merchandise and service sales is deferred until the time of need, sales of preneed cemetery property provide opportunities for full current revenue recognition to the extent that the property is developed and available for use. We have adequate liquidity and a favorable debt maturity profile, which allow us to return capital to shareholders.
Factors affecting our operating results include: demographic trends in terms of population growth and average age, which impact death rates and number of deaths; establishing and maintaining leading market share positions supported by strong local heritage and relationships; effectively responding to increasing cremation trends by selling complementary services and merchandise; controlling salary and merchandise costs; and exercising pricing leverage related to our atneed revenue. The average revenue per funeral contract is influenced by the mix of traditional and cremation services because our average revenue for cremations is lower than that for traditional burials. To further enhance revenue opportunities, we continue to focus on our cremation customer’s preferences and remaining relevant by developing additional memorialization merchandise and services that specifically appeal to cremation customers. We believe the presentation of these additional merchandise and services through our customer-facing technology enhances our customer’s experience by reducing administrative burdens and allowing them to visualize the product offerings and services, which will help drive increases in the average revenue for a cremation in future periods.
Recent Trends
Like most businesses world-wide, COVID-19 is still impacting various aspects of our business operations; however, we cannot, with certainty, predict the scope, severity, or duration with which COVID-19 will continue to impact our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
In 2021, we continued to experience the impact of COVID-19 variants. However, we have seen community restrictions lifted and vaccine distribution more widespread. As restrictions have lifted, we have seen an increase in the number of families who
FORM 10-K 23
PART II
desire memorial services which has driven significant growth in our preneed sales as well as positively affected our average revenue per funeral service. We view this as further evidence that our customers continue to value what our team does best, which is helping our client families gain closure and healing through the process of grieving, remembrance, and celebration.
For further discussion of our key operating metrics, see our "Cash Flow" and “Results of Operations” sections below. For a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 16, 2021.
Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Capital Allocation Considerations
We rely on cash flow from operations as a significant source of liquidity. Our cash flow from operating activities provided $920.6 million in 2021. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we have $811.0 million in borrowing capacity under our Bank Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had $65.0 million in current maturities of long-term debt, which primarily consist of the current amounts due on our term loan and finance leases.
Our Bank Credit Facility requires us to maintain certain leverage and interest coverage ratios. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants. Our financial covenant requirements and actual ratios as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Per Credit Agreement Actual
Leverage ratio 4.75 (Max) 2.56
Interest coverage ratio 3.00 (Min) 10.12
We target a leverage ratio of 3.5- 4.0x, however increased earnings over the last two years have resulted in a ratio much lower than our target. We expect leverage to naturally increase in future quarters as we expect earnings to be less impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have the financial strength and flexibility to reward shareholders with dividends while maintaining a prudent capital structure and pursuing new opportunities for profitable growth.
Our unencumbered cash on hand, future operating cash flows, and the available capacity under our bank credit agreement will give us adequate liquidity to meet our short-term needs as well as our long-term financial obligations. Due to cash balances residing in Canada and minimum operating cash requirements, a portion of our cash on hand is encumbered.
We consistently evaluate the best uses of our cash flow that will yield the highest value and return on capital. Our capital deployment strategy is prioritized as follows:
Investing in Acquisitions and Building New Funeral Service and Cemetery Locations. We manage our footprint by focusing on strategic acquisitions and building new funeral service locations where the expected returns are attractive and exceed our weighted average cost of capital by a meaningful margin. We target businesses with favorable customer dynamics and/or where we can achieve additional economies of scale. We continue to pursue strategic acquisitions and build new funeral service locations in areas that provide us with the potential for scale. We were able to invest $121.4 million in acquiring 30 funeral homes and 2 cemeteries during 2021.
Managing Debt. We may seek to make open market debt repurchases when it is opportunistic to do so relative to other capital deployment opportunities and to manage our near-term debt maturity profile. We have a relatively consistent annual cash flow stream that is generally resistant to down economic cycles. This cash flow stream and our significant liquidity are available to substantially reduce our long-term debt maturities should we choose to do so.
Return Excess Cash to Shareholders. Absent strategic acquisition or new opportunities, we intend to return excess cash to shareholders. Our quarterly dividend rate has steadily grown from $0.025 per common share in 2005 to $0.23 per common share at the end of 2021. We target a payout ratio of 30% to 40% of after tax earnings excluding special items and intend to grow our cash dividend commensurate with the growth in our business. While we intend to pay regular quarterly cash dividends for the foreseeable future, all future dividends are subject to limitations in our debt covenants and final determination by our Board of Directors each quarter upon review of our financial performance.
Cash Flow
Our ability to generate strong operating cash flow is one of our fundamental financial strengths and provides us with substantial flexibility in meeting operating and investing needs.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $920.6 million and $804.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Excluding an $8.3 million cash receipt from a vendor waiver and release agreement in the current period, cash flow from operations increased $107.9 million for 2021 versus 2020. The 2021 increase over 2020 comprises:
24 Service Corporation International
PART II
•a $600.7 million increase in cash receipts from customers,
•a $24.2 million increase in General Agency (GA) and other receipts, and
•a $10.4 million decrease in cash interest payments primarily due to reductions in our long-term debt; partially offset by
•a $235.3 million increase in employee compensation payments,
•a $132.7 million increase in cash tax payments,
•a $120.2 million increase in vendor and other payments, and
•a $39.2 million increase in net trust deposits.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities used $414.9 million, and $318.4 million, in 2021, and 2020, respectively. The $96.5 million increased outflow from 2021 over 2020 is primarily due to the following:
•a $81.4 million increase in capital expenditures,
•a $57.2 million increase in cash spent on business acquisitions,
•a $2.1 million increase in payments for Company-owned life insurance policies, net of proceeds; partially offset by
•a $25.5 million decrease in cash spent on real estate acquisitions, and
•a $18.7 million increase in cash received from divestitures and asset sales.
Financing Activities
Financing activities used $465.6 million in 2021 compared to using $492.8 million in 2020. The $27.2 million decreased outflow from 2021 over 2020 is primarily due to:
•a $70.2 million decrease in debt payments, net of proceeds, and
•a $12.6 million increase in proceeds from exercises of stock options; partially offset by
•a $37.4 million increase in the purchase of Company common stock,
•a $9.5 million increase in payments of dividends, and
•a $8.7 million change in bank overdrafts and other.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Debt & Finance Leases
As of December 31, 2021, we had $4.0 billion in aggregate principal outstanding on our notes, term loan, Bank Credit Facility, finance leases, mortgages, and other debt (collectively "debt and finance leases"), of which $65.0 million is payable in the next twelve months. The aggregate principal excludes $45.1 million in unamortized non-cash debt issuance costs and original issuance discounts and premiums. Future interest payments associated with the debt and finance leases total $1,079.3 million, of which $148.5 million is payable in the next twelve months. For further information on our debt and finance leases see Note 6 and Note 8 of Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Operating Leases
We have operating lease agreements for funeral service real estate and office equipment for funeral service locations, cemetery locations, and administrative offices. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $73.9 million, of which $10.1 million is payable in the next twelve months. See Note 8 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for additional details related to our leases.
Benefit Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we have several frozen benefit plans with an aggregate benefit obligation of $17.8 million, of which we expect to pay $2.4 million in the next twelve months. See Note 12 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for discussion of our pension plans.
Purchase Commitment
We have entered into a purchase commitment for certain merchandise for resale. The agreement is through 2025 and includes annual minimum volume purchase commitments. As of December 31, 2021, the undiscounted purchase commitment was $29.1 million, of which $9.1 million is committed to be purchased in the next twelve months.
FORM 10-K 25
PART II
Financial Assurances
In support of our operations, we have entered into arrangements with certain surety companies whereby such companies agree to issue surety bonds on our behalf as financial assurance and/or as required by existing state and local regulations. The surety bonds are used for various business purposes; however, the majority of the surety bonds issued and outstanding have been used to support our preneed sales activities. The obligations underlying these surety bonds are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as Deferred revenue, net. The breakdown of surety bonds between funeral and cemetery preneed arrangements, as well as surety bonds for other activities, is described below.
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(In millions)
Preneed funeral $ 89.2 $ 94.4
Preneed cemetery:
Merchandise and services 147.0 149.4
Pre-construction 24.8 24.2
Bonds supporting preneed funeral and cemetery obligations 261.0 268.0
Bonds supporting preneed business permits 7.0 5.5
Other bonds 20.4 20.7
Total surety bonds outstanding $ 288.4 $ 294.2
When selling preneed contracts, we may post surety bonds where allowed by state law. We post the surety bonds in lieu of trusting a certain amount of funds received from the customer. The amount of the bond posted is generally determined by the total amount of the preneed contract that would otherwise be required to be trusted, in accordance with applicable state law.
Surety bond premiums are paid annually and the bonds are automatically renewable until maturity of the underlying preneed contracts, unless we are given prior notice of cancellation. Except for cemetery pre-construction bonds (which are irrevocable), the surety companies generally have the right to cancel the surety bonds at any time with appropriate notice. In the event a surety company were to cancel the surety bond, we are required to obtain replacement surety assurance from another surety company or fund a trust for an amount generally less than the posted bond amount. Management does not expect that we will be required to fund material future amounts related to these surety bonds due to a lack of surety capacity or surety company non-performance.
Preneed Activities and Backlog of Contracts
In addition to selling our products and services to client families at the time of need, we enter into price-guaranteed preneed contracts, which provide for future funeral or cemetery merchandise and services. Because preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise or services will generally not be provided until sometime in the future, most states and provinces require that all or a portion of the funds collected from customers on preneed contracts be deposited into merchandise and service trusts until the merchandise is delivered or the service is performed. In certain situations, as described above, where permitted by state or provincial laws, we may post a surety bond as financial assurance for a certain amount of the preneed contract in lieu of placing funds into trust accounts. Alternatively, we may sell a life insurance or annuity policy from third-party insurance companies.
Insurance-Funded Preneed Contracts
Where permitted by state or provincial law, we may sell a life insurance or annuity policy from third-party insurance companies, for which we earn a commission as general sales agent for the insurance company. These general agency commissions (GA revenue) are based on a percentage per contract sold and are recognized as funeral revenue when the insurance purchase transaction between the preneed purchaser and third-party insurance provider is completed. All selling costs incurred pursuant to the sale of insurance-funded preneed contracts are expensed as incurred. We do not reflect the unfulfilled insurance-funded preneed contract amounts in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The proceeds of the life insurance policies or annuity contracts will be reflected in funeral revenue as we perform these funerals.
26 Service Corporation International
PART II
The table below details our results of insurance-funded preneed production and maturities.
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(Dollars in millions)
Preneed insurance-funded:
Sales production(1)
$ 636.9 $ 501.3
Sales production (number of contracts) (1)
107,191 89,080
General agency revenue $ 157.4 $ 124.5
Maturities $ 392.9 $ 385.2
Maturities (number of contracts) 65,812 66,362
(1) Amounts are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Trust-Funded Preneed Contracts
The funds collected from customers and required by state or provincial law are deposited into trusts. We retain any funds above the amounts required to be deposited into trust accounts and use them for working capital purposes, generally to offset the selling and administrative costs of our preneed programs. Although this represents cash flow to us, the associated revenues are deferred until the merchandise is delivered or services are performed (typically at maturity). The funds in trust are then invested by professional money managers with oversight by independent trustees in accordance with state and provincial laws.
The tables below detail our results of preneed production and maturities, excluding insurance contracts, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(Dollars in millions)
Funeral:
Preneed trust-funded (including bonded):
Sales production $ 451.0 $ 357.3
Sales production (number of contracts) 116,654 94,059
Maturities $ 352.4 $ 313.4
Maturities (number of contracts) 83,846 80,962
Cemetery:
Sales production:
Preneed $ 1,337.2 $ 1,045.5
Atneed 494.0 400.9
Total sales production $ 1,831.2 $ 1,446.4
Sales production deferred to backlog:
Preneed $ 575.8 $ 481.3
Atneed 338.3 281.0
Total sales production deferred to backlog $ 914.1 $ 762.3
Revenue recognized from backlog:
Preneed $ 348.2 $ 334.5
Atneed 317.7 267.4
Total revenue recognized from backlog $ 665.9 $ 601.9
Backlog of Preneed Contracts
The following table reflects our backlog of trust-funded deferred preneed contract revenue, including amounts related to Deferred receipts held in trust at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Additionally, the table reflects our backlog of unfulfilled insurance-funded contracts (which are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet) at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The backlog amounts presented include amounts due from customers for undelivered performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts to arrive at our total backlog of deferred revenue. The table does not include the backlog associated with businesses that are held for sale.
FORM 10-K 27
PART II
The table also reflects our preneed receivables and trust investments associated with the backlog of deferred preneed contract revenue including the amounts due from customers for undelivered performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts. The table below is meaningful because it sets forth the aggregate amount of future revenue we expect to recognize as a result of preneed sales, as well as the amount of funds associated with this revenue. Because the future revenue exceeds the assets, future revenue will exceed the cash distributions actually received from the associated trusts and future collections from the customer.
December 31, 2021 December 31, 2020
Fair Value Cost Fair Value Cost
(In billions)
Deferred revenue, net $ 1.53 $ 1.53 $ 1.49 $ 1.49
Amounts due from customers for unfulfilled performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts 0.72 0.72 0.64 0.64
Deferred receipts held in trust 4.77 3.93 4.27 3.66
Allowance for cancellation on trust investments (0.33) (0.27) (0.29) (0.25)
Backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue, net of estimated allowance for cancellation 6.69 5.91 6.11 5.54
Backlog of insurance-funded revenue (1)
6.97 6.97 6.58 6.58
Total backlog of deferred revenue $ 13.66 $ 12.88 $ 12.69 $ 12.12
Preneed receivables, net and trust investments $ 6.02 $ 5.18 $ 5.35 $ 4.73
Amounts due from customers for unfulfilled performance obligations on cancelable preneed contracts 0.71 0.71 0.64 0.64
Allowance for cancellation on trust investments (0.33) (0.27) (0.29) (0.25)
Assets associated with backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue, net of estimated allowance for cancellation 6.40 5.62 5.70 5.12
Insurance policies associated with insurance-funded deferred revenue (1)
6.97 6.97 6.58 6.58
Total assets associated with backlog of preneed revenue $ 13.37 $ 12.59 $ 12.28 $ 11.70
(1) Amounts are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The fair value of our trust investments was based on a combination of quoted market prices, observable inputs such as interest rates or yield curves and appraisals. As of December 31, 2021, the difference between the backlog and asset market amounts represents $0.20 billion related to contracts for which we have posted surety bonds as financial assurance in lieu of trusting, $1.17 billion collected from customers that were not required to be deposited into trusts, and $0.17 billion in allowable cash distributions from trust assets partially offset by $1.25 billion in amounts due on delivered property and merchandise. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the total backlog comprised $3.93 billion related to cemetery contracts and $9.73 billion related to funeral contracts. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the assets associated with the backlog of trust-funded deferred revenue comprised $3.84 billion related to cemetery contracts and $2.56 billion related to funeral contracts.
Trust Investments
In addition to selling our products and services to client families at the time of need, we enter into price-guaranteed preneed funeral and cemetery contracts, which provide for future funeral or cemetery merchandise and services. Since preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise or services will generally not be provided until sometime in the future, most states and provinces require that all or a portion of the funds collected from customers on preneed funeral and cemetery contracts be paid into trusts and/or escrow accounts until the merchandise is delivered or the service is performed. Investment earnings associated with the trust investments are expected to mitigate the inflationary costs of providing the preneed funeral and cemetery merchandise and services in the future at the prices that were guaranteed at the time of sale. Also, we are required by state and provincial law to pay a portion of the proceeds from the preneed or atneed sale of cemetery property interment rights into perpetual care trusts. For these investments, the original corpus generally remains in the trust in perpetuity and the earnings or elected distributions are withdrawn as allowed to defray the expense to maintain the cemetery property. While many states require that net capital gains or losses be retained and added to the corpus, certain states allow the net realized capital gains and losses to be included in the earnings that are distributed. Additionally, some states allow a total return distribution that may contain elements of income, capital appreciation, and principal.
Independent trustees manage and invest the majority of the funds deposited into the funeral and cemetery merchandise and service trusts as well as the cemetery perpetual care trusts. The majority of the trustees are selected based on their respective geographic footprint and qualifications per state and provincial regulations. Most of the trustees engage the same independent investment managers. These trustees, with input from SCI's wholly-owned registered investment advisor, establish an investment policy that serves as an operating document to guide the investment activities of the trusts including
28 Service Corporation International
PART II
asset allocation and manager selection. The investments are also governed by state and provincial guidelines. All of the trusts seek to control risk and volatility through a combination of asset classes, investment styles, and a diverse mix of investment managers.
Asset allocation is based on the liability structure of each funeral, cemetery, and perpetual care trust. Based on the various criteria set forth in the investment policy, the investment advisor recommends investment managers to the trustees. The primary investment objectives for the funeral and cemetery merchandise and service trusts include 1) preserving capital within acceptable levels of volatility and risk and 2) achieving growth of principal over time sufficient to preserve and increase the purchasing power of the assets. Preneed funeral and cemetery contracts generally take several years to mature; therefore, the funds associated with these contracts are often invested through several market cycles.
Where total return distributions are allowed by state and provincial regulations, the cemetery perpetual care trusts’ primary investment objectives are growth-oriented to provide for a fixed distribution rate from the trusts’ assets, similar to university endowments. Where such distributions are limited to ordinary income, the cemetery perpetual care trusts’ investment objectives emphasize providing a steady stream of current investment income with some capital appreciation. Both types of distributions are used to provide for the current and future maintenance and beautification of the cemetery properties.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately 94% of our trusts were under the control and custody of four large financial institutions. The U.S. trustees primarily use four managed limited liability companies (LLCs), one for each merchandise and service trust type and two for the cemetery perpetual care trust type, each with an independent trustee as custodian. Each financial institution acting as trustee manages its allocation of trust assets in accordance with the investment policy through the purchase of the appropriate LLCs' units. For those accounts not eligible for participation in the LLCs or where a particular state's regulations contain other investment restrictions, the trustee utilizes institutional mutual funds that comply with our investment policy or with such state restrictions. The U.S. trusts include a modest allocation to alternative investments. These alternative investments are held in vehicles structured as LLCs and are managed by certain trustees. The trusts that are eligible to allocate a portion of their investments to alternative investments purchase units of the respective alternative investment LLCs.
Investment Structures
The managed LLCs use the following structures for investments:
Commingled Funds. These funds allow the trusts to access, at a reduced cost, some of the same investment managers and strategies used elsewhere in the portfolios.
Mutual Funds. The trust funds employ institutional share class mutual funds where operationally or economically efficient. These mutual funds are utilized to invest in various asset classes including U.S. equities, non-U.S. equities, corporate bonds, government bonds, high yield bonds, and commodities, all of which are governed by guidelines outlined in their individual prospectuses.
Separately Managed Accounts. To reduce the costs to the investment portfolios, the trusts utilize separately managed accounts where appropriate.
Asset Classes
Equity investments have historically provided long-term capital appreciation in excess of inflation. The trusts have direct investments in individual equity securities primarily in domestic equity portfolios that include large, mid, and small capitalization companies of different investment styles (i.e., growth and value). The majority of the equity allocation is managed by institutional investment managers that specialize in an objective-specific area of expertise. Our equity securities are exposed to market risk; however, we believe these securities are well-diversified. As of December 31, 2021, the largest single equity position represented less than 1% of the total securities portfolio.
Fixed income investments are intended to preserve principal, provide a source of current income, and reduce overall portfolio volatility. The majority of the fixed income allocation for the trusts is invested in institutional share class mutual funds. Where the trusts have direct investments in individual fixed income securities, these are primarily in government and corporate instruments.
Canadian government fixed income securities are investments in Canadian federal and provincial government instruments. In many cases, regulatory restrictions mandate that the funds from the sales of preneed funeral and cemetery contracts sold in certain Canadian jurisdictions must be invested in these instruments.
Alternative investments serve to provide high rates of return with reduced volatility and lower correlation to publicly-traded securities. These investments are typically longer term in duration and are diversified by strategy, sector, manager, geography and vintage year. The investments consist of numerous limited partnerships, invested in private equity, private market real estate, energy and natural resources, infrastructure, transportation, and private debt including both distressed debt and mezzanine financing. The trustees that have oversight of their respective alternative LLCs work closely with the investment advisor in making all investment decisions.
FORM 10-K 29
PART II
Trust Performance
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Standard and Poor’s 500 Index increased 28.7% and the Barclay’s Aggregate Index decreased 1.5%. This compares to the SCI trusts that increased 14.4% during the same year-end period, which have a diversified allocation of approximately 59% equities, 28% fixed income securities, 8% alternative and other investments with the remaining 5% available in cash.
Recognized trust fund income (realized and unrealized) related to our preneed trust investments was $179.7 million, $129.1 million, and $119.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Recognized trust fund income (realized and unrealized) related to our cemetery perpetual care trust investments was $96.1 million, $77.8 million, and $77.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
SCI, the trustees, and the investment advisor monitor the capital markets and the trusts on an on-going basis. The trustees, with input from the investment advisor, take prudent action as needed to achieve the investment goals and objectives of the trusts.
Results of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Management Summary
In 2021, we reported consolidated net income attributable to common stockholders of $802.9 million ($4.72 per diluted share) compared to net income attributable to common stockholders in 2020 of $515.9 million ($2.88 per diluted share). These results were impacted by certain significant items including:
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(In millions)
Pre-tax gains on divestitures and impairment charges, net $ 25.2 $ 7.0
Pre-tax losses on early extinguishment of debt, net $ (5.2) $ (18.4)
Pre-tax income from vendor waiver and release agreement cash receipts $ 8.3 $ -
Tax effect from significant items $ (7.3) $ 2.6
Change in uncertain tax reserves and other(1)
$ 4.0 $ 3.0
(1) See Note 5 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional information related to change in uncertain tax reserves and other.
In addition to the above items, the increase over the prior year can be attributed to higher funeral and cemetery gross profit and lower interest expense, which was partially offset by higher income taxes on higher earnings.
30 Service Corporation International
PART II
Funeral Results
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(Dollars in millions, except average revenue per service)
Consolidated funeral revenue $ 2,343.2 $ 2,052.3
Less: revenue associated with acquisitions/new construction 34.1 13.1
Less: revenue associated with divestitures 2.2 6.8
Comparable(1) funeral revenue
2,306.9 2,032.4
Less: comparable recognized preneed revenue 158.1 124.5
Less: comparable general agency and other revenue 140.1 111.7
Adjusted comparable funeral revenue $ 2,008.7 $ 1,796.2
Comparable services performed 376,368 360,457
Comparable average revenue per service(2)
$ 5,337 $ 4,983
Consolidated funeral gross profit 625.6 494.6
Less: gross profit associated with acquisitions/new construction 8.1 5.0
Less: gross losses associated with divestitures (2.6) (2.7)
Comparable(1) funeral gross profit
$ 620.1 $ 492.3
(1) We define comparable (or same store) operations as those funeral locations owned by us for the entire period beginning January 1, 2020 and ending December 31, 2021.
(2) We calculate comparable average revenue per service by dividing comparable funeral revenue, excluding general agency revenue, recognized preneed revenue, and other revenue to avoid distorting our average of normal funeral services revenue, by the comparable number of funeral services performed during the period. Recognized preneed revenue is preneed sales of merchandise that are delivered at the time of sale, including memorial merchandise and travel protection, net, and excluded from our calculation of comparable average revenue per service because the associated service has not yet been performed.
Funeral Revenue
Consolidated revenue from funeral operations was $2,343.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,052.3 million for the same period in 2020. This $290.9 million, or 14.2%, increase in revenue is primarily attributable to a $21.0 million increase in revenue contributed from acquired and newly constructed properties and a $274.5 million, or 13.5%, increase in comparable funeral revenue as described below. These increases were partially offset by the loss of $4.6 million in revenue contributed by properties that have been subsequently divested.
Comparable revenue from funeral operations was $2,306.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2,032.4 million for the same period in 2020. This $274.5 million increase was primarily attributable to a 4.4% increase in funeral services performed compared to 2020 primarily due to COVID-19 pandemic-related deaths. The increase in funeral services performed comprised a 3.8% increase in funeral services performed by our funeral service locations and an 8.4% increase in cremations performed by our non-funeral home channel. Additionally, we experienced a $28.4 million increase in comparable general agency and other revenue and a $33.6 million increase in comparable recognized preneed revenue, as a result of higher comparable preneed funeral sales production.
Average revenue per funeral service increased 7.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. In 2020, the social distancing effects from the pandemic resulted in fewer and smaller memorial funeral services, which negatively impacted our average revenue per funeral service in the prior year. Our total comparable cremation rate increased 70 basis points to 59.3% primarily as a result of an increase in cremations with service.
Funeral Gross Profit
Consolidated funeral gross profit increased $131.0 million, or 26.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to a $3.1 million increase in gross profit contributed from acquired and newly constructed properties and an increase in comparable funeral gross profit of $127.8 million, or 26.0%. The comparable funeral gross profit percentage increased 270 basis points to 26.9% as the growth in comparable funeral revenue more than offset higher fixed costs in the current year relative to the prior year as staffing and service levels normalized, driven by our customers desire for more robust remembrances and celebrations as social distancing measures alleviated. Additionally, maintenance expenses were temporarily higher associated with various storms and hurricanes as well as catch up on deferred maintenance needs from 2020.
FORM 10-K 31
PART II
Cemetery Results
Years Ended December 31,
2021 2020
(In millions)
Consolidated cemetery revenue $ 1,800.0 $ 1,459.2
Less: revenue associated with acquisitions/new construction 0.4 0.2
Less: revenue associated with divestitures 0.3 0.3
Comparable(1) cemetery revenue
$ 1,799.3 $ 1,458.7
Consolidated cemetery gross profit $ 678.0 $ 482.2
Less: gross (loss) profit associated with acquisitions/new construction (0.2) (0.3)
Less: gross profit associated with divestitures 0.2 -
Comparable(1) cemetery gross profit
$ 678.0 $ 482.5
(1) We define comparable (or same store) operations as those cemetery locations owned by us for the entire period beginning January 1, 2020 and ending December 31, 2021.
Cemetery Revenue
Consolidated revenue from our cemetery operations increased $340.8 million, or 23.4%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in comparable cemetery revenue of $340.6 million, or 23.3%. The increase in comparable cemetery revenue was primarily attributable to a $231.5 million, or 24.2%, increase in recognized preneed revenue as a result of strong comparable preneed cemetery property sales production for the period as well as a $91.1 million, or 23.5%, increase in comparable cemetery atneed revenue driven by both higher sales averages and contract velocity across service, merchandise, and property sales. Additionally, comparable other revenue grew $18.1 million, or 15.9%, primarily from higher endowment care trust fund income due to higher capital gains and other distributions.
Cemetery Gross Profit
Consolidated cemetery gross profit increased $195.8 million, or 40.6%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily attributable to the increase in comparable cemetery gross profit of $195.5 million, or 40.5%. Comparable cemetery gross profit increased 460 basis points to 37.7% as the growth in comparable cemetery revenue more than offset higher fixed costs in the current year relative to the prior year as staffing and service levels continued to normalize driven by customer interaction and increased maintenance expenses.
Other Financial Statement Items
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
Corporate general and administrative expenses decreased $3.0 million to $138.1 million in 2021 compared to $141.1 million in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to fewer workers compensation, general liability, and auto liability insurance claims in the current year and higher charitable contributions in the prior year.
Gains on Divestitures and Impairment Charges, Net
We recognized a $25.2 million and a $7.0 million net pre-tax gain on asset divestitures and impairments in 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily as the result of asset divestitures associated with non-strategic funeral and cemetery locations in the United States and Canada partially offset by impairment losses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $12.5 million to $150.6 million in 2021 compared to $163.1 million in 2020 primarily due to lower balances and interest rates on our floating rate debt along with debt refinancing activities over the last twelve months.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased $9.9 million to $10.7 million in 2021 primarily due to a $8.3 million cash receipt from a vendor waiver and release agreement.
Losses on Early Extinguishment of Debt, Net
During 2021, we made aggregate debt payments of $736.0 million for scheduled and early extinguishment payments. During 2020, we made aggregate debt payments of $1,406.4 million for scheduled and early extinguishment payments. Certain of these transactions resulted in the recognition of pre-tax losses of $5.2 million and $18.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, recorded in Losses on early extinguishment of debt, net in our Consolidated Statement of Operations.
32 Service Corporation International
PART II
Provision for Income Taxes
The 2021 consolidated effective tax rate was 23.2%, compared to 22.0% in 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was higher than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to state income taxes partially offset by tax benefits from share-based compensation.
Critical Accounting Policies, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, and Accounting Changes
Our consolidated financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. See Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for more information. Estimates and assumptions affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date. Actual results could differ from such estimates due to uncertainties associated with the methods and assumptions underlying our critical accounting measurements. The following is a discussion of our critical accounting policies pertaining to revenue recognition, valuation of goodwill, valuation of intangible assets, fair value measurements, and the use of estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the merchandise or services is transferred to the customer. Our performance obligations include the delivery of funeral and cemetery merchandise and services and cemetery property interment rights. Control transfers when merchandise is delivered or services are performed. For cemetery property interment rights, control transfers to the customer when the property is developed and the interment right has been sold and can no longer be marketed or sold to another customer.
On our atneed contracts, we generally deliver the merchandise and perform the services at the time of need. Personalized marker merchandise and marker installation services sold on atneed contracts are recognized when control is transferred to the customer, generally when the marker is delivered and installed in the cemetery.
We also sell price-guaranteed preneed contracts through various programs providing for future merchandise and services at prices prevailing when the agreements are signed. Revenue associated with sales of preneed contracts is deferred until control of the merchandise or the services is transferred to the customer, which is upon delivery of the merchandise or as services are performed, generally at the time of need. On certain preneed contracts, we sell memorialization merchandise, which consists of urns and urn-related products, that we deliver to the customer at the time of sale. Revenue is recognized at the time of delivery when control of the memorialization merchandise is transferred.
For personalized marker merchandise sold on a preneed contract, we will:
•purchase the merchandise from vendors,
•personalize such merchandise in accordance with the customer's specific written instructions,
•either store the merchandise at a third-party bonded storage facility or install the merchandise, based on the customer's instructions, and
•transfer title to the customer.
We recognize revenue and record the cost of sales when control is transferred for the merchandise, which occurs upon delivery to the third-party storage facility or installation of the merchandise at the cemetery.
Pursuant to state or provincial law, all or a portion of the proceeds from funeral and cemetery merchandise or services sold on a preneed basis may be required to be paid into trust funds. We defer investment earnings related to these merchandise and service trusts until the associated merchandise is delivered or services are performed. Fees charged by our wholly-owned registered investment advisor are also included in revenue in the period in which they are earned.
A portion of the proceeds from the sale of cemetery property interment rights is required by state or provincial law to be paid by us into perpetual care trust funds to maintain the cemetery. This portion of the proceeds is not recognized as revenue. Investment earnings from these trusts are distributed to us regularly and recognized in current cemetery revenue.
For more information related to revenue, see Notes 2, 3, and 13 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Valuation of Goodwill
We record the excess of purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in business combinations as goodwill. Goodwill is tested annually during the fourth quarter for impairment by assessing the fair value of each of our reporting units.
Our goodwill impairment test involves certain estimates and management judgment. We perform our goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. We determine fair value of each
FORM 10-K 33
PART II
reporting unit using both a market and income approach. The income approach, which is a discounted cash flow method, uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows. We do not record an impairment of goodwill in instances where the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount. If the aggregate fair value is less than the related carrying amount for a reporting unit, we compare the implied fair value of goodwill to the carrying amount of goodwill. If the carrying amount of reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess.
For more information related to goodwill, see Notes 2 and 4 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets include covenants-not-to-compete, customer relationships, trademarks and tradenames, and other intangible assets primarily resulting from acquisitions. Certain of our trademark and tradenames and other intangible assets are considered to have an indefinite life and are not subject to amortization. We test for impairment of intangible assets annually during the fourth quarter.
Our intangible asset impairment tests involve estimates and management judgment. For trademark and tradenames, our test uses the relief from royalty method whereby we determine the fair value of the assets by discounting the cash flows that represent a savings over having to pay a royalty fee for use of the trademark and tradenames. The discounted cash flow valuation uses projections of future cash flows and includes assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions that may differ from actual future cash flows.
For more information related to intangible assets, see Notes 2 and 4 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Fair Value Measurements
We measure the securities held by our funeral merchandise and service, cemetery merchandise and service, and cemetery perpetual care trusts at fair value on a recurring basis. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We utilize a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosure of fair value measurements. The valuation hierarchy is based upon the transparency of inputs to the valuation of an asset or liability as of the measurement date. The three levels are defined as follows:
•Where quoted prices are available in an active market, securities held by the trusts are classified as Level 1 investments.
•Where quoted market prices are not available for the specific security, fair values are estimated by using either quoted prices of securities with similar characteristics or an income approach fair value model with observable inputs that include a combination of interest rates, yield curves, credit risks, prepayment speeds, ratings, and tax-exempt status. These securities are classified as Level 2 investments.
•The valuation of other investments requires management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, and the long-term nature of such assets. These securities are classified as Level 3 investments.
Categorization within the valuation hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Certain securities held by our funeral merchandise and service, cemetery merchandise and service, and cemetery perpetual care trusts have been classified as Level 3 of the hierarchy due to the significant management judgment required because of the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, or the long-term nature of the securities. For more information related to our fair value measurements, see Notes 2, 3, and 7 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States (GAAP) requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the carrying values of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date. Actual results could differ from such estimates due to uncertainties associated with the methods and assumptions underlying our critical accounting measurements. Critical estimates used by management include:
Reserves and Allowances
We provide reserves for credit losses on our receivables. These reserves are based on an analysis of historical trends of collection activity adjusted for current conditions and forecasts. We also record an estimate of general agency revenue that may be canceled in its first year and revenue would be charged back by the insurance company. These estimates are impacted by a number of factors, including changes in the economy and demographic or competitive changes in our areas of operation.
34 Service Corporation International
PART II
Valuation of Trust Investments
When available, we use quoted market prices for specific securities. When quoted market prices are not available for the specific security, fair values are estimated by using either quoted market prices for securities with similar characteristics or a fair value model with observable inputs that include a combination of interest rates, yield curves, credit risks, prepayment terms, rating, and tax exempt status. The valuation of certain investments requires significant management judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, inherent lack of liquidity, and the long-term nature of such assets.
Legal Liability Reserves
Contingent liabilities, principally for legal matters, are recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Liabilities accrued for legal matters require judgments regarding projected outcomes and a range of loss based on historical experience and recommendations of legal counsel. However, litigation is inherently unpredictable and excessive verdicts do occur. As disclosed in Note 9 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, our legal exposures and the ultimate outcome of these legal proceedings could be material to operating results or cash flows in any given quarter or year.
Income Taxes
We compute income taxes using the liability method. Our ability to realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets requires us to achieve certain future earnings levels. We have established a valuation allowance against a portion of our deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions, and we could be required to further adjust that valuation allowance in the near term if market conditions change materially and future earnings are, or are projected to be, significantly different than our current estimates. An increase in the valuation allowance would result in additional income tax expense in such period.
As of December 31, 2021, foreign withholding taxes have not been provided on the estimated $339.9 million of undistributed earnings and profits ("E&P") of our foreign subsidiaries as we intend to permanently reinvest these foreign E&P in those businesses outside the United States. However, if we were to repatriate such foreign E&P, the foreign withholding tax liability is estimated to be $16.4 million.
We file income tax returns, including tax returns for our subsidiaries, with federal, state, local, and foreign jurisdictions. We consider the United States to be our most significant jurisdiction; however, all tax returns are subject to routine compliance review by the taxing authorities in the jurisdictions in which we file tax returns in the ordinary course of business.
The federal statutes of limitation have expired for all tax years prior to 2018, and we are not currently under audit by the IRS. However, pursuant to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the statute of limitations on the transition tax for the 2017 tax year does not expire until 2024. Various state jurisdictions are auditing years 2013 through 2020. There are currently no federal or provincial audits in Canada; however, years subsequent to 2015 remain open and could be subject to examination. We believe that it is reasonably possible that the recorded amount of gross unrecognized tax benefits may decrease by $1.3 million within the next twelve months as a result of concluding various state tax matters.
Insurance Loss Reserves
We purchase comprehensive general liability, morticians and cemetery professional liability, automobile liability, and workers’ compensation insurance coverages structured with high deductibles. This high-deductible insurance program means we are primarily self-insured for claims and associated costs and losses covered by these policies. Historical insurance industry experience indicates a high degree of inherent variability in assessing the ultimate amount of losses associated with casualty insurance claims. This is especially true with respect to liability and workers’ compensation exposures due to the extended period of time that transpires between when the claim might occur and the full settlement of such claim, which is often many years. We continually evaluate loss estimates associated with claims and losses related to these insurance coverages falling within the deductible of each coverage. Assumptions based on factors such as claim settlement patterns, claim development trends, claim frequency and severity patterns, inflationary trends, and data reasonableness will generally affect the analysis and determination of the “best estimate” of the projected ultimate claim losses. The results of these evaluations are used to both analyze and adjust our insurance loss reserves. As of December 31, 2021, insurance loss reserves were $94.3 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Accounting Changes
For discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and accounting changes, see Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
FORM 10-K 35
PART II