Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We financed our business in 2021 through available cash and cash flows from operating activities and financing activities. As of December 31, 2021, our cash balance was $6.1 million as compared to $2.1 million at December 31, 2020.
Generally, our net cash provided by operating activities is used to fund our day-to-day operating activities. Our largest source of operating cash flows is cash collections from our customers. Our primary short- and long-term liquidity requirements primarily arise from inventory purchases, employee-related expenditures, leasing of facilities, and general operating expenses, and interest and principal repayments related to our outstanding indebtedness. Net cash provided by operating activities was $2.1 million for 2021 compared to $0.8 million in 2020.
In 2021 and 2020, we used $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively, in investing activities related to expenditures on production tooling for new products and purchases of computer software and hardware. We expect to continue our investing activities, including capital expenditures. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase common stock under our stock repurchase programs.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was $2.5 million, compared to $895,000 during 2020. Financing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of $1.9 million in proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options and a net borrowing of $625,000 on the CalCap Loan (as defined in Note 3, Bank Financing Arrangements, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on From 10-K). Financing activities in 2020 consisted of proceeds of a loan of $1.06 million under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and a loan of $150,000 from the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) under its Economic Injury Disaster (“EIDL”) assistance program, offset by an approximately $1.41 million net payment of borrowings under our bank lines of credit, an approximately $333,000 repayment on our term loan and a $150,000 repayment on the SBA loan. The subordinated convertible note financing added approximately $1.43 million to net cash in 2020.
We can also borrow under the existing $2.5 million revolving credit facility that matures on January 31, 2023. On December 31, 2021, the Company had no outstanding drawings against the revolving credit facility.
The primary factors that influence our liquidity include the amount and timing of our revenues, cash collections from our customers, cash payments to our suppliers, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and share repurchases. We believe that our existing balances of cash, and capital resources, inclusive of available borrowing capacity on the revolving credit facility and funds generated from operations, are sufficient to meet anticipated capital requirements, fund our operations and support our growth. Our cash requirements, however, are subject to change as business conditions change.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in our Annual Reports on Form 10-Kfor the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The application of these policies requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on a combination of historical experience and reasonable judgment applied to other facts. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material to the financial statements. In addition, the use of different assumptions or judgments may result in different estimates. We believe our critical accounting policies that are subject to these estimates are: Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable Reserves, Inventory Valuation, Stock-Based Compensation, Income Taxes and Valuation of Goodwill.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States “”GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the financial statements.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
The basic computation of earnings (loss) per share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period presented in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 260, “Earnings Per Share”. The computation of diluted earnings per common share is based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents which would arise from the exercise of stock options and warrants outstanding using the treasury stock method and the average market price per share during the period. Common stock equivalents are not included in the diluted earnings per share calculation when their effect is antidilutive.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
On January 1, 2017, we adopted ASC 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” and implemented a new revenue recognition policy. Under the new policy, we recognize revenue on sales to distributors when shipping of product is completed and title transfers to the distributor, less a reserve for estimated product returns (sales and cost of sales). The reserves are based on estimates of future returns calculated from actual return history, primarily from stock rotations, plus knowledge of pending returns outside of the norm. As of December 31, 2021, the deferred revenue and deferred cost on shipments to distributors were approximately $407,000 and $159,000, respectively, compared to approximately $451,000 and $170,000, respectively, as of December 31, 2020.
We generally recognize revenues on sales to customers other than distributors upon shipment provided that contract with the customer is identified, performance obligations in the contract are satisfied, and the price is determined. Most of our customers other than distributors do not have rights of return except under warranty.
We earn revenue from an extended warranty service program offered on select products. Revenues from the extended warranty service program are recognized ratably over the life of the extended warranty contract. The amount of unrecognized warranty service revenue is classified as deferred service revenue and presented on our balance sheet in its short and long-term components.
We also earn revenue from services performed in connection with consulting and engineering development arrangements. For those contracts that include contract milestones or acceptance criteria we recognize revenue as such milestones are achieved or as such acceptance occurs. In some instances, the acceptance criteria in the contract requires acceptance after all services are complete and all other elements have been delivered, in which case revenue recognition is deferred until those requirements are met.
Accounts Receivable Allowance
We estimate the amount of uncollectible receivables at the end of each reporting period based on the aging of the receivable balance, historical trends, and communications with our customers. If actual bad debts are significantly different from our estimates our operating results will be affected.
Inventory Valuation
Our inventories primarily consist of component parts used to assemble our products after we receive orders from our customers. We purchase or have manufactured the component parts required by our engineering bill of materials. The timing and quantity of our purchases are based on order forecasts, the lead time requirements of our vendors, and on economic order quantities. At the end of each reporting period, we compare our inventory on hand to our forecasted requirements for the next nine-month period and reserve the cost of any inventory that is a surplus, less any amounts that we believe we can recover from disposal of goods or that we specifically believe will be saleable past a nine-month horizon. Our sales forecasts are based upon historical trends, communications from customers, and marketing data regarding market trends and dynamics. Surplus or obsolete inventory can also be created by changes to our engineering bill of materials. Charges for the amounts we record as surplus or obsolete inventory are included in cost of revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based awards to employees, including grants of employee stock options and restricted stocks, in our financial statements based on the grant date fair values of the share-based awards. We use a binomial lattice valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants. The binomial lattice model incorporates calculations for expected volatility, risk-free interest rates, employee exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior, and these factors affect the estimate of the fair value of the stock option grants.
Valuation of Goodwill
In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU) 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments in this update eliminate Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. The annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test is performed by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge should be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In addition, income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit should be considered when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable.
The Company tests its goodwill for impairment annually as of September 30th or more frequently when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the Company’s single reporting unit more likely than not exceeds its fair value. The Company wrote off its entire goodwill of $4.4 million as measured on September 30, 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method under ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements. Under this method, The Company determines deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities by using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent that it believes that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If the Company determines that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, it would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
The Company records uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740 on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the Company recognizes the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority.
Results of Operations for Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenue for 2021 was $23.2 million, an increase of 48% compared to revenue of $15.7 million for 2020. Revenue of Companion SocketScan products represented 69% of our 2021 revenue and increased 58% compared to 2020. Our Companion DuraScan products, which are weatherproof and ruggedized and primarily targeted at commercial, industrial, warehousing and outdoor application and their associated customers, represented about 16% of 2021 revenue and increased 37% compared to 2020. We upgraded all our DuraScan products to support themed field-replaceable battery, increased the durability and added healthcare specific options. Our Attachable scanners, DuraSled and 800 Series, made up of approximately 7% of our 2021 revenue and increased approximately 4% compared to 2020. The increase in revenue was driven by strong application-driven demand, particularly in retail as the economy reopened.
Gross Margins
Annual gross margins on revenue increased slightly to 53.6% in 2021 from 53.1% in 2020. The improvement in margins compared to last year can be primarily attributed to higher revenues and the absorption of fixed manufacturing overhead. The improvement was partially offset by higher component costs and higher shipping costs.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses in 2021 were approximately $4.0 million, an increase of 26% compared to expenses of approximately $3.1 million in 2020. The increases were primarily attributable to an increase in personnel expenses, (as we had realized a benefit in 2020 from our short-term cost reduction initiatives in this area), higher employee incentive-based compensation expense associated with improved financial performance, the inclusion of amortization and depreciation expenses of newly acquired intangible assets and equipment, and increased fees paid for contractors and consultants assisting with product development.
Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue were 17% in 2021 and 20% in 2020. We believe that a continued commitment to Research and Development activities is essential to maintain or achieve a leadership position for our existing products, to provide innovative new product offerings, and to provide engineering support for key customers. In addition, we consider our ability to accelerate time to market for new products to be critical to our revenue growth. Therefore, we expect to continue to make significant Research and Development investments in the future. The investment percentage is impacted by revenue levels and investing cycles.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expenses in 2021 were approximately $3.0 million, an increase of approximately 5% compared to $2.8 million in 2020. The increase in expense in 2021 was primarily due to increased fees paid for contractors and consultants assisting with website development and upgrades, the hiring of additional employee, and a reduction in the benefit realized from our short-term cost reduction initiatives of 2020, such benefit having not continued into 2021.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense in 2021 was $2.8 million, an increase of 22% compared to $2.3 million in 2020. The increase in expense during 2021 was due to higher employee incentive-based compensation expense associated with improved financial performance (as we had realized a benefit in 2020 from our short-term cost reduction initiatives in this area), higher professional fees associated with the filing of a shelf registration statement, higher proxy distribution costs resulting from a greatly increased number of beneficial owners of the Company’s stock and increased insurance costs.
Interest Expense, net of Interest Income
Interest expense and other, net of interest income and other, was approximately $199,000 in 2021 compared to approximately $97,000 in 2020. Interest expense in 2021 was primarily related to the subordinated convertible notes (see Note 4, Secured Subordinated Convertible Notes Payable, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information) and interest on bank term loan. Interest expense in 2020 was primarily related to interest on the bank term loan and credit line facilities, as well as secured subordinated convertible notes payable. Average total outstanding balance of bank term loan and credit lines during 2020 was $0.48 million. Additionally, interest expense in each of the comparable periods includes interest on equipment lease financing obligations.
Interest income reflects interest earned on cash balances. Interest income was nominal in each of the comparable periods, reflecting low average rates of return.
Income Taxes
The Company's effective tax rate was negative 45.6% in 2021 compared to 0% in 2020. The 2021 effective tax rate included discrete income tax benefits of $9.2 million resulting from the disqualifying disposition of incentive stock options and $0.5 million relating to stock-based compensation. The 2020 effective tax rate included the goodwill impairment charge of $4.47 million and stock-based compensation of $0.51 million, partially offset by $1.06 million for PPP loan forgiveness, which arrived a Federal taxable income of $0.29 million. The State taxable income, however, was $1.3 million due to the expenses on which the PPP loan proceeds were spent on are non-deductible in California. No deferred tax expense or benefit was recorded in 2020. As of January 1, 2020, the Company recognized a net cumulative-effect adjustment of $2.6 million ($0.5 million tax effected) related to the recognition of previously unrecognized windfall tax benefits resulting from the adoption of ASU 2016-09, “Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting.”. The adjustment increased net deferred tax assets and reduced Accumulated Deficit by the same amount.
Our net operating loss carryforwards do not begin expiring until the end of 2023 if not used. The Company’s deferred tax asset, primarily representing future income tax savings from the application of net operating loss carry forwards, was valued at $7.96 million and $6.06 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth summary quarterly statements of operations data for each of the quarters in 2020 and 2021. This unaudited quarterly information has been prepared on the same basis as the annual information presented elsewhere herein, and, in our opinion, includes all adjustments (consisting only of normal recurring entries) necessary for a fair presentation of the information for the quarters presented. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period.
We generally ship orders as received and therefore quarterly revenue and operating results depend on the volume and timing of orders received during the quarter, which are difficult to forecast. Historically, we have recognized a substantial portion of our revenue in the last month of the quarter. Operating results may also fluctuate due to factors such as the demand for our products, the size and timing of customer orders, the introduction of new products and product enhancements by us or our competitors, product mix, timing of software enhancements, manufacturing supply shortages, changes in the level of operating expenses, and competitive conditions in the industry. Because our staffing and other operating expenses are based on anticipated revenue, a substantial portion of which is not typically generated until the end of each quarter, delays in the receipt of orders can cause significant variations in operating results from quarter to quarter.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 are outlined in the table shown below:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding the status of recent accounting pronouncements.