Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements involving risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing transformational therapeutics for serious diseases with significant unmet medical need. Our mission is to improve patient outcomes and save lives. We have been focusing our development efforts on our immuno-oncology programs. In September 2021, we announced the launch of Duet. Duet integrates the management and clinical development of the Duet Platform. Duet Therapeutics, formerly Olimmune, was acquired by Scopus in June 2021.
The Duet Platform relies on a novel approach to immuno-oncology with a suite of bifunctional oligonucleotides that activate APCs within the tumor microenvironment, while alleviating tumor immunosuppression to jump-start T cell-mediated immune responses. The unique mechanism-of-action of these synthetic oligonucleotides comes from simultaneously targeting two intracellular immune pathways - STAT3, a master immune checkpoint inhibitor, and TLR9. The targeted inhibition of STAT3 reawakens immune cells and allows for the full potential of TLR9-driven innate and adaptive immune responses.
The Duet Platform is comprised of three distinctive, complementary CpG-STAT3 inhibitors:
·
RNA silencing
CpG-STAT3siRNA
(“DUET-01”)
·
Antisense
CpG-STAT3ASO
(“DUET-02”)
·
DNA-binding inhibitor
CpG-STAT3decoy
(“DUET-03”)
DUET-01 is in a Phase 1 clinical trial, as a monotherapy, for NHL. On March 2, 2022, the clinical trial sponsor publicly updated to May 2022 the possible start date for enrollment. The design of the existing investigator-sponsored clinical protocol for DUET-01, including the number of study visits, together with constraints on mobility and travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, has caused delays in enrollment. The company has been engaged in ongoing discussions with the sponsor, who has been evaluating the applicable protocol with a view to reducing and/or more closely concentrating subject visits. As a siRNA-based technology, DUET-01 is delivered intratumorally. Pursuant to the Kortylewski SRA, research is being initiated to evaluate increasing the stability of novel siRNA-based molecules to enable systemic delivery. DUET-02 is being developed for systemic delivery. We are, through Duet, developing DUET-02, which has a similar mechanism of action to DUET-01, except the STAT3 inhibitor is an ASO RNA molecule rather than a siRNA. The STAT3ASO molecule binds directly to the STAT3 mRNA, RNase H1 to degrade the STAT3 mRNA. The use of ASO permits other chemical modifications resulting in greater stability in human blood. This allows for systemic treatment of harder-to-reach solid tumors such as prostate or kidney cancers. Dose-range finding studies, GLP toxicology studies, and GMP manufacturing of the drug substance and product are all currently in process. Duet expects to file an IND for DUET-02 in Q4 2022 in advanced solid malignancies, with Phase 1 clinical trials anticipated to begin in Q1 2023 in the United States. DUET-03 uses an alternative to the destruction of mRNA to silence STAT3 activity, such as with DUET-01 and DUET-02, instead targeting the actual STAT3 transcription factor protein. Duet is also evaluating combination therapies with checkpoint inhibitors.
The company has licenses for additional drug candidates, including drug candidates targeting SSc and other fibrotic conditions and opioid-sparing pain treatments. As a result of the company’s increased emphasis on its immuno-oncology programs and other considerations, we have been continuing to reduce allocations of resources to other programs.
We have devoted significant resources to our development efforts relating to our drug candidates. On an ongoing basis, the company continues to refine, update and enhance its immuno-oncology pipeline and target indications, including prioritizing solid tumor indications. The company also continually evaluates the possibilities of additional studies with a view to enhancing, among other things, the effectiveness and method of delivery of our drug candidates and identifying additional protections for our intellectual property.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses. We anticipate that all of our expenses will increase substantially, including as we:
●continue our research and development efforts;
●contract with third-party research organizations to management our clinical and pre-clinical trials for our drug candidates;
●outsource the manufacturing of our drug candidates for clinical testing and pre-clinical trials;
●seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our drug candidates;
●maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
●add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel to support our research and development and regulatory efforts;
●continue to be engaged in litigation and actions taken by and/or against the Adverse Parties and Adverse Stockholders; and
●operate as a public company.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain marketing approval for one or more of our drug candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. Accordingly, we will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our operating activities through equity and debt offerings. We may also raise capital through government or other third-party funding and grants, collaborations and development agreements, strategic alliances, and licensing arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Moreover, our ability to raise capital is currently impeded by limited availability of authorized common stock. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would impair our ability to develop our drug candidates and would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.
We have incurred net losses in every year since our inception. Our net loss has materially increased for the year ended December 31, 2021. From inception (April 18, 2017) through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations through the issuance of common stock, warrants and convertible notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $41.5 million.
On April 1, 2022, the Company filed a Notification of Late Filing on Form 12b-25 (the “12b-25”) reporting that the Company’s Annual Report could not be filed within the prescribed time period without unreasonable effort or expense. Disclosure included in the 12b-25 provided that the Company “expects to report a material increase in net loss, key components of which are set forth below, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a net loss of approximately $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 is attributable principally to: (a) approximately $15 million of research and development expenses, including acquired in-process research and development expensed in connection with a key acquisition and (b) approximately $13 million of general and administrative expenses, including an aggregate of approximately $8 million of fees, costs and/or expenses relating to (i) a proxy contest for the 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders and related proceedings, including an action pursuant to Section 225 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and (ii) additional related litigation by or against the participants engaged in the proxy contest and other litigation by parties associated and/or acting with such participants. The amount set forth in (a) above includes non-cash expenses of approximately $12.6 million.” The approximately $15 million of research and development expenses includes approximately $8.1 million relating to the company’s acquisition of Olimmune in June 2021 and approximately $5.1 million in milestone consideration incurred in 2021 relating to the acquisition of Bioscience Oncology in June 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies and estimates are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the accounting policies are critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, was enacted. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued after the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as public companies that are not emerging growth companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that are not emerging growth companies.
As an “emerging growth company,” we also rely on exemptions from certain reporting requirements, including without limitation: (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the completion of an initial public offering; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Versus Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operation for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As set forth in the is Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview (“MD&A Overview”), our net loss has materially increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year earlier period. Our net losses were approximately $27.0 million and $10.9 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of approximately $16.1 million, or 148.1%. We anticipate our fiscal year net losses will continue to increase as we continue to advance our research and drug development activities and incur additional general and administrative expenses, including fees, costs and expenses relating to the Adverse Parties litigation.
Approximate financial results contained in the MD&A Overview correspond to the results in the summary table, above, as follows: “net loss of approximately $11 million” ($10.862 million); “approximately $15 million of research and development expenses” ($15.023 million); and “approximately $13 million of general and administrative expenses” ($12.611 million). As also noted in the MD&A Overview, of the approximately $15 million of research and development expenses, an aggregate of approximately $13.2 million related to the company’s acquisition of Olimmune in June 2021 and milestone consideration incurred in 2021 relating to the acquisition of Bioscience Oncology in June 2020.
Revenue
We did not have any revenue during our fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Our ability to generate product revenues in the future will depend almost entirely on our ability to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for, and then successfully commercialize a drug candidate, or enter into collaborations that provide for payments to us.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses
As contained in the summary table above and the narrative information referenced below the table, general and administrative expenses were approximately $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to approximately $2.7 million for the year earlier period. This increase reflects, in part, being a public company for the full year in 2021 as compared to approximately two weeks in 2020. General and administrative expenses constitute our second most significant category of expenses after research and development expenses, as described below. The full year of public company-related costs in 2021 includes such expenses related to public company reporting; professional fees; compliance with corporate governance and internal controls; directors and officers liability insurance; and compensation to certain members of the Board and Board committees. Additional public company expenses in 2021 include a full year of investor relations costs, including costs associated with participation in and sponsorship of various industry conferences and travel costs associated with investor conferences and investor meetings. General and administrative expenses also increased in 2021 relating to fees and expenses for the portions of prospective and completed acquisitions and financing transactions not otherwise included in research and development expense or accounted for as offsets to offering proceeds, respectively. The company completed a follow-on public offering in February 2021, the acquisition of Olimmune in June 2021, and a private placement in November 2021. A significant component of general and administrative expenses is compensation, including stock-based compensation, and/or benefits for our operating team, which is comprised of nine members, including our employees, including pursuant to employment contracts, executive officers who provide services pursuant to a management services agreement, and key consultants pursuant to consulting or advisory agreements. Our senior management consists of the President and Chief Executive Officer of Duet, our Chairman and our Vice Chairman, who are advised by the Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Board. General and administrative expenses include six months of post-acquisition general and administrative expenses of Olimmune in 2021. As also set forth in the MD&A Overview, summary table above, and narrative information referenced below the table, we incurred substantial general and administrative expenses commencing in 2021, including an aggregate of approximately $8 million of expenses relating to the Proxy Contest, including fees, costs and expenses of corporate and securities law and litigation counsel, and various other expenses incurred in connection with the contested election, and fees and expenses relating primarily to litigation by or against the Adverse Parties, the Adverse Stockholders, and/or parties associated or acting with such Adverse Parties and Adverse Stockholders, including the Delaware Litigation, the Section 225 Action, the Derivative Complaint, and certain other pending and withdrawn actions. Additional Proxy Contest costs include fees and expenses of strategic and crisis communications and proxy solicitation. These litigation costs also include legal fees and other expenses incurred in connection with the legal advice provided to the Board and certain directors and committees thereof, including relating to discussions and negotiations relating to attempted negotiated resolutions with certain Adverse Parties and the internal review conducted by the Audit Committee in 2021. See “Item 1. Business - Litigation, Proxy Contest and Other Matters.” for additional information.
Research and Development and Expenses
We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expenses consist of the costs associated with our acquisition of intellectual property that is classified as in-process research and development and fees incurred under our agreements with COH, the NIH and Hebrew University, including the expenses associated with securities issued in connection with such agreements, as applicable. For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred research and development expenses of approximately $15.0 million and $7.4 million, respectively, an increase of approximately $7.6 million or 102.4%. Of these amounts, approximately $12.7 million and $6.3 million were non-cash expenses incurred in connection with our acquisitions of Duet and Bioscience Oncology in 2021 and 2020, respectively. These expenses increased primarily as a result of the costs related to our acquisition of Duet, the upfront costs under the Duet License Agreements and costs associated with the filing of the IND and preparation for the Phase 1 clinical trial for DUET-01. Expenses relating to the acquisition of Duet, the Duet license costs, and the DUET-01 IND and Phase I clinical trial were $7.0 million, $1.1 million, and $1.2 million, respectively. These new expenses were offset by an approximately $1.6 million decrease in in-process research and development costs related to our acquisition of Bioscience Oncology and DUET-01 in 2020. We anticipate that our research and development expenses, exclusive of any in-process research and development relating to our acquisitions, will increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our drug candidates.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consists of changes in the fair value of a warrant liability, as well as interest expense on our Convertible Notes. Interest expense increased by approximately by $69,000, or 9.8%, from $706,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $775,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily related to the amortization of discount and accrued interest on the Convertible Notes issued between February 2020 and September 2020 totaling approximately $2.9 million. Effective July 31, 2021, the holders of the Convertible Notes converted, under the original terms of the Convertible Notes, an aggregate of approximately $3.1 million of initial principal and accrued and unpaid interest at a rate of $0.50 per W Warrant, resulting in the issuance of 6,169,771 W Warrants. The remaining outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest through July 31, 2021 of approximately $0.1 million was repaid in cash. Accordingly, the company has no further obligations under the Convertible Notes at December 31, 2021.
Other income related to the change in fair value of warrant liability was approximately $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no income or expense related to the warrant liability in prior year. This income during the year ended December 31, 2021 is associated with the decrease of a liability related to certain warrants issued in August and September 2020 which were reclassified from equity to warrant liability on June 25, 2021. Until their reclassification into equity on July 31, 2021, we were required to revalue warrants classified on our balance sheet as a liability at the end of each reporting period and reflect a gain or loss from the change in fair value in the period in which the change occurred. We calculated the fair value of such warrants using a Monte Carlo daily price simulation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since our inception and, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $41.5 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years.
Since April 18, 2017 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations principally with approximately $29.1 million in gross proceeds from the sale of convertible notes, common stock, warrants and units comprised of common stock and warrants, the exercise of a portion of such warrants, and units comprised of common stock and additional investment options (“AIOs”). We had cash of approximately $4.0 million and approximately $7.9 million at March 31, 2022 and December 31, 2021, respectively.
The company is party to litigation in several matters as of the date hereof. Litigation is highly unpredictable and the costs of litigation, including legal fees and expenses, and the possible liabilities, including monetary damages, to which the company could become subject could be significant. Any such liabilities could have a material adverse effect on the company. The company has not recorded any liability as of December 31, 2021 because a potential loss was not probable or reasonably estimable given the preliminary nature of the various proceedings. Subsequent to December 31 2021, the company has continued to commit significant capital resources relating to ongoing litigation. The company’s existing capital resources will not be sufficient to fully implement its business plan, including the development of its drug candidates, while also continuing to be subject to or pursuing ongoing litigation. The company will require additional financing and there can be no assurance that any such financing will be available on satisfactory terms, or at all. Moreover, our ability to raise capital is currently impeded by limited availability of authorized common stock. Further, there can be no assurance that the absence of any additional financing, as necessary, will not have a material adverse effect on the company. See “Legal Proceedings”.
Future Funding Requirements
We have not generated any revenue. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our drug candidates. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue to research, develop, and seek regulatory approval for, our drug candidates. We expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of any of our drug candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As a result, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations to fund future clinical trials and pre-clinical testing for our drug candidates, general and administrative costs and public company and other expenses, including potential indemnification obligations and legal fees (primarily related to litigation). See “Legal Proceedings” for additional information concerning such matters. We expect to finance our cash needs primarily through the sale of our debt and equity securities. However, our ability to raise capital is currently impeded by limited availability of authorized common stock. We may also raise capital through government or other third-party funding and grants, collaborations and development agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our drug candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of additional capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of our drug candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
●the progress, costs, results and timing of our drug candidates’ future clinical studies and future pre-clinical trials, and the clinical development of our drug candidates for other potential indications beyond their initial target indications;
●the willingness of the FDA and the EMA to accept our future drug candidate clinical trials, as well as our other completed and planned clinical and pre-clinical studies and other work, as the basis for review and approval of our drug candidates;
●the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA, EMA and any other regulatory approvals;
●the number and characteristics of drug candidates that we pursue, including our drug candidates in future pre-clinical development;
●the ability of our drug candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
●our need to expand our research and development activities;
●the costs of litigations with Adverse Parties;
●the costs associated with securing and establishing commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
●the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, products, drug candidates and technologies;
●our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our licensed intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
●our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
●the effect of competing technological and market developments;
●our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems;
●the duration and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, and associated operational delays and disruptions and increased costs and expenses;
●the economic factors, geopolitical risks and sanctions and other terms; and
●timing and success of any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of debt financings and equity offerings, government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of debt and equity securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
The company is continually monitoring the impact of the global pandemic on its business, especially since the company conducts activities in multiple locations, both in and outside of the United States. These locations are New York, New York and Los Angeles, California and Israel. At various times since the onset of the global pandemic, these locations have been severely affected by COVID-19 and, as a result, have been subject to various requirements to stay at home and self-quarantine, as well as constraints on mobility and travel, especially international travel.
While the company continues to advance its development programs, the company is also continually assessing the impact of the global pandemic on its product development efforts, including any impact on the timing and/or costs for its clinical trials, IND-enabling work, and other research and development activities. There is no certainty as to the length and severity of societal disruption caused by COVID-19. Consequently, the company does not have sufficient visibility to predict the impact of the global pandemic on its operations and overall business, including delays in the progress of its planned pre-clinical work and clinical trials, or by limiting its ability to recruit physicians or clinicians to run its clinical trials, enroll patients or conduct follow-up assessments in its clinical trials. Further, the business or operations of its strategic partners and other third parties with whom the company conducts business may also be adversely affected by the global pandemic. The company continues to monitor the impact of the global pandemic, including regularly reevaluating the timing of its research and development and clinical milestones. Until the company is able to gain greater visibility as to the impact of the global pandemic, the company intends to commit greater resources to its existing and future programs in the United States and is slowing investment in program development outside the United States.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
As previously noted, we, as an emerging growth company, have elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period provided for in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards, which allows us to defer adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies unless otherwise noted.
We have reviewed recent accounting pronouncements and concluded they are either not applicable to the business or no material effect is expected on the consolidated financial statements as a result of future adoption.
Effect of Inflation and Changes in Prices
We do not believe that inflation and changes in prices will have a material effect on our operations.