Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations:
The following review of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere within this Report.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This item contains certain non-GAAP financial measures. A “non-GAAP financial measure” is defined as a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the consolidated statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows of the company. Pursuant to the requirements of Regulation G, we have provided a reconciliation below of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
The non-GAAP financial measures used are: (1) organic revenue growth (decline), which represents the change in revenue excluding the impacts of acquisitions and divestitures, the impact of the additional week in 2020 and estimated currency translation effects; and (2) adjusted operating income (loss), which represents operating income (loss) excluding goodwill impairment charges and restructuring costs. These measures are presented because management uses this information to monitor and evaluate financial results and trends. Therefore, management believes this information is also useful for investors.
Financial Summary
Results of Operations
Our reportable segments consist of the Americas segment, the EMEA segment and the Other category. Unallocated corporate expenses are reported as Corporate.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue.
The current year results of operations are presented in comparison to the prior year within the sections below. For a discussion of the 2021 results of operations in comparison to 2020, see "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
During 2022, demand for our products improved due to a broad recovery in our industry as many customers restarted paused projects and made investments in support of their workplace strategies. Our orders grew 25% compared to the prior year and reflected growth across most geographies. Broad-based supply chain disruptions, including ocean freight constraints and port congestion, domestic transportation and logistical challenges, and labor shortages caused us to extend lead times and impacted our ability to manufacture and complete deliveries to our customers. The order growth and the supply chain disruptions resulted in a backlog of customer orders at the end of 2022 of approximately $787, which was 77% higher than the prior year.
As a result of the supply chain disruptions during the year, we incurred significant inflation, net of pricing benefits, primarily in steel and other commodities, and higher freight and labor costs and inefficiencies, which decreased our gross profit by approximately $106 in 2022 compared to the prior year. During 2022, we announced three list price increases as a result of these impacts to our cost of sales, and we expect these price increases to begin offsetting the current level of inflation in 2023.
We recorded net income of $4.0 and diluted earnings per share of $0.03 in 2022 compared to net income of $26.1 and diluted earnings per share of $0.22 in 2021. In 2021, the results included: (1) a goodwill impairment charge related to the EMEA segment, which had the effect of decreasing net income by $17.6 and diluted earnings per share by $0.15, and (2) restructuring costs in the Americas segment, which had the effect of decreasing net income by $17.4 and diluted earnings per share by $0.15. Operating income of $20.1 in 2022 represented a decrease of $22.9 compared to the prior year. The decrease was due to higher cost of sales as a percentage of revenue and higher operating expenses as a percentage of revenue, partially offset by the benefits of higher revenue and the impact of the restructuring costs and goodwill impairment charge recorded in the prior year. Excluding the impact of the restructuring costs and the impairment charge, adjusted operating income in 2022 decreased by $69.1 compared to the prior year.
Revenue of $2,772.7 in 2022 represented an increase of $176.5 or 6.8% compared to the prior year. Revenue increased by 3.1% in the Americas, 17.1% in EMEA and 13.9% in the Other category. After adjusting for $16.0 of currency translation effects and $44.8 from acquisitions, the organic revenue growth was $115.7 or 4% compared to the prior year. The organic revenue growth was 1% in the Americas, 15% in EMEA and 12% in the Other category.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 230 basis points to 72.5% of revenue in 2022 compared to 2021. Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 370 basis points in the Americas, and by 210 basis points in the Other category, while EMEA improved by 210 basis points compared to the prior year. The year-over-year increase was driven by approximately $80 of higher inflation costs, net of pricing benefits, and approximately $26 of higher costs related to labor and logistics inefficiencies as a result of supply chain disruptions, partially offset by approximately $21 of benefits from shifts in business mix and a $8.9 reduction in variable compensation expense.
Operating expenses of $741.4 in 2022 represented an increase of $57.2, or 40 basis points as a percentage of revenue compared to the prior year, which benefited from approximately $41 of lower employee costs as a result of temporary hour and pay reductions. Compared to 2021, operating expenses in 2022 included:
•$18.8 of lower variable compensation expense,
•approximately $17 of higher marketing, product development and sales expenses,
•$15.4 of gains from the sale of land in 2022 (compared to gains of $6.7 from the sale of land in 2021) and
•$14.1 from acquisitions.
Operating expenses increased by $28.8 or 80 basis points as a percentage of revenue in the Americas, increased by $17.0 (but decreased by 140 basis points as a percentage of revenue) in EMEA and increased by $8.9 (but decreased by 80 basis points as a percentage of revenue) in the Other category.
We recorded an income tax benefit of $2.4 in 2022, which included $3.6 of discrete tax benefits. The income tax benefit of $0.2 in 2021 included $11.7 of benefits related to the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and the non-deductible nature of the goodwill impairment charge. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, Investment Income and Other Income, Net
Interest expense in 2022 decreased compared to 2021 due to the impact of interest expense on borrowings under our global credit facility in Q1 2021, which were repaid during Q2 2021. Miscellaneous income (expense), net in 2021 included a $2.8 gain related to additional proceeds received in 2021 from the partial sale of an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate in 2018.
Business Segment Disclosure
See Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our business segments.
Americas
The Americas segment serves customers in the U.S., Canada, the Caribbean Islands and Latin America with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products marketed to corporate, government, healthcare, education and retail customers through the Steelcase, Coalesse, AMQ, Smith System, Orangebox and Viccarbe brands.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue.
Operating income in the Americas declined by $52.6 in 2022 compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by higher cost of sales as a percentage of revenue and higher operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. The 2021 results included $28.6 of restructuring costs. Excluding the impact of the restructuring costs, adjusted operating income in 2022 decreased by $81.2 compared to the prior year.
The Americas revenue represented 68.7% of consolidated revenue in 2022. Revenue of $1,905.0 represented an increase of $56.5 or 3.1% compared to 2021. Order growth of 23% and the supply chain disruptions resulted in a backlog of customer orders at the end of 2022 of approximately $580. After adjusting for $41.8 from acquisitions and $5.2 of currency translation effects, the organic revenue growth in 2022 was $9.5 or 1% compared to the prior year.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 370 basis points to 73.2% of revenue in 2022. The year-over-year increase was driven by approximately $75 of higher inflation costs, net of pricing benefits, and approximately $24 of higher costs related to labor and logistics inefficiencies as a result of supply chain disruptions, partially offset by $12.6 of benefits from shifts in business mix (which included growth from certain product categories that generate higher gross margins) and $7.9 of lower variable compensation expense.
Operating expenses increased by $28.8, or 80 basis points as a percentage of revenue, in 2022 compared to the prior year, which benefited from approximately $30 of lower employee costs as a result of temporary hour and pay reductions. Compared to 2021, operating expenses in 2022 included:
•$15.4 of gains from the sale of land in 2022 (compared to gains of $6.7 from the sale of land in 2021),
•$13.7 of lower variable compensation expense,
•$11.3 from acquisitions,
•approximately $6 of higher marketing, product development and sales expenses and
•approximately $4 of higher discretionary spending in other functional areas.
EMEA
The EMEA segment serves customers in Europe, the Middle East and Africa primarily under the Steelcase, Coalesse, Orangebox and Viccarbe brands, with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
EMEA operating results improved by $35.6 in 2022 compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by higher revenue, lower cost of sales as a percentage of revenue and lower operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. The prior year included a $17.6 goodwill impairment charge related to our Orangebox U.K. reporting unit. Excluding the impact of the goodwill impairment charge, adjusted operating income in 2022 improved by $18.0 compared to the prior year.
EMEA revenue represented 21.6% of consolidated revenue in 2022. Revenue increased by $87.2 or 17.1% compared to the prior year. The increase was broad-based across most markets, primarily driven by growth in the U.K., including Orangebox, and Iberia. After adjusting for $7.5 of currency translation effects and $3.0 from an acquisition, the organic revenue growth was $76.7 or 15% compared to the prior year.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased by 210 basis points to 72.3% in 2022 compared to the prior year. The improvement was driven by the benefits of higher revenue and $9.7 of benefits from shifts in business mix (as the prior year included a higher mix of project business), partially offset by approximately $3 of higher inflation costs, net of pricing benefits.
Operating expenses increased by $17.0 in 2022, but decreased by 140 basis points as a percentage of revenue compared to the prior year, which included approximately $8 of lower employee costs as a result of temporary hour and pay reductions. The remaining increase was driven by approximately $6 of higher marketing, product development and sales expenses, $3 of higher discretionary spending and employee costs in other functional areas and $2.8 from an acquisition, partially offset by $2.8 of lower variable compensation expense.
Other
The Other category includes Asia Pacific and Designtex. Asia Pacific serves customers in Australia, China, India, Japan, Korea and other countries in Southeast Asia primarily under the Steelcase brand with a comprehensive portfolio of furniture, architectural and technology products. Designtex sells textiles, wall coverings and surface imaging solutions specified by architects and designers directly to end-use customers through a direct sales force primarily in North America. In 2020, the Other category also included PolyVision, which was sold in Q4 2020.
________________________
* Currency translation effects represent the net effect of translating prior year foreign currency revenues using the average exchange rate on a monthly basis during the current year.
** 2020 included 53 weeks of revenue.
Operating income in the Other category decreased by $3.4 in 2022 compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by higher cost of sales as a percentage of revenue, partially offset by higher revenue and lower operating expenses as a percentage of revenue.
Revenue in the Other category represented 9.7% of consolidated revenue in 2022. Revenue in 2022 increased by $32.8 or 13.9% compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by all markets except for India.
After adjusting for $3.3 of currency translation effects, the organic revenue growth was $29.5 or 12% compared to the prior year.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue increased by 210 basis points to 68.6% in 2022 compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by approximately $4 of higher inflation costs, net of pricing benefits, $1.2 of higher freight costs and inefficiencies due to supply chain disruptions, $1.2 of unfavorable shifts in business mix (which included a higher mix of project business) and $0.9 of higher overhead costs, partially offset by the benefits of higher revenue.
Operating expenses increased by $8.9, but decreased by 80 basis points as a percentage of revenue, compared to the prior year. The prior year included approximately $6 of lower employee costs as a result of temporary pay reductions. The current year included approximately $4 of higher marketing, product development and sales expenses, partially offset by $1.3 of lower variable compensation expense.
Corporate
Corporate costs include unallocated portions of shared service functions such as information technology, corporate facilities, finance, human resources, research, legal and customer aviation, plus deferred compensation expense and income or losses associated with COLI.
Operating expenses increased by $2.5 in 2022 compared to the prior year. The increase was driven by $6.1 of lower COLI income and $2.9 of higher discretionary spending, partially offset by $5.8 of lower deferred compensation expense and $0.9 of lower variable compensation expense compared to the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents are used to fund day-to-day operations, including seasonal disbursements, particularly the annual payment of accrued variable compensation and retirement plan contributions in Q1 of each fiscal year. During normal business conditions, we target a range of $75 to $175 for cash and cash equivalents to fund operating requirements. In addition, we may carry additional liquidity for potential investments in strategic initiatives and as a cushion against economic volatility, and from time to time, we may allow our cash and cash equivalents to temporarily fall below our targeted range to fund acquisitions and other growth initiatives.
As of February 25, 2022, we held a total of $200.9 in cash and cash equivalents. Of that total, 77% was located in the U.S. and the remaining 23%, or $45.8, was located outside of the U.S., primarily in China (including Hong Kong), Mexico, Malaysia, Singapore and the U.K.
COLI investments are recorded at their net cash surrender value. Our investments in COLI policies are intended to be utilized as a long-term funding source for long-term benefit obligations. However, COLI can also be used as a source of liquidity. We believe the financial strength of the issuing insurance companies associated with our COLI policies is sufficient to meet their obligations. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Availability under credit facilities may be reduced related to compliance with applicable covenants. See Liquidity Facilities for more information.
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities
In 2022, we used cash in working capital, primarily driven by increased inventory levels in connection with supply chain disruptions and increased accounts receivable due to revenue growth. Annual payments related to accrued variable compensation and retirement plan contributions totaled $50.4 in 2022 compared to $148.0 in 2021.
Cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Capital expenditures in 2022 were primarily related to investments in manufacturing operations, product development, information technology and customer-facing facilities. Capital expenditures in 2022 were higher compared to 2021 due to reduced spending in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We sold land for proceeds of $17.2 in 2022 and $7.1 in 2021. In 2022, we completed the acquisition of Viccarbe using cash of $32.6. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Other investing activities in 2022 included $7.8 of proceeds from COLI policy maturities. Other investing activities in 2021 included $3.3 of additional proceeds from the partial sale of an investment in an unconsolidated affiliate in 2018.
Cash used in financing activities
We paid dividends of $0.10 per common share in Q1 2022 and dividends of $0.145 per common share in each of Q2 2022, Q3 2022 and Q4 2022. We paid dividends of $0.07 per common share in Q1 2021 and dividends of $0.10 per common share in each of Q2 2021, Q3 2021 and Q4 2021.
In 2021, we borrowed and repaid $250.0 under our global credit facility to provide additional liquidity in light of the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During 2022 and 2021, we made common stock repurchases of $55.2 and $42.7, respectively, all of which related to our Class A Common Stock. These common stock repurchases included repurchases of Class A Common Stock of $6.0 and $4.0 in 2022 and 2021, respectively, which were made to satisfy participants' tax withholding obligations upon the issuance of shares under equity awards, pursuant to the terms of our Incentive Compensation Plan.
As of February 25, 2022, we had $6.4 of remaining availability under the $150 share repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors in 2016.
Liquidity Facilities
Our total liquidity facilities as of February 25, 2022 were as follows:
We have a $250.0 global committed bank facility in effect through 2025. As of February 25, 2022, there were no borrowings outstanding under the facility, our availability to borrow under the facility was not limited, and we were in compliance with all covenants under the facility.
We have a $12.5 committed credit facility related to a subsidiary, which has current availability of $4.0 based on eligible accounts receivable of the subsidiary. As of February 25, 2022, $2.4 was outstanding under the facility.
We have unsecured uncommitted short-term credit facilities with various financial institutions with up to $3.8 of U.S. dollar obligations and up to $6.6 of foreign currency obligations available for working capital purposes as of February 25, 2022. These credit facilities have no stated expiration date but may be changed or canceled by the banks at any time. There were no borrowings outstanding under the uncommitted facilities as of February 25, 2022.
Total consolidated debt as of February 25, 2022 was $482.5. Our debt primarily consists of $444.9 in term notes due in 2029 with an effective interest rate of 5.6%. In addition, we have a term loan with a balance as of February 25, 2022 of $34.9. This term loan has a floating interest rate based on 30-day LIBOR plus 1.20% and is due in 2024. The term notes are unsecured, and the term loan is secured by our two corporate aircraft. The term notes and the term loan contain no financial covenants and are not cross-defaulted to our other debt facilities.
See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Liquidity Outlook
At February 25, 2022, our total liquidity, which is comprised of cash and cash equivalents and the cash surrender value of COLI, aggregated to $368.9. Our liquidity position, funds available under our credit facilities and cash generated from operations are expected to be sufficient to finance our known and foreseeable liquidity needs, including our material cash requirements.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material committed cash requirements are as follows:
•Debt: Principal obligations on our debt are $5.1 during 2023 and $477.4 thereafter. Interest obligations on our debt are estimated to be $23.4 during 2023 and approximately $23 in each year thereafter until maturity. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•Operating leases: We have commitments related to corporate offices, sales offices, showrooms, manufacturing and distribution facilities, vehicles and equipment under non-cancelable operating leases that expire at various dates through 2035. Minimum payments under our operating lease obligations are estimated to be $51.6 during 2023 and $200.1 thereafter. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•Employee benefit and compensation obligations: We have obligations related to contributions and benefit payments expected to be made for post-retirement, pension and defined contribution plans and deferred compensation plans. Our obligations related to post-retirement benefit plans are not contractual, and the plans could be amended at the discretion of our Compensation Committee. Payments related to post-retirement and pension plans are estimated to be $8.6 during 2023 and $61.1 from 2024 through 2032. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information. Our deferred
compensation obligations are estimated to be $8.0 during 2023 and $48.5 thereafter. See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We also have other planned material usages of cash which we consider discretionary. This includes plans for capital expenditures which are expected to be approximately $70 to $80 in 2023. In addition, we fund dividend payments as and when approved by our Board of Directors. On March 23, 2022, we announced a quarterly dividend on our common stock of $0.145 per share, or approximately $16, to be paid in Q1 2023.
The amounts included above are as of February 25, 2022. Our material cash requirements are subject to fluctuation based on business requirements, economic volatility or investments in strategic initiatives. The amounts of these obligations could change materially over time as new contracts or obligations are initiated and existing contracts or obligations are terminated or modified. We anticipate the cash expected to be generated from future operations and current cash and cash equivalents, funds available under our credit facilities and funds available from COLI will be sufficient to fulfill our existing material cash requirements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These principles require the use of estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Although these estimates are based on historical data and management’s knowledge of current events and actions it may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates if different conditions occur. The accounting estimates that typically involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity are listed and explained below. These estimates were discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and affect all of our segments.
Business Combinations and Goodwill
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is allocated to goodwill. The allocation of the purchase consideration requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. These estimates are reviewed with our advisors and can include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows related to acquired dealer relationships, trademarks and know-how/designs and require estimation of useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, actual results may differ from these estimates. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings. During 2022, we acquired Viccarbe. See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Annually in Q4, or earlier if conditions indicate it is necessary, the carrying value of each reporting unit is compared to an estimate of its fair value. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment charge. Goodwill is assigned to and the fair value is tested at the reporting unit level. In 2022, we evaluated goodwill using nine reporting units: the Americas, Red Thread, EMEA, Asia Pacific, Designtex, AMQ, Smith System, Orangebox U.K. and Viccarbe.
During Q4 2022, we performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill in our reporting units. In the test for potential impairment, we measured the estimated fair values of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) valuation method. The DCF analysis calculated the present value of projected cash flows and a residual value using discount rates that ranged from 8% to 12%. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows in measuring fair value. Assumptions used in our DCF valuations, such as discount rates, forecasted revenue growth rates, expected operating margins and estimated capital investment, are consistent with our internal projections as of the time of the assessment. If we had concluded that it was appropriate to increase the discount rate in our analysis by 100 basis points to estimate the fair value of each reporting unit, the fair value of each of our reporting units would still have exceeded its carrying value. These assumptions could change over time, which may result in future impairment charges. We corroborated the results of the DCF analysis with a market-based approach that used observable comparable company information to support the appropriateness of the fair value estimates. There were no impairment charges recorded for any reporting units in 2022.
As of February 25, 2022, we had remaining goodwill recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as follows:
As of the valuation date, the enterprise value available for goodwill determined as described above is substantially in excess of the underlying reported value of goodwill for all reporting units. See Note 2 and Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Taxes
Our annual effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates and tax planning strategies in various jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining our tax expense, measuring our expected ability to realize deferred tax assets and evaluating our tax positions.
We are audited by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service under the Compliance Assurance Process (“CAP”). Under CAP, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service works with large business taxpayers to identify and resolve issues prior to the filing of a tax return. Accordingly, we expect to record minimal liabilities for U.S. Federal uncertain tax positions. Tax positions are reviewed regularly for state, local and non-U.S. tax liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. These assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all positive and negative evidence. These expectations require significant judgment and are developed using forecasts of future taxable income that are consistent with the internal plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business as of the time of the evaluation. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. A 1% change in statutory tax rates used to compute our deferred tax assets and liabilities would have increased or decreased our income tax expense in 2022 by approximately $3.
Future tax benefits are recognized to the extent that realization of these benefits is considered more likely than not. As of February 25, 2022, we recorded tax benefits from net operating loss carryforwards of $41.2. We also have recorded valuation allowances totaling $2.4 against these assets, which reduced our recorded tax benefit to $38.8. It is considered more likely than not that a $38.8 cash benefit will be realized on these carryforwards in future periods. This determination is based on the expectation that related operations will be sufficiently profitable or various tax, business and other planning strategies will enable us to utilize the carryforwards. To the extent that available evidence raises doubt about the realization of a deferred tax asset, a valuation allowance would be established or adjusted. A change in judgment regarding our expected ability to realize deferred tax assets would be accounted for as a discrete tax expense or benefit in the period in which it occurs.
Additionally, we have deferred tax assets related to tax credit carryforwards of $26.2 comprised primarily of U.S. foreign tax credits, U.S. general business credits and investment tax credits granted by the Czech Republic. The U.S. foreign tax credit and general business credit carryforward periods are 10 and 20 years, respectively. Utilization of foreign tax credits is restricted to 21% of foreign source taxable income in that year. We have projected our pretax domestic earnings and foreign source income and expect to utilize $18.2 of excess foreign tax credits and $2.9 of general business credits within the allowable carryforward periods. The carryforward period for the Czech Republic investment tax credits is also 10 years. We have projected our pretax earnings in the Czech Republic and expect to utilize the entire $5.1 of credits within the allowable carryover period. Valuation allowances are recorded to the extent realization of the tax credit carryforwards is not more likely than not.
See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Benefits
We sponsor a number of domestic and foreign plans to provide pension, medical and life insurance benefits to retired employees. As of February 25, 2022 and February 26, 2021, the fair value of plan assets, benefit plan obligations and funded status of these plans were as follows:
The post-retirement medical and life insurance plans are unfunded. As of February 25, 2022, approximately 75% of our unfunded defined benefit pension obligations is related to our non-qualified supplemental retirement plan that is limited to a select group of management approved by the Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors and is unfunded. The post-retirement medical and life insurance plans were frozen to new participants in 2003. The non-qualified supplemental retirement plan was frozen to new participants in 2016, and the benefits were capped for existing participants. A portion of our investments in whole life and variable life COLI policies with a net cash surrender value of $168.0 as of February 25, 2022 are intended to be utilized as a long-term funding source for post-retirement medical benefits, deferred compensation and defined benefit pension plan obligations. The asset values of the COLI policies are not segregated in a trust specifically for the plans and thus are not considered plan assets. Changes in the values of these policies have no effect on the post-retirement benefits expense, defined benefit pension expense or benefit obligations recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
We recognize the cost of benefits provided during retirement over the employees’ active working lives. Inherent in this approach is the requirement to use various actuarial assumptions to predict and measure costs and obligations many years prior to the settlement date. Key actuarial assumptions that require significant management judgment and have a material impact on the measurement of our consolidated benefits expense and benefit obligations include, among others, the discount rate and health care cost trend rates. These and other assumptions are reviewed with our actuaries and updated annually based on relevant external and internal factors and information, including, but not limited to, benefit payments, expenses paid from the plan, rates of termination, medical inflation, regulatory requirements, plan changes and governmental coverage changes.
To conduct our annual review of discount rates, we perform a matching exercise of projected plan cash flows against spot rates on a yield curve comprised of high-quality corporate bonds as of the measurement date (the Ryan ALM Top Third curve). The measurement dates for our retiree benefit plans are consistent with the last day in February. Accordingly, we select discount rates to measure our benefit obligations that are consistent with market indices at the end of February. In 2022, the weighted average discount rate used to determine the estimated fair value of our pension plan obligations was increased to 2.5% from 1.7%. The weighted-average discount rate used to determine the estimated fair value of our post-retirement plan obligations was increased to 3.38% from 2.58%. Selecting these discount rates in 2022 resulted in a $5.8 actuarial gain recorded related to our defined benefit plan obligations and a $2.6 actuarial gain recorded related to our post-retirement plan obligations.
Based on consolidated benefit obligations as of February 25, 2022, a one percentage point decline in the discount rate used for benefit plan measurement purposes would have changed the 2022 consolidated benefit obligations by approximately $13. All obligation-related actuarial gains and losses are amortized using a straight-line method over the average remaining service period of active plan participants.
To conduct our annual review of healthcare cost trend rates, we model our actual claims cost data over a historical period, including an analysis of the pre-65 age group and other important demographic components of our covered retiree population. This data is adjusted to eliminate the impact of plan changes and other factors that would tend to distort the underlying healthcare cost inflation trends. Our initial healthcare cost trend rate is reviewed annually and adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with recent historical experience and our expectations regarding short-term future trends. As of February 25, 2022, our initial rate of 5.80% for pre-age 65 retirees was trended downward by each year, until the ultimate trend rate of 4.50% was reached. The ultimate trend rate is adjusted annually, as necessary, to approximate the current economic view on the rate of long-term inflation plus an appropriate healthcare cost premium. Post-age 65 trend rates are not applicable as our plan provides a fixed subsidy for post-age 65 benefits.
Despite the previously described policies for selecting key actuarial assumptions, we periodically experience material differences between assumed and actual experience. Our consolidated net unamortized prior service credits and net actuarial losses of $0.9 and $10.6, respectively, are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Forward-Looking Statements
From time to time, in written and oral statements, we discuss our expectations regarding future events and our plans and objectives for future operations. These forward-looking statements discuss goals, intentions and expectations as to future trends, plans, events, results of operations or financial condition, or state other information relating to us, based on current beliefs of management as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, us. Forward-looking statements generally are accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “intend,” “may,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” "target" or other similar words, phrases or expressions. Although we believe these forward-looking statements are reasonable, they are based upon a number of assumptions concerning future conditions, any or all of which may ultimately prove to be inaccurate. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements and vary from our expectations because of factors such as, but not limited to, competitive and general economic conditions domestically and internationally; acts of terrorism, war, governmental action, natural disasters, pandemics and other Force Majeure events; cyberattacks; the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions taken by various governments and third parties to combat the pandemic; changes in the legal and regulatory environment; changes in raw material, commodity and other input costs; currency fluctuations; changes in customer demand; and the other risks and contingencies detailed in this Report and our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We undertake no obligation to update, amend or clarify forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding recently issued accounting standards.