Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes, and other information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to a variety of factors, including without limitations those set forth under the cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Additionally, you should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
SecureTech is an emerging growth company focused on developing and marketing advanced security and safety technologies. SecureTech’s products preserve life, protect property, and prevent crime. Under the Top Kontrol brand, SecureTech currently sells the world’s only anti-theft and anti-carjacking automobile security and safety system. Under its wholly-owned Piranha subsidiaries, SecureTech intends to develop and acquire secure green energy data centers, advanced cybersecurity technologies, and blockchain and cryptocurrency systems and platforms for mining, storage, and trading exchanges.
Limited Operating History; Need for Additional Capital
There is limited historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are an emerging growth business with limited operating history. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns, such as increases in marketing costs, increases in administrative expenditures associated with daily operations, increases in accounting and audit fees, and increases in legal fees related to filings and regulatory compliance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had incurred ($455,731) in losses since our inception on March 2, 2017. We have not achieved profitability and expect to continue incurring net losses into subsequent fiscal periods. We anticipate incurring significant operating expenses and, as a result, will need to generate substantial revenues to achieve profitability, which may never occur. Even if we do achieve profitability, we may be unable to sustain or increase profitability on an ongoing basis, which could cause us to go out of business.
To become profitable and competitive, we must successfully sell our current product, Top Kontrol, and continue innovating and developing new products, technologies, and services that the marketplace will accept. We anticipate relying on equity sales of our common stock to continue to fund our business operations until we can generate sufficient revenues to cover our operating expenses, which may never happen. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to our then existing stockholders. There is no assurance that we will be able to make any additional sales of our equity securities or arrange for debt or other financings to fund our planned business activities. We may also rely on loans from our management or other significant shareholders. However, there are no assurances that management or any of our significant shareholders will provide us with any additional funds in the future.
We are continually exploring new financing sources to meet our need for additional cash, including raising funds through sales of our equity securities and loans. We cannot provide any assurances that our efforts to secure additional financing will be successful. We have no guarantee that future funding will be available to us on acceptable terms. If financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue, develop, or expand our operations. Further, future equity financing could result in additional and substantial dilution to existing shareholders.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Sales
Sales for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 were $31,713, compared to $20,266 for the same period of 2020. This $11,447, or 56.5%, increase in sales is the result of having Top Kontrol available for purchase for the entire fiscal year. All sales were attributable to Top Kontrol.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our early Top Kontrol sales efforts. In particular, we have encountered numerous delays in attracting sales personnel and automotive technicians into our training and certification program. We cannot predict with any certainty how long this pandemic will continue to hamper our Top Kontrol sales and training expansion efforts.
Because we did not begin marketing and selling Top Kontrol until after this pandemic began, we have no historical perspective to quantify or speculate on the extent to which COVID-19 affects our overall sales and financial condition.
Cost of Goods Sold
Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of purchasing components and circuitry from various vendors then utilizing third-party contract manufacturing facilities to produce our products, with final assembly conducted at our Minnesota headquarters. Cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,915, compared to $5,882 for the same period of 2020. This $3,033, or 51.6%, increase in cost of goods sold is the result of increased sales of Top Kontrol units. As a percentage of overall sales, cost of goods sold was 28.1% and 29.0% during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $22,798, compared to $14,384 for the same period of 2020. This $8,414, or 58.5%, increase in gross profits is the result of increased sales of Top Kontrol units. Our gross profit margin was 71.9% and 71.0% during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consisted of two components: general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses. Total operating expenses were $131,511 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $78,825 for the same period of 2020, representing an increase in operating expenses of $52,686, or 66.8%, during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
General and administrative expenses consisted of selling, general and administrative expenses, legal and accounting expenses, and regulatory compliance expenses. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 our general and administrative expenses were $124,267, compared to $78,395 for the same period of 2020, representing an increase of $45,872, or 58.2%. The increase in general and administrative expenses is the result of higher accounting and regulatory compliance expenses and increased marketing expenses related to selling Top Kontrol.
Research and development expenses are expenses related to the development and certification of our products. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 our research and development expenses were $7,245, which were attributable to early work on our second-generation Top Kontrol product. Our research and development expenses for the same period of 2020 were $430, which were attributable to a new product line that has temporarily halted while we focus on making improvements to our Top Kontrol product line. The result was an increase in research and development expenses of $6,815, or 1,438.4%. Research and development expenses will continue to vary considerably into the foreseeable future.
Loss From Operations
As a result of the preceding, our loss from operations was ($108,713) during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared with ($64,441) for the same period of 2020. This $44,272, or 68.7%, increase in our loss from operations is the result of a significant increase in our overall operating expenses.
Net Loss
As a result of the preceding, our net loss was ($108,713) during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared with ($64,441) for the same period of 2020. This $44,272, or 68.7%, increase in our net loss is the result of a significant increase in our overall operating expenses.
Total Stockholders’ Equity.
Our stockholders’ equity was $250,504 as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal demands for liquidity are related to our efforts to generate sales, produce inventory, and expenditures related to sales, regulatory compliance, and general corporate purposes. We intend to meet our liquidity demands, including capital expenditures related to the manufacture of inventory and the expansion of our business, primarily through cash flow provided by operations and sales of our securities.
We rely primarily on internally generated cash flow and available working capital to support operations and growth. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any credit facilities. Although we believe that our current cash and anticipated cash receipts from Top Kontrol sales will be sufficient to meet our planned working capital requirements and capital expenditures over the next 12 months, we are always exploring additional sources of new capital. Without limiting our available options, future financings will most likely be through the sale of additional shares of our common stock. We may also include warrants, options, and/or rights in conjunction with any future issuances of our common stock. However, we can give no assurance that future financing will be available to us and, if available to us, in amounts or on terms acceptable to us.
We had net working capital of $250,504 as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $114,537, or 84.2%, from net working capital of $135,967 as of December 31, 2020. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 73-to-1 on December 31, 2021.
The following is a summary of cash provided by or used in each of the indicated types of activities during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was ($99,028), a decrease of ($10,031), or (9.2%), from cash used in operating activities of ($109,059) during the same period of 2020. The decrease in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to a decrease in inventories of ($9,018).
Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $223,250, compared to $65,894 for the same period of 2020. This $157,356, or 238.8%, increase in cash inflow from financing activities was from selling additional shares of our common stock in a private placement offering.
Impact of the COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the disease known as COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, COVID-19 coronavirus has spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic causing the U.S. government to impose travel restrictions between the United States, Europe, and many other countries worldwide, which have subsequently cycled between being lifted, reimposed, and modified on an ongoing basis. As of December 31, 2021, the COVID-19 panic continues to negatively affect the global economy, significantly disrupt global supply chains, and create major financial and retail marketplace disruptions.
Because we began manufacturing and selling Top Kontrol during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we cannot determine, compare, or estimate with any degree of accuracy to what extent the pandemic may be hindering our sales efforts. While we believe this pandemic has had a material impact on our business, particularly relating to sales of Top Kontrol, we do not have enough operating history to accurately evaluate or quantify the extent that this pandemic may have impacted the following areas of our business:
•
Raw material and component supply chains
•
Product sales
•
Training and educating prospective Top Kontrol Certified Technicians
•
Marketing and advertising efficiencies
Uncertainties regarding the economic impact of COVID-19 are likely to result in sustained market turmoil through the fiscal year ending December 31, 2022, while many businesses continue to operate at diminished capacities and the global supply chain remains fractured. Many market experts believe businesses will continue to experience adverse effects and supply chain disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic into the fiscal year ending December 31, 2023.
Going Concern Consideration
Our independent registered public accounting firm has issued a going concern opinion in their audit report dated March 30, 2022, which can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on March 30, 2022. This means that our auditors believe there is substantial doubt that we can continue as an ongoing business for the next 12 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet activities or operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The accompanying financial statements of SecureTech have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. Because a precise determination of many assets and liabilities depends on future events, the preparation of financial statements for a period necessarily involves the use of estimates made using careful judgment. Actual results may vary from these estimates.
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in a global slowdown of economic activity, which is likely to decrease demand for a wide variety of goods and services while also disrupting supply chains, sales channels, marketing activities, and general business operations for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained at local, regional, and worldwide levels. At this point, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. As of the date of issuance of these financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require us to update our estimates, judgments, or adjust the carrying value of our assets or liabilities. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained and is recognized in the financial statements as soon as they become known. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and any such differences may be material to our financial statements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, SecureTech considers highly liquid financial instruments purchased with a maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, SecureTech had no cash equivalents.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements” and ASC 825, Financial Instruments, requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. It establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. It prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
Inventory and Cost of Sales
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or realizable value, using the weighted average cost method. When an impairment indicator suggests that the carrying amounts of inventories might not be recoverable, Management reviews such carrying amounts and estimates the net realizable value based on the most reliable evidence available at that time. An impairment loss is recorded if the net realizable value is less than the carrying value. Impairment indicators considered for these purposes are, among others, obsolescence, decrease in market prices, damage, and a firm commitment to sell.
Net Loss per Share Calculation
Basic net loss per common share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per share is calculated similarly to basic loss per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. SecureTech excludes all potentially dilutive securities from its diluted net loss per share computation since their effect would be anti-dilutive because SecureTech recorded a loss for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
SecureTech’s primary source of revenue is from the sale of our Top Kontrol product. We began selling Top Kontrol in late April 2020.
Top Kontrol requires installation by a Certified Top Kontrol Technician. To become a Certified Top Kontrol Technician, an automotive technician must complete a one-day hands-on course hosted by SecureTech. Failure to have Top Kontrol installed by a Certified Top Kontrol Technician voids the product’s limited liability warranty.
Because of this professional installation requirement, SecureTech generally sells its products to and through Certified Top Kontrol Technicians and Authorized Dealers. In the instances where SecureTech sells directly to the end-user, product installation is performed by authorized SecureTech personnel.
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customers are satisfied. Revenue is recorded net of marketing allowances, volume discounts, and other forms of variable consideration. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our product to the customer and payment has been received. SecureTech does not offer terms or credit to any of its customers.
Revenue Recognition; ASC 606 Five-Step Model
Under ASC 606, SecureTech recognizes revenue from the sale of service contracts by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue Recognition; General Right of Return
Customers are allowed to return goods that are defective (warranty returns). In some instances, customers may be allowed to return a limited number of units for periodic stock adjustment returns. Such stock adjustment returns would be limited to no more than 5% of their total units sold.
As is standard in the industry, we only will accept returns from active customers. If a customer ceases doing business with us, we have no further obligation to accept additional product returns from that customer.
Income Taxes
SecureTech accounts for income taxes pursuant to FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under FASB ASC 740-10-25, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the bases of certain assets and liabilities for income tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified according to the financial statement classification of the assets and liabilities generating the differences.
SecureTech maintains a valuation allowance with respect to deferred tax assets. SecureTech establishes a valuation allowance based upon the potential likelihood of realizing the deferred tax asset and taking into consideration SecureTech’s financial position and results of operations for the current period. Future realization of the deferred tax benefit depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income within the carryforward period under the Federal tax laws.
Changes in circumstances, such as SecureTech generating taxable income, could cause a change in judgment about its ability to realize the related deferred tax asset. Any change in the valuation allowance will be included in income in the year of the change in estimate.
Election to Use Extended Transitional Period Under Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”)
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(2) of the JOBS Act, which allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There are various updates recently issued, most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to have a material impact on SecureTech’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.