Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for factors that could cause or contribute to such differences.
Overview
We are a bi-coastal contract development and manufacturing organization, or CDMO, with capabilities spanning pre-Investigational New Drug, or IND, development to commercial manufacturing and packaging for a wide range of therapeutic dosage forms with a primary focus in the area of small molecules. With an expertise in solving complex manufacturing problems, Recro is a leading CDMO providing development, end-to-end regulatory support, clinical and commercial manufacturing, aseptic fill/finish, lyophilization, packaging and logistics services to the global pharmaceutical market. In addition to our experience in handling DEA-controlled substances and developing and manufacturing advanced dosage forms, Recro has the expertise to deliver on our clients’ pharmaceutical development and manufacturing projects, regardless of complexity level. We do all of this in our best-in-class facilities that, in the aggregate, total 145,000 square feet, in Gainesville, Georgia and San Diego, California.
We currently manufacture the following key products with our key commercial partners: Ritalin LA®, Focalin XR®, Verelan PM®, Verelan SR®, Verapamil PM, Verapamil SR, Donnatal liquids and tablets and Scot-Tussin cough and cold liquids, as well as supporting numerous development stage products.
During the third quarter of 2021, we acquired IriSys, LLC, or IriSys, an independent San Diego-based CDMO, with a number of highly attractive features including significant capabilities beyond oral solid dose, including sterile and non-sterile injectables, liquid and powder filled capsules, tablets, oral liquids, liposomes and nano/micro-particles, topical formulations and ophthalmic droppers. In 2020, we launched our clinical trials support services capabilities, which includes preparation of clinical trial supplies, as well as specialized services dedicated to the development and current Good Manufacturing Practices, or cGMP, of high-potency products.
Our manufacturing and development capabilities include formulation, product development from formulation through clinical trial and commercial manufacturing, and specialized capabilities for solid oral dosage forms, extended release and controlled substance manufacturing, as well as high potency development and manufacturing. With the acquisition of IriSys, our capabilities have been expanded beyond oral solid dose to include sterile injectables oral liquids, tablets, topicals, liquid/powder filled capsules, ophthalmic droppers, liposomes and nano/microparticles. In addition, the acquisition adds new capabilities in the areas of aseptic fill/finish and lyophilization and established bi-coastal footprint from which to better serve clients within the U.S., as well as globally. In a typical collaboration, we work with our partners to develop product candidates or new formulations of existing product candidates. We also typically exclusively manufacture and supply clinical and commercial supplies of these proprietary products and product candidates.
We have used cash flow generated by our business primarily to fund the growth of our CDMO business, to fund a historical acute care research and development business that was spun off in 2019, and to make payments under our credit facility. We believe our business will continue to contribute cash to fund our growth, make payments under our credit facility and other general corporate purposes.
COVID-19
We continue to closely monitor developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which continues to have adverse effects on the U.S. and world economies, including the commercial activities of our customers and their peers. While we are committed to continue providing essential pharmaceutical products to our customers, we are also taking all necessary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees. These developments include:
Operations. We are continuing to follow appropriate safety protocols including strict social distancing and other protective measures for employees supporting essential operations at our plant. We are also supporting continued remote work arrangements for other personnel not required to work on site.
Business development. We continue to experience lower than expected growth in our development business, which we believe is partially attributable to COVID-19. We have responded to these challenges by adopting new methods for meeting and contacting customers. Meanwhile, some customers have begun easing restrictions, but these measures vary among customers and from state to state. Other customers continue to delay their development plans for a variety of reasons such as concerns about the timing of clinical trials.
Manufacturing demand. We believe that there continues to be lower end-user demand for some of the commercial products we manufacture as compared to periods prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Third party national data demonstrates that there was a meaningful impact of COVID-19 on the reduction of total prescriptions filled by patients across most therapeutic areas, including chronic cardiovascular and pediatric medications.
Logistics challenges. As global logistics and supply chain issues continue to present obstacles to the U.S. economy and our business, we will continue to work to overcome these challenges. We also expect to continue facing inflationary pressure on raw materials, labor and logistics. During 2021, we experienced minimal supply chain disruption.
Our sales and manufacturing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 were disrupted as a result of the pandemic due to production slowdowns, stoppages and decreased demand for the products we manufacture. While we do not currently expect that future results will be materially impacted by the pandemic, there can be no assurance that such future results will not be impacted. While vaccines have proven effective in reducing the severity and mortality of COVID-19, including the variants that have evolved to date, the overall vaccination rate in the United States has not reached the level required for herd immunity. Certain variants of COVID-19, such as the delta and omicron variants, are proving to be more easily spread than earlier variants. We may also be adversely impacted by broader economic effects associated with the pandemic such as inflation, changes in laws and general volatility in the markets. The continued low vaccination rate, and the emergence of new variants, which could prove resistant to existing vaccines, could again result in major disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide and our business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
Financial overview
Revenues
We recognize three types of revenue: manufacturing, profit-sharing and research and development.
Manufacturing
We recognize manufacturing revenue from the sale of products we manufacture for our commercial partners. Manufacturing revenues are recognized upon transfer of control of a product to a customer, generally upon shipment, based on a transaction price that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to as specified in the agreement with the commercial partner, which could include pricing and volume-based adjustments.
Profit-sharing
We recognize profit-sharing or royalty revenue, collectively referred to as profit-sharing revenue, related to the sale of products by our commercial partners that incorporate our technologies. Profit-sharing revenues are generally recognized under the terms of the applicable license, development and/or supply agreement. For arrangements that include sales-based profit-sharing and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue when the related sales occur by the commercial partner. For arrangements that include sales-based profit-sharing and the license is not deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue when the performance obligation to which the profit-sharing has been allocated has been satisfied, which is upon transfer of control of a product to a customer. In these cases, significant judgment is required to calculate the estimated variable consideration from such profit-sharing using the expected value method based on historical commercial partner pricing and deductions. Estimated variable consideration is partially constrained due to the uncertainty of price adjustments made by our commercial partners, which are outside of our control. Factors causing price adjustments by our commercial partners include increased competition in the products’ markets, mix of volume between the commercial partners’ customers, and changes in government pricing.
Research and development
Research and development revenue includes services associated with formulation, process development, clinical trial material and clinical trial support services, as well as custom development of manufacturing processes and analytical methods for a customer’s non-clinical, clinical and commercial products. Such revenues are recognized at a point in time or over time depending on the nature and particular facts and circumstances associated with the contract terms.
In contracts that specify milestones, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Milestone payments related to arrangements under which we have continuing performance obligations are deferred and recognized over the period of performance. Milestone payments that are not within our control, such as submission for approval to regulators by a commercial partner or approvals from regulators, are not considered probable of being achieved until those submissions are submitted by the customer or approvals are received.
In contracts that require revenue recognition over time, we utilize input or output methods, depending on the specifics of the contract, that compare the cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire performance obligation. Under these contracts, the customer typically owns the product details and process, which have no alternative use. These projects are customized to each customer to meet its specifications and typically only one performance obligation is included. Each project represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The customer also retains control of its product as the product is being created or enhanced by our services and can make changes to its process or specifications upon request.
Cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expenses
Cost of sales consists of inventory costs, including production wages, material costs and overhead, and other costs related to the recognition of revenue. Selling, general and administrative expenses consists of salaries and related costs for administrative, public company costs, business development personnel as well as legal, patent-related expenses and consulting fees. Public company costs include compliance, auditing services, tax services, insurance and investor relations.
In October 2021, we integrated and reorganized our collective employee base to support a multi-site organization. As a result, certain employees in administrative roles are supporting the entire company instead of plant operations. Costs associated with these employees, including employee compensation and other expenses, are classified in selling, general and administrative expenses prospectively from October 1, 2021.
Our business development expenses increased during 2021 with the expansion of our sales team in various geographies, in anticipation of business growth from new formulation and development capabilities, as well as the expansion of the team through the acquisition of IriSys.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we qualified for approximately $4.4 million of federal employee retention credits, all of which was recognized as an offset to expense. We did not qualify for or recognize any such credits in 2020, and we do not expect to qualify for or recognize any additional credits in future periods.
Amortization of intangible assets
Historically, we recognized amortization expense related to an intangible asset for our profit-sharing and contract manufacturing relationships on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of six years. Amortization stopped when the intangible asset reached the end of its useful life in April 2021. With the acquisition of IriSys, we are recognizing amortization expense related to acquired customer relationships, backlog and trademarks and trade names on a straight-line basis over estimated useful lives of 7, 2.4, and 1.5 years, respectively.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the periods presented primarily relates to our Athyrium senior secured term loans and the amortization of related financing costs. In addition, following the acquisition of IriSys, there is additional interest expense related to interest on the sellers note which was a component of the IriSys acquisition purchase price.
Net operating losses and tax carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss, or NOL, carry forwards of approximately $135.9 million, $127.7 million of which have an indefinite carry forward period. The remaining $8.2 million of federal NOL carry forwards, $137.7 million of state NOL carry forwards and federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $4.6 million are also available to offset future taxable income, but they will begin to expire at various dates beginning in 2028 if not utilized. We believe that it is more likely than not that the deferred income tax assets associated with our U.S. operations will not be realized, and as such, there is a full valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Key indicators of performance
To evaluate our performance, we monitor a number of industry-standard key indicators such as:
•Safety and human capital management, as measured by recordable injuries, good saves and employee retention;
•Operational excellence, as measured by the percentage of our orders that are delivered on-time and in full;
•New business growth, as measured by value of new contracts signed; and
•Financial operating results, as measured by revenue and Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we discuss and reconcile to its nearest GAAP measure elsewhere in our public financial reporting. We believe that supplementing our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP with non-GAAP measures is useful to investors, creditors and others in assessing our performance. These measurements should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported GAAP results because they may include or exclude certain items as compared to similar GAAP-based measurements, and such measurements may not be comparable to similarly-titled measurements reported by other companies. Rather, these measurements should be considered as an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that provide a more complete understanding of our business.
Results of operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue. The increase of $8.9 million was primarily the result of increases in revenue due to the acquisition of IriSys as well as higher revenues from our clinical trial materials business including revenue from a commercial product tech transfer project. Despite the discontinuation of two commercial product lines by our commercial partners announced in the first quarter of 2020, our legacy commercial business has remained relatively flat in 2021 compared to 2020 as our other commercial products saw growth in 2021 compared to 2020 rebounding from lower volumes in 2020 due to impacts to the market from COVID-19.
Cost of sales. The increase of $1.5 million was primarily due to costs from the San Diego facility due to the acquisition of IriSys and is partially offset by lower costs due to the prior year reduction in force and certain employment incentive tax credits in 2021.
Selling, general and administrative. The increase of $0.3 million was primarily related to deal and integration costs related to the acquisition of IriSys and administrative expenses associated with the addition of our San Diego team offset by lower public company costs and stock-based compensation expense. As a result of our integration and reorganization, effective October 1, 2021, certain expenses associated with employees who now support our multi-site organization structure and operations are classified in selling, general and administrative expenses. Prior to October 1, 2021, these employees supported our plant operations and were classified in cost of sales.
Amortization of intangible assets. The decrease of $1.6 million was the result of the amortization of CDMO royalties and contract manufacturing relationships acquired in 2015 ending on April 10, 2021 offset by amortization related to the acquisition of IriSys for acquired customer relationships, backlog and trademarks and trade names.
Interest expense. The decrease of $4.1 million was primarily due to reduced term loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement with Athyrium as well as a decrease in the LIBOR base rate of interest on our term loans under the Credit Agreement. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in interest from the sellers note which was a component of the IriSys acquisition purchase price.
Gain on extinguishment of debt. In June 2021, the PPP Note and all accrued interest thereon was forgiven.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. The decrease of $32.7 million was primarily the result of customer ordering patterns in the prior year and the loss of Verapamil SR market share by a commercial partner in the first quarter of 2020 due to the re-entry of a competitor. Our commercial partner has sustained its market position for Verapamil SR capsules since the end of the first quarter of 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in decreased end-user demand, inventory rebalancing by our commercial partners and slower than expected new business starts. In addition, revenue declined due to the discontinuation of two commercial product lines by our commercial partners. Higher revenues from our clinical trial materials new business growth activities has partially offset the decrease, including a significant new commercial product tech transfer project.
Cost of sales. The increase of $3.1 million was not proportionate to the decrease in revenue primarily due to lower commercial manufacturing volumes and the related impact on fixed costs expensed through cost of sales, despite making reductions in the work force and implementing cost saving measures. Cost savings generated from these activities are expected to continue into 2021. Further contributing to cost of sales was increased cost of development sales on higher clinical trial material new business revenues.
Selling, general and administrative. The decrease of $1.8 million was primarily related to lower public company costs, which were partially offset by our new business efforts and the addition of the clinical trial support services to our early cGMP offering in the second quarter of 2020.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization expense was $2.6 million for both periods, which was related to the amortization of the CDMO royalties and contract manufacturing relationships intangible asset over its estimated useful life.
Change in warrant valuation. Previously, certain warrants were outstanding whose fair value was remeasured each period with changes in fair value recognized in earnings. The last of those warrants were exercised in November 2019.
Interest expense. The increase of $0.2 million was primarily due to additional term loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement with Athyrium in the first quarter of 2019 offset by a decrease in the LIBOR base rate of interest on our term loans under the Credit Agreement.
Discontinued operations. In November 2019, our former Acute Care business was spun-out from us through our former wholly-owned subsidiary, Baudax Bio. As a result, that business’s results are included in the 2019 period but not the 2020 period.
Liquidity and capital resources
At December 31, 2021, we had $25.2 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily from results of operations and the issuance of equity and debt. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our capital expenditures were $5.3 million to scale and support our expansion of capabilities.
We are party to a credit agreement with Athyrium, or the Credit Agreement, which has been fully drawn. The Credit Agreement requires us to repay the outstanding principal amount of $100.0 million on December 31, 2023. The Credit Agreement also includes certain financial covenants that the Company will need to satisfy on a monthly and quarterly basis, including: (i) maintaining a permitted net leverage ratio, calculated as our indebtedness, net of cash and cash equivalents, divided by EBITDA, each as defined in the Credit Agreement; and (ii) a minimum amount of cash and cash equivalents on hand.
We are also party to an amended common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital Fund LLC, or Aspire Capital. The amended agreement provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the agreement, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase, at our sole election, up to an aggregate value of $41.2 million in shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, there is availability to issue up to $30.0 million or 6,199,299 shares of common stock under the 2019 Common Stock Purchase Agreement.
In August 2021, we acquired IriSys for $50.2 million by paying $24.0 million in cash, net of cash acquired, and issuing a note and equity with fair values of $5.3 million and $20.9 million, respectively, to the former equity holders of IriSys.
We may require additional financing or choose to refinance certain of these instruments, which could include debt refinancing, sale of real-estate and/or other assets, strategic development, licensing activities and/or marketing arrangements or through public or private sales of equity or debt securities from time to time. Financing may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all, and our failure to raise capital when needed could materially adversely impact our growth plans and our financial condition or results of operations. Further, our ability to access capital market or otherwise raise capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Additional debt or equity financing, if available, may be dilutive to the holders of our common stock and may involve significant cash payment obligations and covenants that restrict our ability to operate our business or to access capital.
Sources and uses of cash
Continuing operations
Cash flows from operating activities represents our income or loss from continuing operations as adjusted for stock-based compensation, depreciation, asset impairment expense, non-cash interest expense, changes in fair value of warrants and amortization of intangibles, a gain on extinguishment of debt as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities. The increase in cash flows from operations in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the decrease in net loss from continuing operations and an increase in accrued interest and accrued expense offset by cash used in increases in accounts receivable and our contract asset. The decrease in cash flows from operations in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the increase in our net loss from continuing operations, partially offset by cash provided by decreases in accounts receivable, our contract assets and inventory due to lower revenue levels.
Net cash used in investing activities for each of the three years includes capital expenditures to scale and support our expansion of capabilities. With the inclusion of IriSys, we anticipate that 2022 capital expenditures will increase as we continue to maintain our existing capabilities as well as support the growth of our clinical trials business and other new business acquired from IriSys. In 2021, net cash used in investing activities also included $24.0 million paid to acquire IriSys. In 2019, net cash used in investing activities also included offsetting $12.1 million purchases and maturities of short-term investments for a zero net cash flow impact.
Net cash provided by financing activities included:
•During 2021, net proceeds from an issuance of common stock of $32.1 million, partially offset by debt repayments of $10.1 million, financing costs of $1.4 million paid in connection with the debt amendments and common stock issuances, and $0.7 million to pay employee tax withholdings upon vesting of equity awards.
•During 2020, net proceeds of $11.1 million from issuance of common stock through our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital and $4.4 million from a PPP Note, partially offset by a $1.1 million repayment of the PPP Note, $10.1 million to repay term loans with Athyrium and $1.1 million to pay employee tax withholdings upon vesting of equity awards.
•During 2019, net proceeds of $43.6 million from issuance of term loans with Athyrium and $6.0 million from the exercise of options, partially offset by the contribution of $19.0 million to Baudax Bio in connection with the Separation, payment of $2.9 million of financing costs related to the issuance of term loans with Athyrium and $1.7 million to pay employee tax withholdings upon vesting of equity awards.
Discontinued operations
Net cash used in discontinued operations during 2020 was to settle outstanding liabilities related to our former acute care research and development business and for 2019 was used primarily to fund the research activities of our former Acute Care business.
Forward-looking factors
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•the extent to which we in-license, acquire or invest in products, businesses and technologies;
•the timing and extent of our manufacturing and capital expenditures;
•our ability to maintain or expand our relationships and contracts with our commercial partners;
•our ability to grow and diversify our business with new customers, including our ability to meet desired project outcomes with development customers;
•our ability to regain profitability;
•our ability to comply with stringent U.S. & foreign government regulation in the manufacture of pharmaceutical products, including cGMP and DEA requirements;
•our ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or sale of real-estate or other assets;
•the costs of preparing, submitting and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property claims; and
•the extent to which health epidemics and other outbreaks of communicable diseases, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, could disrupt our operations or materially and adversely affect our business and financial conditions.
We might use existing cash and cash equivalents on hand, additional debt, equity financing, sale of real-estate or other assets or out-licensing revenue or a combination thereof to fund our operations or acquisitions. If we increase our debt levels, we might be restricted in our ability to raise additional capital and might be subject to financial and restrictive covenants. Our shareholders may experience dilution as a result of the issuance of additional equity or debt securities. This dilution may be significant depending upon the amount of equity or debt securities that we issue and the prices at which we issue any securities.
Contractual commitments
The table below reflects our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Debt obligations consist of principal, an exit fee of 1% of that principal, and interest on $100.0 million of outstanding term loans under our credit facility with Athyrium, $6.1 million of notes issued to the former members of IriSys and a small finance lease. Because the Athyrium term loans bear interest at a variable rate based on LIBOR, we estimated future interest commitments utilizing the LIBOR rate as of December 31, 2021. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the future interest obligations are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
(2)Purchase obligations consist of cancelable and non-cancelable purchase commitments related to inventory, capital expenditures and other goods or services. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets.
(3)We are party to two operating leases for development facilities in California and Georgia that end in 2031 and 2025, respectively. The leases each include options to extend at our discretion.
(4)We have entered into employment agreements with each of our named executive officers that provide for, among other things, severance commitments of up to $1.3 million should we terminate the named executive officers for convenience or if certain events occur following a change in control. In addition, we would be subject to other contingencies of up to $3.6 million in the aggregate if certain events occur following a change in control. Because these obligations are contingent, the amounts are not included in the table above.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have determined that certain accounting policies and estimates are critical to the preparation of the financial statements. We have prepared the following additional disclosures to supplement our summary of significant accounting policies located in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business combinations
Business acquisitions are accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 805, Business Combinations. In purchase accounting, identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed, are recognized at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, and any remaining purchase price is recorded as goodwill. In determining the fair values of the consideration transferred, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, particularly with respect to long-lived tangible and intangible assets. Critical estimates used in valuing tangible and intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions as part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the business acquisition date, our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the purchase price allocation period, which is generally one year from the business acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. For changes in the valuation of intangible assets between preliminary and final purchase price allocation, the related
amortization is adjusted in the period it occurs. Subsequent to the purchase price allocation period any adjustment to assets acquired or liabilities assumed is included in operating results in the period in which the adjustment is determined.
Although our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, actual results may differ. See note 3 to the consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this report for more information related to the acquisition of IriSys.
Revenue recognition for variable consideration in sales-based profit-sharing arrangements
For sales-based profit-sharing where the license for intellectual property is not deemed to be the predominant item to which the profit-sharing relates, we recognize revenue upon transfer of control of the manufactured product. In these cases, significant judgment is required to calculate the estimated variable consideration from such profit-sharing using the expected value method based on historical commercial partner pricing and deductions.
We are required to exercise significant judgment to estimate the value of the variable consideration, which we partially constrain due to the uncertainty of price adjustments made by our commercial partners, which are outside of our control. Factors causing price adjustments by our commercial partners include increased competition in the products’ markets, mix of volume between the commercial partners’ customers, and changes in government pricing. If we were to increase or decrease the percentage value of the constraint by 5%, we would recognize a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, to revenue and earnings of $0.5 million.
Impairment of goodwill
We are required to review, on an annual basis, the carrying value of goodwill to determine whether impairment may exist. The impairment analysis for goodwill consists of an optional qualitative assessment potentially followed by a quantitative analysis. If we determine that the carrying value of our reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge to goodwill is recorded for the excess.
The critical judgments involved in our annual qualitative test include an assessment of unfavorable events and a judgment whether those events put our goodwill at risk of impairment, which if determined to be at risk would require us to perform a quantitative test. The critical judgments and estimates in our quantitative test include selection and weighting of available valuation methods and the selection of assumptions that may be used in those methods.
In 2021, we concluded qualitatively that our goodwill was not at risk of impairment due to the substantial excess of fair value over the carrying value of our reporting unit that we observed in prior period quantitative testing. The carrying value of our goodwill was $41.1 million at December 31, 2021. Any changes to our judgments or estimates could result in a goodwill impairment of up to that amount in a future period.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We are required to review the carrying value of long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment or amortizable intangible assets, for recoverability whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of individual assets or asset groups may not be recoverable.
Assumptions and estimates used in the evaluation of recoverability are subjective, and changes in these assumptions may negatively impact projected undiscounted cash flows, which could result in impairment charges in future periods. On an ongoing periodic basis, we evaluate our long-lived assets for indicators of impairment such as economic, governmental or regulatory events.
In 2020, we received notification from a commercial partner of a discontinuation of a commercial product line. As a result of this event, we recognized $1.0 million of impairment expense related to property, plant and equipment associated with that product line.