ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere herein.
Critical Accounting Policies
The consolidated financial statements of 374Water Inc., formerly known as PowerVerde, Inc. (“374Water Inc.,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company”) are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that effect the amounts reported in the financial statements and related notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants
The Company accounts for common stock purchase warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 815- 40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). Based on the provisions of ASC 815- 40, the Company classifies as equity any contracts that (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement, or (ii) gives the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). The Company classifies as assets or liabilities any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside the control of the Company), or (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). All outstanding warrants as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were classified as equity. The Company utilizes the Black Scholes Model to complete valuation of warrants and uses the inputs for the Black Scholes Model including Risk Free Rate, Dividend yield, stock price, exercise price, term, and volatility. The Company uses other public company comparison for Volatility and pulls the risk-free rate from the federal treasury rates based on the term. The Company’s exercise price is pulled from the warrant agreement and the stock price is pulled from the market close on the day of issuance. The Company’s term for the warrants utilizes the simplified method for the calculation of the term.
Intellectual Property
The Company reviews intangible assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company uses an estimate of the undiscounted cash flows over the remaining life of its long-lived assets, or related group of assets where applicable, in measuring whether the assets to be held and used will be realizable. In the event of impairment, the Company would discount the future cash flows using its then estimated incremental borrowing rate to estimate the amount of the impairment.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation based on ASC Topic 718-Stock Compensation which requires expensing of stock options and other share-based payments based on the fair value of each stock option awarded. The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This model requires management to estimate the expected volatility, expected dividends, and expected term as inputs to the valuation model.
Overview
374Water, Inc. (the “Company”, “374Water”, “We”, or “Our”) is a Delaware corporation which was incorporated on September 8, 2005. The Company was initially formed to develop, commercialize, and market a series of unique electric generating power systems designed to produce electrical power with zero emissions or waste byproducts, based on a patented pressure-driven expander motor and related organic rankine cycle technology.
On April 16, 2021, 374Water Inc. (f/k/a PowerVerde, Inc.) entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger”) with 374Water, Inc., a privately held company based in Durham, North Carolina, (“374Water Private Company”) and 374Water Acquisition Corp., a newly-formed wholly-owned subsidiary of PowerVerde.
As a result of the Merger, the former 374Water Private Company shareholders own 65.8% of our issued and outstanding common stock and 53.8% of our issued and outstanding voting stock (which includes the preferred stock on an as converted basis).
Subsequent to the Merger, 374Water is focused on being a cleantech and social impact company providing a disruptive technology that addresses imminent environmental pollution challenges. We are focused on a new era of sustainable waste stream management that promotes circular economy initiatives and enables organizations to achieve sustainability goals and create green impact. Our vision is a world without waste and our mission is to preserve a clean and healthy environment that sustains life.
We have developed proprietary waste stream treatment systems based on Supercritical Water Oxidation (SCWO). The term used for the process is AirSCWOTM. SCWO leverages the unique properties of water in its supercritical phase (above 374 oC and 221 Bar) to convert organic matter to energy and safe products that can be recovered and used. The AirSCWOTM systems are essentially waste stream agnostic and able to treat a variety of complex, hazardous and non-hazardous waste streams, opening up opportunities for multiple applications in diverse market verticals on an international scale. Most pertinently, the technology is shifting the landscape in addressing environmental challenges that, until now, have been considered unsurmountable (due to science/engineering or cost barriers), one good example being the global PFAS crisis.
We currently outsource manufacturing of the AirSCWOTM systems to our strategic partner in the US, Merrell Bros., Inc., that have the facilities and capability to rapidly ramp-up manufacturing volumes and also support system modifications and deployment as required per market and clients. We envision in the future applying an outsourced manufacturing model in a few territories, and may consider establishing our own manufacturing capability in geographies where this is needed to adequately grow our market share.
The systems are supplied to multiple market verticals, and our revenue model includes both capital equipment sales and long-term service agreements based on throughput and capacity (Waste Purchase Agreements). Our market penetration strategy is combined of direct client and channel partner sales routes, depending on the specific market and territory. In some cases, the systems may be white labelled and sold as part of a broader solution package.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021, as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Since inception, we have focused on the development, testing and commercialization of our clean energy electric power generation systems. Since the closing of the 374Water Merger, our business has been focused on development and commercialization of 374Water’s supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) systems. We generated $48,100 and $86,570 in revenue from manufacturing assembly services and from consulting and advisory services during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. This year, we had substantial expenses due to our ongoing research and development activities and efforts to commercialize our systems, as well as substantial administrative expenses associated with our status as a public company. Our general and administrative expenses increased to $1,095,382 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $17,483 in the same period of 2020, primarily because of increased insurance costs, payroll expenses due to hiring employees and stock-based compensation expenses. Our professional fees increased to $343,862 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $8,791 in the same period of 2020, primarily because of increased legal fees and accounting fees relating to the 374Water Merger and our status as a public company. Our research and development expenses were $375,032 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $57,718 in the same period of 2020, primarily because of the increase in engineering expenses following the 374Water Merger. Our product development expenses were $1,399,833 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to no such expenses in the same period of 2020. This activity represents the issuance of stock warrants to a strategic partner in the second quarter of 2021 as part of compensation for the manufacturing, supply and service of AirSCWO products. Substantial net losses are expected until we are able to successfully commercialize and market our 374Water systems, as to which there can be no assurance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In April 2021, in connection with the Merger, we raised approximately $6.6 million from the sale of Series D Preferred Stock and converted all of its convertible debt notes and accrued interest to shares of common stock. On December 17, 2021, the Company raised approximately $5 million from the sales of Common Stock.
We have financed our operations since inception principally through the sale of debt and equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $11,263,270 compared to working capital of $10,572 at December 31, 2020. This increase in working capital occurred in April 2021, and is due primarily to the gross proceeds of $6,551,745 from the sale of Series D Convertible Preferred Stock, the receipt of $1,134,999 of proceeds from the exercise of a warrant, and the gross proceeds of $4,999,975 from the private placement in December 2021 for the sale of Common Stock.
We believe that these funds will satisfy our working capital needs for the next 12 months. There can be no assurance that these funds will be sufficient to finance our plan of operations and commercialize our systems or that we will be able to raise any necessary additional funds on a commercially reasonable basis or at all.