ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future fiscal years. Some of the statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management and involve significant elements of subjective judgment and analysis. Words such as “expects,” “will,” “anticipates,” “targets,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “potential,” “should,” “could,” variations of such words, and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include those discussed under the caption “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” and in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These and many other factors could affect our future financial and operating results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Annual Report.
Overview
SCYNEXIS, Inc. is pioneering innovative medicines to potentially help millions of patients worldwide in need of new options to overcome and prevent difficult-to-treat and drug-resistant infections. We are developing our lead product candidate, ibrexafungerp, as a broad-spectrum, intravenous (IV)/oral agent for multiple fungal indications in both the community and hospital settings. In June 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved BREXAFEMME (ibrexafungerp tablets) for treatment of patients with vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC), also known as vaginal yeast infection, and we have commenced the commercialization of BREXAFEMME in the U.S. We also are continuing late-stage clinical development of ibrexafungerp for multiple indications, including the treatment of life-threatening invasive fungal infections caused primarily by Candida (including C. auris) and Aspergillus genera in hospitalized patients.
Ibrexafungerp, the first representative of a novel class of antifungal agents called triterpenoids, is a structurally distinct glucan synthase inhibitor and has shown in vitro and in vivo activity against a broad range of human fungal pathogens such as Candida and Aspergillus genera, including multidrug-resistant strains, as well as Pneumocystis, Coccidioides, Histoplasma and Blastomyces genera. Candida and Aspergillus genera are the fungi responsible for approximately 85% of all invasive fungal infections in the United States (U.S.) and Europe. To date, we have characterized the antifungal activity, pharmacokinetics, and safety profile of the oral and IV formulations of ibrexafungerp in multiple in vitro, in vivo, and clinical studies. The FDA has granted Qualified Infectious Disease Product (QIDP) and Fast Track designations to ibrexafungerp for the indications of VVC (including the prevention of recurrent VVC), invasive candidiasis (IC) (including candidemia), and invasive aspergillosis (IA), and has granted Orphan Drug designations for the IC and IA indications. These designations may provide us with additional market exclusivity and expedited regulatory paths.
BREXAFEMME Update
In June 2021, the FDA approved BREXAFEMME for use in patients with VVC. This approval was based on positive results from two Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center studies (VANISH-303 and VANISH-306), in which oral ibrexafungerp demonstrated statistically superior efficacy compared to placebo and a favorable tolerability profile in women with VVC. The FDA granted BREXAFEMME five years of exclusivity extension under the Generating Antibiotic Incentives Now (GAIN) Act, which will be added to any other applicable exclusivity periods, such as the five years of new chemical entity (NCE) exclusivity, for a combined ten-year period of regulatory exclusivity. BREXAFEMME also is protected by multiple patents, including a composition-of-matter patent covering the ibrexafungerp molecule. With patent term extension, this patent is expected to expire in 2035, providing an expected 13 years of protection from generic competitors in the U.S.
Following approval of BREXAFEMME in June 2021, by August the product had been manufactured, packaged, and distributed to pharmacies and our sales force had been hired and trained with the commercial launch formally announced in September 2021. According to IQVIA data, there were approximately 3,600 total prescriptions for BREXAFEMME written in the fourth quarter of 2021, and approximately 4,600 total prescriptions written in the full year 2021. BREXAFEMME is now covered by commercial insurance plans that represent more than 54% of commercially covered lives in the U.S.
We have partnered with Amplity Inc. (Amplity), a leading global contract commercialization organization, to support the ongoing U.S. commercialization of BREXAFEMME. We are utilizing Amplity’s commercial execution expertise and resources for sales force, remote engagement, training, market access and select operations services. BREXAFEMME is now available at pharmacies and our full sales team is in the field actively engaging healthcare providers (HCPs). An Early Experience Program was successfully implemented with key HCPs in July 2021, confirming the need for a new treatment option and their willingness to prescribe BREXAFEMME. Progress with payors has yielded scheduled Pharmacy and Therapeutic (P&T) reviews and contract discussions and negotiations.
Ibrexafungerp Update
In February 2022, we announced positive results from our global Phase 3 CANDLE study investigating the safety and efficacy of oral ibrexafungerp for prevention of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis (rVVC), also known as vaginal yeast infection. We plan to submit the results to the FDA in an NDA supplement in the second quarter of 2022 and anticipate receiving a potential approval by year-end.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we initiated a global Phase 3 study to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of oral ibrexafungerp as a step-down therapy for patients with invasive candidiasis and/or candidemia following IV echinocandin therapy in the hospital compared to currently-available outpatient therapies (the MARIO study). The global Phase 3 multi-center, prospective, randomized, double-blind study of two treatment regimens will evaluate oral ibrexafungerp as a step-down treatment in patients suffering from invasive candidiasis (IC) compared to oral fluconazole. Eligible hospital patients with IC will receive treatment with IV echinocandin and will then be switched to either oral ibrexafungerp or oral fluconazole once step-down criteria are met. Approximately 220 patients will be enrolled and randomized in the study.
Enrollment is ongoing in our refractory and difficult-to-treat invasive fungal infections (rIFI) program, which comprises two open-label Phase 3 studies (FURI and CARES) designed to support a potential future NDA submission for ibrexafungerp through the Limited Population Pathway for Antibacterial and Antifungal Drugs (LPAD). We intend to continue to enroll and analyze the data of patients that have completed the treatment course in our FURI and CARES studies.
Enrollment is ongoing in our Phase 2 SCYNERGIA study for patients with invasive aspergillosis and will be extended into 2022 to enable investigators impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic additional time to secure patients for this important trial. SCYNERGIA, which is evaluating oral ibrexafungerp in combination with voriconazole for the treatment of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, has not enrolled as rapidly as initially projected. The prioritization of hospital resources toward addressing the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the ability of many institutions to focus on screening and enrolling patients into some clinical trials, including SCYNERGIA. With recent decreases in COVID-19 hospitalizations in some regions, we expect enrollment to accelerate over the next two quarters and anticipate top-line results in the second half of 2022.
We completed our Phase 1 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled single and multiple ascending dose study evaluating the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of the liposomal IV formulation of ibrexafungerp in 64 healthy subjects with treatment durations of up to seven days. Dosing began in March 2021, and the last cohort was completed in October 2021.
Corporate Update
In May 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the Loan Agreement) with Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules), as administrative agent and collateral agent (in such capacity, the Agent) and a lender, and Silicon Valley Bank, as a lender (SVB), for an aggregate principal amount of $60.0 million (the Term Loan). We received $20.0 million upon closing of the Loan Agreement and $10.0 million upon the FDA approval of BREXAFEMME for oral use in patients with VVC. Pursuant to the Loan Agreement, the Term Loan is now available to us in two additional tranches, subject to certain terms and conditions.
In May 2021 and February 2022, we entered into an agreement with a third party to sell a portion of our unused New Jersey NOLs and research and development credits for approximately $4.1 million and $4.7 million, respectively.
In February 2021, we partnered with Amplity Inc. (Amplity) for the commercial launch of BREXAFEMME for the treatment of VVC. Under the terms of the 5-year agreement, we are utilizing Amplity’s commercial execution expertise and resources for sales force, remote engagement, training, market access and select operations services. We maintain full ownership of ibrexafungerp and control of all strategic aspects of the launch. Amplity is deferring a portion of its direct service costs in the first two years (2021 and 2022), which we will repay over three years starting in 2023. Amplity has the potential to earn a performance-based success fee in the 2023-2025 time frame by exceeding certain revenue targets.
On February 11, 2021, we entered into an Exclusive License and Collaboration Agreement (the Agreement) with Hansoh (Shanghai) Health Technology Co., Ltd., and Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Group Company Limited (collectively, Hansoh), pursuant to which Hansoh obtains an exclusive license from us to research, develop and commercialize ibrexafungerp in the Greater China region, including mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. Under the terms of the Agreement, Hansoh shall be responsible for the development, regulatory approval and commercialization of ibrexafungerp in Greater China. We received a $10.0 million upfront payment in the first quarter of 2021 and will also be eligible to receive up to $112.0 million in development and commercial milestones, plus low double-digit royalties on net product sales. The obligation to pay royalties with respect to sales in a specified region will continue until the later of the date of expiration of all intellectual property and regulatory exclusivity for the product in the region and ten years from the first commercial sale, unless earlier terminated by Hansoh with advanced notice for convenience or under other specified circumstances.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The full extent of the future impacts of COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is uncertain and a prolonged outbreak could have an adverse effect on our business.
We continue to see enrollment across our ongoing studies but have observed that the pandemic has resulted in some delays to some of our clinical studies as the initiation of new investigational sites can be delayed due to the diversion of their resources away from necessary start-up activities, and by limiting the ability of investigational sites to conduct all activities associated with our ongoing studies. For example, the circumstances can hinder the investigational sites’ ability to screen patients for enrollment. We are collaborating with our investigational sites to implement measures to minimize disruptions to patients and ensure continued access to treatment, in accordance with health authority guidance.
With respect to manufacturing and supply, we currently have sufficient drug supply for our ongoing commercialization of BREXAFEMME and clinical studies. Our third-party contract manufacturers continue to operate at or near normal levels and, at this time and subject to further COVID-19 implications, we do not anticipate any disruptions to our drug supply chain. Additionally, our employees have been transitioned to a work-from-home policy and this has not had any material impact on our internal operating abilities.
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial results, liquidity and cash flows will depend largely on future developments. Any potential delays in clinical studies as a result of the impact of COVID-19 could result in the recognition of research and development expense for these studies in periods later than originally anticipated. As of December 31, 2021, we had $104.5 million in cash and cash equivalents. Our ability to acquire necessary capital may be negatively impacted by the economic environment if the pandemic is prolonged.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 health pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential impacts on our business, our clinical trials, our activities dependent on regulatory authorities, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely.
Liquidity
We have operated as a public entity since we completed our initial public offering in May 2014, which we refer to as our IPO. We also completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock in April 2015 and public offerings of our common stock and warrants in June 2016, March 2018, December 2019, and December 2020. We have received an aggregate of $253.2 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in these six offerings. Our principal source of liquidity is cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $104.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and we have the availability to issue up to $46.9 million of our common stock under our at-the-market facility with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (Cantor) and Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. (Ladenburg) and we have the availability to issue up to $16.8 million of our common stock under our purchase agreement with Aspire Capital. We received $30.0 million under our Term Loan in 2021, received $5.0 million in March 2022, and could potentially be eligible to receive up to an additional $25.0 million, subject to certain terms and conditions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 494,406 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of $3.1 million under our at-the-market (ATM) facility, sold 400,000 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of $2.6 million under our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital, and in May 2021 and February 2022, we received cash receipts of $4.1 million and $4.7 million from a third party for the sale of a portion of our unused New Jersey Net Operating Losses (NOLs) and research and development credits. During the year ended December 31, 2021, 5,113,156 of our outstanding warrants were exercised for proceeds of $32.8 million.
We have incurred net losses since our inception, including the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $359.5 million. We expect we will continue to incur significant research and development expense as we continue to execute our research and drug development strategy, but that our research and development expenses will decrease primarily given the completion of the VANISH Phase 3 registration program and the CANDLE study. Consistent with our operating plan, we also expect that we will continue to incur significant selling, general and administrative expenses to support our public reporting company operations, and that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase to support the ongoing commercial launch of BREXAFEMME for the VVC indication and our ongoing operations. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more of equity offerings, debt financings, other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, and New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may offer shares of our common stock pursuant to our effective shelf registration statements, including under our ATM and the common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Revenue primarily consists of a non-refundable upfront payment received under our license agreement with Hansoh and product sales of BREXAFEMME.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of distribution and freight expenses and other manufacturing costs associated with BREXAFEMME. Prior to the regulatory approval of BREXAFEMME on June 1, 2021, we expensed as research and development the costs associated with the third-party manufacture of BREXAFEMME.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred while performing research and development activities to discover, develop, or improve potential product candidates we seek to develop. This includes conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing and other development efforts, and activities related to regulatory filings for product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expense primarily consists of:
•
costs related to executing preclinical studies and clinical trials, including development milestones, drug formulation, manufacturing and other development;
•
salaries and personnel-related costs, including benefits and any stock-based compensation for personnel performing research and development functions;
•
fees paid to clinical research organizations (CROs), vendors, consultants and other third parties who support our product candidate development and intellectual property protection;
•
other costs in seeking regulatory approval of our products; and
•
allocated overhead.
Ibrexafungerp was the only key research and development project during the periods presented. We expect to continue to incur significant research and development expense for the foreseeable future as we continue our effort to develop ibrexafungerp, and to potentially develop our other product candidates, subject to the availability of additional funding.
The successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of any product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, including employee benefits and any stock-based compensation. This includes personnel in executive, accounting and finance, commercial, human resources, business development, medical affairs, and administrative support functions. Other expenses include facility-related costs not otherwise allocated to research and development expense, professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and legal services, consulting costs for general and administrative purposes, information systems maintenance and marketing efforts.
Other Expense (Income)
Substantially all of our other expense (income) during the periods reported consists of costs associated with:
•
fair value adjustments to our warrant and derivative liabilities;
•
interest expense;
•
amortization of debt issuance costs and discount;
•
other income associated with research and development tax credits;
•
interest income associated with our held-to-maturity short-term investments
•
other expense and;
•
the expense recognized for the extinguishment of debt.
Income Tax Benefit
To date, we have not been required to pay U.S. federal income taxes because of our current and accumulated net operating losses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our income tax benefit recognized consists primarily of an income tax benefit associated with the sale of our NOLs and research and development credits offset by tax withholding expense associated with the upfront payment received from Hansoh.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and period-to-period percentage change (dollars in thousands):
Revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue consists primarily of a non-refundable upfront cash payment of $10.0 million received under our license agreement with Hansoh and product sales of BREXAFEMME.
Cost of Product Revenues. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of product revenue consists primarily of distribution and freight expenses and other manufacturing costs associated with BREXAFEMME. Prior to the regulatory approval of BREXAFEMME on June 1, 2021, we expensed $3.4 million as research and development expense the costs associated with the third-party manufacture of BREXAFEMME which was recognized primarily in 2020. We expect that these initial quantities of BREXAFEMME previously expensed prior to June 1, 2021, will be sold over approximately the next 12 months.
Research and Development. For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses decreased to $23.8 million from $36.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $12.7 million, or 34.9%, was primarily driven by a decrease of $5.5 million in chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (CMC), a decrease of $5.2 million in clinical development expense, a decrease of $0.9 million in preclinical expense, a decrease of $0.5 million in regulatory expense, and a net decrease in other research and development expense of $0.5 million.
The $5.5 million decrease in CMC for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by the expense recognized in 2020 associated with the production and manufacture of ibrexafungerp for commercial batches necessary for the launch of BREXAFEMME in the second half of 2021 as well as ongoing and planned clinical studies. Prior to regulatory approval of BREXAFEMME on June 1, 2021, we expensed as research and development the production and manufacture costs associated with ibrexafungerp. The $5.2 million decrease in clinical development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by a decrease of $2.0 million in costs associated with the CANDLE study, a decrease of $1.9 million associated with the VANISH Phase 3 VVC program that was substantially complete by the beginning of the third quarter of 2020, a decrease of $2.1 million in expense associated with two drug-drug interaction and certain Phase 1 clinical studies to support the NDA submission for BREXAFEMME, a decrease of $0.4 million in expense associated with the SCYNERGIA study, offset in part by an increase of $0.3 million in costs associated with the Phase 1 IV formulation study in South Africa, a $0.3 million increase in costs associated with the MARIO study, a $0.1 million increase in expense associated with the FURI and CARES studies, and a net increase in other clinical expenses of $0.2 million. The $0.9 million decrease in preclinical expenses was primarily driven by a $0.8 million decrease in certain pharmacokinetic and preclinical expenses incurred during the prior comparable period. The $0.5 million decrease in regulatory expense was primarily due to the additional costs incurred during 2020 for the preparation and filing of the NDA submission for the treatment of VVC.
Selling, General and Administrative. For the year ended December 31, 2021, selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $49.9 million from $14.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $35.3 million, or
241.3%, was primarily driven by a $23.1 million increase in commercial expense, a $3.5 million increase in salary and other compensation related costs, a $2.6 million increase in medical affairs expense, and a $2.2 million increase in information technology costs, all primarily due to the costs recognized to support the ongoing commercialization of BREXAFEMME. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was also driven by an increase of $1.7 million increase in certain professional fees, a $1.2 million increase in business development expense associated with the licensing agreement entered into with Hansoh in February 2021, and a net increase of $1.0 million in other selling, general and administrative expense.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized a $2.7 million and a $1.8 million loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the conversions of our April 2020 6.0% Convertible Senior Notes (April 2020 Notes), respectively.
Amortization of Debt Issuance Costs and Discount. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, amortization of debt issuance costs and discount was $1.3 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The 2021 and 2020 debt issuance costs and discount for both the April 2020 and March 2019 convertible notes primarily consisted of an allocated portion of advisory fees and other issuance costs. The 2021 debt issuance costs and discount for the Loan Agreement comprised issuance and commitment costs, customary closing and final fees, and the fair value of the warrants issued in conjunction with the Loan Agreement.
Interest Income. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $24,000 and $0.2 million, respectively, in interest income associated with our money market account and short-term investments. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to the maturity of all our short-term investments during 2020.
Interest Expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $2.7 million and $1.2 million, respectively, in interest expense associated with our Loan Agreement and convertible debt. The increase from the prior comparable period is primarily due to the additional interest expense recognized in the period due to the Loan Agreement which was entered into in May 2021.
Other Income. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $13,000 and $0.3 million in other income associated with certain research and development tax credits.
Other Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $0.6 million in expense associated with the noncash consideration associated with the common stock purchase agreement entered into with Aspire Capital in April 2020.
Warrant Liabilities Fair Value Adjustment. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized a gain of $30.4 million and a loss $5.2 million, respectively, for the fair value adjustment for warrant liabilities primarily due to the decrease and increase in our stock price during the periods, respectively.
Derivative Liabilities Fair Value Adjustment. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized gains of $1.2 million and $2.3 million, respectively, in the fair value adjustment related to the derivative liabilities primarily due to the decrease in our stock price during the period.
Income Tax Benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a $4.1 million income tax benefit associated with the sale of a portion of our NOLs and research and development credits and $1.1 million of tax withholding expense primarily associated with the upfront payment received from Hansoh. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $3.1 million income tax benefit associated with the sale of a portion of our NOLs and research and development credits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $104.5 million, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $93.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in our cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to the funds received for warrants exercised in 2021 and through our ATM and Aspire facilities, the cash receipt of $4.1 million received in 2021 for the sale of a portion of our New Jersey NOLs, offset in part by the ongoing costs for the commercialization of BREXAFEMME and the continued development costs associated with our lead product candidate, ibrexafungerp.
We have incurred net losses since our inception, including the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $359.5 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more of equity offerings, debt financings, or other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements. We may offer shares of our common stock pursuant to our Form S-3 shelf registration statements. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of $3.0 million and $2.6 million under our ATM and Aspire facilities, respectively.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities
The $5.2 million increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to increases in costs associated with the ongoing commercial launch of BREXAFEMME for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections and ibrexafungerp development efforts, offset in part due to the cash receipt of $10.0 million from Hansoh received during 2021. Consistent with our operating plan, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase to support the ongoing commercial launch of BREXAFEMME and our ongoing operations and that our research and development expenses will decrease primarily given the completion of the VANISH Phase 3 registration program and the CANDLE study.
Net cash used in operating activities of $54.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisted of the $32.9 million net loss adjusted for non-cash charges that included the gain on change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $30.4 million and stock-based compensation expense of $2.1 million, the gain on change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of $1.2 million, the loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.7 million, and the amortization of debt issuance costs and discount of $1.3 million, plus a net favorable change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.1 million. The net favorable change in operating assets and liabilities consisted of an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7.7 million, offset in part by an increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs, accounts receivable, and inventory of $4.6 million. The $7.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily due to the increase in accounts payable of $2.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and an increase of $3.4 million for other liabilities associated with the long term deferred fees due to Amplity. The $4.6 million increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs, accounts receivable, and inventory is primarily due to an increase in inventory of $5.3 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $0.9 million, offset in part by a decrease of $2.9 million in other assets for a receivable that was fully collected in February 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities of $49.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of the $55.2 million net loss adjusted for non-cash charges that included the loss on change in fair value of the warrant liabilities of $5.2 million and stock-based compensation expense of $2.2 million, the gain on change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of $2.3 million, the loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.8 million, and the amortization of debt issuance costs and discount of $1.2 million, plus a net unfavorable change in operating assets and liabilities of $3.2 million. The net unfavorable change in operating assets and liabilities included a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2.3 million and an increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs of $0.9 million. The $2.3 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily due to the decrease in accounts payable of $2.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The $0.9 million increase in prepaid expenses, other assets, and deferred costs is primarily due to a $2.9 million increase for a receivable that was fully collected in February 2021, offset in part by a $1.2 million decrease in prepaid research and development costs associated with drug product shipped during the period.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted solely of purchases of intangible assets associated with implementation costs for internal use software.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of purchases and maturities of short-term investments of $14.2 million and $20.7 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $67.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted primarily of (a) gross proceeds from common stock of $32.8 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants in addition to $5.7 million in gross proceeds from common stock sold under our ATM and Aspire facilities, partially offset by related underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses totaling $0.2 million, and (b) during the period we received $30.0 million under our Loan Agreement, offset by $1.3 million in payments of loan payable issuance costs associated with the Loan Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $94.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of gross proceeds from common stock of $90.6 million, primarily as a result of our December 2020 public offering of common stock and warrants in addition to the gross proceeds from common stock sold under our ATM and Aspire facilities, partially offset by related underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses totaling $5.9 million. Additionally, pursuant to the April 2020 Notes, we issued and sold to Puissance $10.0 million aggregate principal amount of our April 2020 Notes, resulting in $9.5 million in net proceeds after deducting an advisory fee and other issuance costs.
Future Cash Needs and Funding Requirements
To date, we have generated minimal revenue from product sales. We do not know if or when we will be able to generate significant revenue from product sales. In addition, we expect to incur expenses in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing future operations.
Based upon our existing operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, the $4.7 million sale of a portion of our New Jersey NOLs, the funding of $5.0 million under our Loan Agreement for positive CANDLE study top-line data, and the anticipated sales of BREXAFEMME will enable us to fund our operating requirements into the second quarter of 2023. These funds will also be sufficient to enable us to continue to commercially launch BREXAFEMME for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections and complete the development activities for the CANDLE study. However, we are continually evaluating our operating plan and assessing the optimal cash utilization for our ibrexafungerp development strategy. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses necessary to complete the development of product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the costs and potential revenue associated with the commercialization of BREXAFEMME;
•
the progress, costs, and the clinical research and development of ibrexafungerp;
•
the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA and any other regulatory approvals;
•
the ability of our product candidates to progress through clinical development successfully;
•
our need to expand our research and development activities;
•
the costs associated with securing, establishing and maintaining commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•
our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
•
our need to implement additional, as well as to enhance existing, internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting processes and systems; and
•
the economic and other terms, timing and success of our existing licensing arrangements and any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of net proceeds from equity offerings, debt financings, or other non-dilutive third-party funding (e.g., grants, New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer (NOL) Program), strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, similar to our previous loan agreement with Solar or the convertible senior notes we sold in March 2019 and April 2020, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through sales of assets, other third-party funding, strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Critical Accounting Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our assumptions and estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Product Revenue, Net
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Under ASC Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of goods and services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. We perform the following five steps to recognize revenue under ASC Topic 606: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only recognize revenue when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. The transaction price for product sales is reduced by variable consideration related to certain gross to net (GTN) adjustments, including chargebacks, rebates, discounts, incentives, and returns, and we will estimate the amount of this variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price using the expected value method.
Information from external sources is used to estimate GTN adjustments. Our estimate of inventory at the wholesalers is based on the projected prescription demand-based sales for our products, as well as our analysis of third-party information, including written and oral information obtained from certain wholesalers with respect to their inventory levels and sell-through to customers and third-party market research data, and our internal information. The inventory information received from wholesalers is a product of their recordkeeping process and excludes inventory held by intermediaries to whom they sell, such as retailers.
We also use information from external sources to identify prescription trends, patient demand and average selling prices. Our estimates are subject to inherent limitations of estimates that rely on third-party information, as certain third-party information was itself in the form of estimates, and reflect other limitations including lags between the date as of which third-party information is generated and the date on which we receive third-party information. Our significant GTN adjustments are further described below:
•
Voluntary Patient Assistance Programs - Through vendors, we offer copay assistance to provide financial assistance to patients for the portion of their prescription cost that is not covered by payors. The reduction in product revenue due to the copay programs is based on an estimate of claims and costs per claim that we expect to receive associated with product revenue that have been recognized. This includes potential product revenue that remains in the distribution channel at the end of a reporting period.
•
Wholesaler Fees and Trade Discounts - We offer discounts and pays certain distributor service fees primarily at contracted rates. These are recorded as a reduction in product revenue based on distributors’ purchases and the applicable discount rate.
•
Chargebacks and Commercial Rebates - We contract with commercial payors such as insurers and pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) and offer rebates for utilization and formulary status at contracted rates. These reserves will be recorded in the same period in which the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue.
License Agreement Revenue
We have entered into arrangements involving the sale or license of intellectual property and the provision of other services. When entering into any arrangement involving the sale or license of intellectual property rights and other services, we determine whether the arrangement is subject to accounting guidance in ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as well as ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808). If we determine that an arrangement includes goods or services that are central to our business operations for consideration, we will then identify the performance obligations in the contract using the unit-of-account guidance in Topic 606. For a distinct unit-of-account that is within the scope of Topic 606, we will apply all of the accounting requirements in Topic 606 to that unit-of-account, including the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure requirements. For a distinct unit-of-account that is not within the scope of Topic 606, we will recognize and
measure the distinct unit-of-account based on other authoritative ASC Topics or on a reasonable, rational, and consistently applied policy election.
In arrangements that include the sale or license of intellectual property and other promised services, we first identify if the licenses are distinct from the other promises in the arrangement. If the license is not distinct, the license is combined with other services into a single performance obligation. For the sale of intellectual property that is distinct, fixed consideration and variable consideration are included in the transaction price and recognized in revenue immediately to the extent that it is probable that there would not be a significant reversal of cumulative revenue in the future. If the sale or license of intellectual property is not distinct, revenue is deferred and recognized over the estimated period of our combined performance obligation.
Research and Development Accruals
We are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with CROs, clinical site agreements, vendors, and consultants in connection with conducting ibrexafungerp clinical trials and preclinical studies and other development activities. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate development and trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which the services and efforts are expended by our service providers.
For clinical trials, we account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by actual hours expended by CRO personnel, investigator performance or completion of specific tasks, patient progression, or timing of various aspects of the trial. For preclinical development services performed by outside service providers, we determine accrual estimates through financial models, taking into account development progress data received from outside service providers and discussions with our knowledgeable internal personnel and service provider personnel. During the course of a clinical trial or preclinical study or development project, we adjust our rate of trial or project expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date within our consolidated financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. We have not experienced any significant adjustments to our estimates to date.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record the fair value of stock options issued as of the grant date as compensation expense. We recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is equal to the vesting period.
Stock-based compensation expense has been reported in our statements of operations as follows (dollars in thousands):
On December 31, 2021, the aggregate intrinsic value of outstanding options to purchase shares of our common stock was $0.1 million, based upon the $6.10 closing sales price per share of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market on that date.
Determination of the Fair Value of Stock-based Compensation Grants
We calculate the fair value of stock-based compensation arrangements using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, the risk free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options, and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. In applying these assumptions, we considered the following factors:
•
we estimate expected volatility based on the volatility of our own common stock trading history and implied volatility;
•
the assumed dividend yield is based on our expectation of not paying dividends on our underlying common stock for the foreseeable future;
•
we determine the average expected life of stock options based on the simplified method in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110, as our common stock has a limited trading history. We expect to use the simplified method until we have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term;
•
we determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities with a remaining term equal to the expected life assumed at the date of grant; and
•
we recognize forfeitures as they are incurred.
The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are set forth below:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the outstanding warrants associated with the June 2016, March 2018, December 2019, December 2020 public offerings as well as the Loan Agreement warrants associated with the remaining unfunded tranches as liabilities measured at fair value. The fair values of these warrants have been determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. We determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to implied yields available from U.S. Treasury securities and utilize the remaining term of the warrant as the expected term. We estimate expected volatility using the historical volatility of our common stock given we have sufficient history to support the expected terms of the warrants and implied volatility. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements on this Annual Report for further details.
Convertible Debt and Derivative Liabilities
For the convertible notes, we account for the bifurcated embedded conversion option, inclusive of the interest make-whole provision and make-whole fundamental change provision, as long-term derivative liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. The derivative liabilities are remeasured at each reporting period using the binomial lattice model with changes in fair value recorded in the consolidated statements of operations in other (income) expense. We used the binomial lattice valuation model to value the derivative liabilities at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. This model incorporates transaction details such as stock price, contractual terms, dividend yield, risk-free rate, adjusted equity volatility, credit rating, market credit spread, and estimated yield. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements on this Annual Report for further details.