Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in any forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those factors discussed below, disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.” See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
We are an oral care company and the creator of the first MedTech platform for teeth straightening. Through our cutting-edge teledentistry technology and vertically integrated model, we are revolutionizing the oral care industry, from clear aligner therapy to our affordable, premium oral care product line. Our mission is to democratize access to a smile each and every person loves by making it affordable and convenient for everyone. We are headquartered in Nashville, Tennessee and operate in the U.S., Costa Rica, Puerto Rico, Canada, Australia, United Kingdom, France, and Ireland.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to evaluate our business performance:
Unique aligner order shipments
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we shipped 332,388 and 374,982 unique aligner orders, respectively. Each unique aligner order shipment represents a single contracted member. We believe that our ability to increase the number of aligner orders shipped is an indicator of our market penetration, growth of our business, consumer interest, and our member conversion.
Average aligner gross sales price
We define average gross sales price (‘‘ASP”) as gross revenue, before implicit price concession and other variable considerations and exclusive of sales tax, from aligner orders shipped divided by the number of unique aligner orders shipped. We believe ASP is an indicator of the value we provide to our members and our ability to maintain our pricing. Our ASP for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1,883 and $1,797, respectively. Our ASP is less than our standard $1,950 price as a result of discounts offered to select members.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including those described below and in the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 pandemic
Although increasing rates of vaccinations across the globe and decreasing governmental restrictions have begun to lessen the impact of COVID-19, we continue to navigate the uncertain and unprecedented economic and operating conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and its protracted duration.
Additionally, we took the following actions beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in an effort to fortify the financial position of the business: reduced our marketing spend as a percentage of revenue; reduced our headquarters and retail workforce; secured the HPS Credit Facility and further strengthened our balance sheet with the convertible notes offering in February 2021, which resulted in the extinguishment of the HPS Credit Facility and more favorable interest rates; and initiated a real estate repositioning program.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we performed a review of our real estate needs and initiated restructuring actions related to a real estate repositioning program that remains on-going. As a result of these actions, we incurred one-time charges of approximately $32.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This one-time charge was primarily associated with the closure of our manufacturing facility in Kyle, Texas; the consolidation of several floors at our headquarters in Nashville, Tennessee; the closure and consolidation of many of our SmileShops, which is an ongoing evaluation; and the impairment of right of use assets and leasehold improvements at the closed SmileShops. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred one-time charges of approximately $5.3 million, respectively, primarily associated with lease abandonment and store closure costs including the costs to exit certain foreign markets, Germany, Austria, and the Netherlands, due to the uncertain operating environment and immaturity of those markets as well as regulatory challenges. Further, in January 2022, we exited the Singapore, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Spain, and Mexico markets to focus on those markets that have the greatest potential for near-term profitability. We continue to evaluate our properties to determine if we will further rationalize our footprint to better align with marketplace demand, including the direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We bolstered our business continuity plans to address the evolving and on-going operational challenges associated with COVID-19. Specifically, we have a crisis management team that meets regularly with the heads of all functional areas to monitor the regulatory environment and health and safety guidelines and to manage the corresponding changes and impacts to our business. Our technology platforms continue to support a majority work from home environment. Our demand forecasting process is integrated with our suppliers to allow us to maintain target inventory levels. This collaborative relationship also allows us to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our suppliers, review their related action plans and confirm they meet our standards as well as public health guidelines.
We believe that our teledentistry platform is well suited for the current operating environment. Our impression kit offers the ability to begin treatment or obtain any necessary touch-ups (mid-course corrections or refinements) remotely from home. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a customer shift towards impression kits, with approximately 60% of our clear aligner sales originating from impression kits during the second half of 2020 and first quarter of 2021. As governmental restrictions began to ease during the second quarter of 2021, we began to see a shift towards a more normalized mix of clear aligner sales originating from impressions kits versus scans in our SmileShops, Partner Network, and popup locations, with approximately 50% of our clear aligner sales originating from impression kits beginning in the third quarter of 2021. Although we cannot know or control the duration and severity of COVID-19 and its impact on our business, we will continue to focus on efficient acquisition of new members, including higher income customers, and controlled growth, each as more specifically discussed below.
Cybersecurity Incident
On May 3, 2021, the Company announced that it experienced a systems outage that was caused by a cybersecurity incident on April 14, 2021 (the “Incident”). We promptly implemented a series of containment and remediation measures to address the Incident, including temporarily isolating and shutting down affected systems and related manufacturing operations. We immediately mobilized our internal engineering security team and engaged leading forensic information technology firms to assist our investigation into the Incident. As a result of these efforts, we were able to successfully block the attack, no ransom was paid, and our systems and operations are back online and performing normally.
We had no data loss from, or other loss of assets as a result of, the Incident, including any exposure of customer or team member information. The Incident, however, caused delays and disruptions to parts of our business, including treatment planning, manufacturing operations, and product delivery. We maintain insurance coverage for certain expenses and potential liabilities that may be associated with the Incident, and we are pursuing coverage for all applicable expense and liabilities. The Incident had a material impact on business operations and financial results in the second quarter, including a delay in fulfilling customer orders. As a result, we experienced a decrease to revenue and increase to certain costs associated with our response to the Incident.
Efficient acquisition of new members
•Visits to our website: During the fourth quarter of 2021, we averaged approximately 4 million unique visitors to our website each month, and we expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing to spread awareness and increase the number of individuals visiting our website.
•Conversions from visits to aligner orders: From our website, individuals can either sign up for a SmileShop appointment, order a doctor prescribed impression kit or book an appointment at an affiliated dentist or orthodontist office, which we refer to as our “Partner Network,” to evaluate and ultimately purchase our clear aligner treatment. We expect to continue to invest heavily in our proprietary technology platform, operations, and other processes to improve member conversion from website visit through SmileShop and Partner Network appointment booking, appointment attendance, and aligners ordered; and a similar process for our impression kits.
•Referrals: During the fourth quarter of 2021, we remained strong on our member experience with referrals reaching 21% of all orders. We expect to continue to invest in our member journey to improve our member experience and increase our member referrals.
SmilePay
We offer SmilePay, a convenient monthly payment plan, to maximize accessibility and provide an affordable option for all of our members. The $250 down payment for SmilePay covers our cost of manufacturing the aligners, and the interest income generated by SmilePay more than offsets the negative impact of delinquencies and cancellations. A number of factors affect delinquency and cancellation rates, including member-specific circumstances, our efforts in member service and management, and the broader macroeconomic environment.
Continued investment in controlled growth
We intend to continue investing in our business to support future growth by focusing on strategies that best address our large market opportunity, both domestically and internationally, and focus on cost discipline across the business. Our key growth initiatives include enhancing our existing product platform; introducing new products to further differentiate our offerings; expanding our customer acquisition channels; expanding our reach through the professional channel; and expanding our market share with more traditional, higher income customers of clear aligner therapy. Additionally, we are focused on continued advancement in automating and streamlining our manufacturing and treatment planning operations to allow us to stay ahead of consumer demand; continued discipline around marketing and selling investments, including a focus on pushing more demand through our existing SmileShop network and Partner Network, comprised of affiliated dentist and orthodontist offices, and leveraging our referrals, aided awareness, and customer acquisition strategies. We also intend to continue to develop a suite of ancillary products for our members’ oral care needs, lengthening our relationship with our members and enhancing our recurring revenue base. As part of these key investment initiatives, we will also continue to explore collaborations with retailers and other third-party partnerships as a component of our strategy.
Pace of adoption for teledentistry
The rate of adoption of teledentistry will impact our ability to acquire new members and grow our revenue.
Strategic actions to increase profitability
On January 24, 2022, we announced a series of strategic actions to position us for improved business performance and future growth, including right-sizing our cost structure to better support core growth initiatives and allocating capital to countries with the greatest potential for near-term profitability.
Following an evaluation of our business and the continuing macroeconomic factors impacting consumers, we implemented initiatives including the expansion of our professional channel, the SmileDirectClub Partner Network;
innovations to our aligner products so as to allow us to capture greater market share of the teen and higher-household income demographics; focusing on our burgeoning oral care product business; and SmileShop growth in markets with strong consumer demand. Expansion into new international markets is paused while the global economy recovers from pandemic and macroeconomic pressures that have contributed to challenging operating environments.
In connection with these operational changes, we suspended operations in Mexico, Spain, Germany, Netherlands, Austria, Hong Kong, Singapore and New Zealand. We continue to operate in and scale its presence in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Ireland, France and Australia.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
Our revenues are derived primarily from sales of aligners, impression kits, whitening gel, retainers, and other oral care products, as well as interest earned on SmilePay. Revenues are recorded based on the amount that is expected to be collected, which considers implicit price concessions, discounts, and cancellations and refunds from customer returns. Revenues include revenue recognized from orders shipped in the current period, as well as deferred revenue recognized from orders in prior periods. We offer our members the option of paying the entire cost of their clear aligner treatment upfront or enrolling in SmilePay, our convenient monthly payment plan requiring a down payment and a monthly payment for up to 24 months.
Financing revenue includes interest earned on SmilePay aligner orders shipped in prior periods. Our average APR is approximately 20%, which is included in the monthly payment.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues includes the total cost of products produced and sold. Such costs include direct materials, direct labor, overhead costs (occupancy costs, indirect labor, and depreciation), fees retained by doctors, freight and duty expenses associated with moving materials from vendors to our facilities and from our facilities to our members, and adjustments for shrinkage (physical inventory losses), lower of cost or net realizable value, slow moving product, and excess inventory quantities.
We manufacture all of our aligners and retainers in our manufacturing facilities. We continue to invest in automating our manufacturing and treatment planning operations, launching our second generation manufacturing at the end of the third quarter of 2020, which is contributing to increased efficiencies in our manufacturing process as evidenced by our increased margins. We have built extensive supply chain mechanisms that allow us to quickly and accurately create treatment plans and manufacture aligners.
Marketing and selling expenses
Our marketing expenses include costs associated with an omni-channel approach supported by mixed media marketing (“MMM”). These costs include online sources, such as social media and paid search, and offline sources, such as television, experiential events, local events, and business-to-business partnerships. We also have comprehensive strategies across search engine optimization, customer relationship management (“CRM”) marketing, and earned and owned marketing. We have invested significant resources into optimizing our member conversion process.
Our selling costs include both labor and non-labor expenses associated with our SmileShops, Partner Network, and popup locations and costs associated with our sales and scheduling teams in our customer contact center. Non-labor costs associated with our SmileShops and popup locations include rent, travel, supplies, and depreciation costs associated with digital photography equipment, furniture, and computers, among other costs.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses include payroll and benefit costs for corporate team members, equity-based compensation expenses, occupancy costs of corporate facilities, bank charges and costs associated with credit and debit card interchange fees, outside service fees, and other administrative costs, such as computer maintenance, supplies, travel, and lodging.
Interest and other expenses
Interest expense includes interest from our financing agreements and other long-term indebtedness. Other expense includes unrealized gains and losses on currency translation adjustments related to certain intercompany loan agreements between legal entities, disposal of long-lived assets, and other non-operating gains and losses.
Provision for income tax expense
We are subject to U.S. federal, state, and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income of SDC Financial, and we are taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. In addition to tax expenses, we also incur tax expenses related to our operations, as well as payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. We receive a portion of any distributions made by SDC Financial. Any cash received from such distributions from our subsidiaries will first be used by us to satisfy any tax liability and then to make any payments required under the Tax Receivable Agreement. See Note 9.
Adjusted EBITDA
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we also present Adjusted EBITDA, a financial measure which is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, plus depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income tax expense, equity-based compensation, loss on extinguishment of debt, impairment of long-lived assets, abandonment and other related charges and certain other non-operating expenses, such as one-time store closure costs associated with our real estate repositioning strategy, severance, retention and other labor costs, certain one-time legal settlement costs, and unrealized foreign currency adjustments. Adjusted EBITDA does not have a definition under GAAP, and our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be the same as, or comparable to, similarly titled measures used by other companies. We use Adjusted EBITDA when evaluating our performance when we believe that certain items are not indicative of operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA provides useful supplemental information to management regarding our operating performance, and we believe it will provide the same to members/stockholders.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA will provide useful information to members/stockholders about our performance, financial condition, and results of operations for the following reasons: (i) Adjusted EBITDA is among the measures used by our management team to evaluate our operating performance and make day-to-day operating decisions and (ii) Adjusted EBITDA is frequently used by securities analysts, investors, lenders, and other interested parties as a common performance measure to compare results or estimate valuations across companies in our industry. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is set forth below.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our historical results of operations. The period-over-period comparison of results of operations is not necessarily indicative of results for future periods. You should read this discussion of our results of
operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues decreased $19.2 million, or 2.9%, to $637.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $656.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in revenues was primarily driven by decreased aligner shipments compared to the prior year period as a result of the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in negative macroeconomic factors impacting our core demographic, including lower discretionary spending and a challenging economic environment impacted by increased inflation, partially offset by growth in our international markets, primarily the U.K.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenues for the U.S. and Canada were approximately $525.4 million and $568.8 million, or 82.4% and 86.6%, respectively, and revenues for the rest of world were approximately $112.2 million and $88.0 million, or 17.6% and 13.4%, respectively.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues decreased $29.3 million, or 14.1%, to $177.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $206.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of revenues decreased as a percentage of revenues from 31.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020 to 27.9% in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to continued automation of our manufacturing processes. The decrease in overall cost of revenues in the current year as compared to the prior year is primarily due to producing a lower number of aligners in the current year.
Gross margin increased to 72.1% in the year ended December 31, 2021 from 68.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the factor described above.
Marketing and selling expenses
Marketing and selling expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 60.9% in the year ended December 31, 2021 from 49.2% in the year ended December 31, 2020, and increased to $388.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $322.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the reopening of several of our SmileShops and increasing our international footprint, the implementation of our pop-up event strategy, and the redeployment of our marketing strategy as compared to the prior year period which was impacted by cost containment measures implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $13.6 million, or 4.4%, to $325.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $312.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in personnel costs as a result of increased headcount and the absence of certain cost containment measures affecting the prior year period, partially offset by lower incentive compensation cost. General and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue increased from 47.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020 to 51.1% in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the factors mentioned above.
Lease abandonment, impairment of long-lived assets and other related charges
Lease abandonment, impairment of long-lived assets and other related charges were $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These charges are primarily associated with the closure and consolidation of a portion of our SmileShops, and the impairment of right of use assets and leasehold improvements at our closed SmileShops. Additionally, the current year period includes costs associated with the consolidation of our facilities in Costa Rica and the prior year period included charges related to the closure of our manufacturing facility in Kyle, Texas, and the consolidation of several floors at our headquarters in Nashville, Tennessee. We continue to evaluate our SmileShops and other properties to determine if we will further rationalize our footprint to better align with marketplace demand, including direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $21.9 million to $23.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $45.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a change in our capital structure that significantly reduced our effective interest rate on our outstanding debt facilities.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $47.6 million. The expense was in conjunction with the payoff of the HPS Credit Facility on March 29, 2021. The cost was primarily made up of fees paid in connection with the termination of the HPS Credit Facility and unamortized fees and warrant costs associated with the initiation of the transaction in the prior year. Loss on extinguishment of debt in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.8 million, respectively, primarily made up of fees and unamortized costs associated with our previous JPM facility.
Other expense (income)
Other expense (income) increased $5.2 million to expense of $4.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 from income of $0.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in expense was primarily due to the impact of unrealized foreign currency translation adjustments.
Provision for income tax expense
Our provision for income tax expense was $1.3 million and $3.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA was negative $133.2 million compared to a negative $77.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA for the U.S. and Canada combined was a negative $65.1 million, and Adjusted EBITDA for the rest of world for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negative $68.1 million.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues decreased $93.6 million, or 12.5%, to $656.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $750.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in revenues was primarily driven by the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations, particularly in the second and third quarters of 2020. Unique aligner shipments decreased approximately 17% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease in unique aligner shipments as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic was partially offset by an increase in non-aligner revenue of approximately $41.1 million.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues increased $28.5 million, or 16.0%, to $206.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $178.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenues increased as a percentage of revenues from 23.8% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 31.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of COVID-19 related changes to the composition of our revenue mix. Specifically, we experienced an increase in retail sales of oral care products as a percentage of revenue, which represents a lower associated gross margin. Additionally, a higher percentage of our aligner sales were driven by impression kits compared to the prior period, which resulted in higher material and shipping costs.
Gross margin decreased to 68.5% in the year ended December 31, 2020 from 76.2% in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the factors described above.
Marketing and selling expenses
Marketing and selling expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased to 49.2% in the year ended December 31, 2020 from 64.2% in the year ended December 31, 2019, and decreased to $322.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $481.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to cost containment measures taken as a result of the effects of COVID-19 on our revenues, including more efficient marketing spend and realignment of our SmileShops to align with demand and operate at a higher utilization percentage driving margin improvement.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $268.9 million, or 46.3%, to $312.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $580.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The prior year period included equity-based compensation expense of $350.1 million and other employee related bonuses of $9.9 million primarily as a result of the IPO, compared to equity-based compensation of $44.9 million in the current period. The current year period also included $6.6 million in one-time costs related to legal settlements and severance costs. Adjusting for equity-based compensation, IPO related costs and one-time items for the current and prior period, general and administrative expenses increased $39.7 million or 18.0% from $220.8 million in the prior year to $260.5 million primarily due to the expansion of our team members and services to support our business growth prior to the COVID-19 outbreak as well as higher depreciation and amortization associated with investments in the business. General and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue, adjusted for the items listed above, increased from 29.4% in the year ended December 31, 2019 to 39.7% in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the factors mentioned above.
Lease abandonment, impairment of long-lived assets and other related charges
Lease abandonment, impairment of long-lived assets and other related charges were $32.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. These charges are primarily associated with the closure of our manufacturing facility in Kyle, Texas; the consolidation of several floors at our Company headquarters in Nashville, Tennessee; the closure and consolidation of a portion of our SmileShops, which is an on-going evaluation; and the impairment of right of use assets and leasehold improvements at our closed SmileShops. We continue to evaluate our SmileShops and other properties to determine if we will further rationalize our footprint to better align with marketplace demand, including direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $29.3 million, or 186.1%, to $45.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $15.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of both higher principal balances and interest rates related to the HPS Credit Facility.
Other income
Other income increased $0.7 million to $0.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of unrealized foreign currency translation adjustments.
Provision for income tax expense
Our provision for income tax expense was $3.1 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, SDC Inc. had cash on hand of $224.9 million, an accumulated deficit of $295.3 million and had working capital of $289.5 million. Our operations have been financed primarily through net proceeds from the sale of our equity securities and borrowings under our debt instruments.
Our short-term liquidity needs primarily include working capital, innovation, and research and development. We believe that our current liquidity, including net proceeds received in connection with the IPO and other financing transactions, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating, investing, and debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our levels of revenue, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, market acceptance of our clear aligners, the results of research and development and other business initiatives, the timing of new product introductions, and overall economic conditions. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations, and any future instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. In February 2021, we issued approximately $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior Notes in a private placement offering. We also issued an additional $97.5 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes to the initial purchasers under an option granted to the initial purchasers. The proceeds of this offering were used by us to enter into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain of the initial purchasers, which are expected to reduce dilution to the Class A common stock upon any conversion of the Notes, and we used a portion of the remainder of the net proceeds to repay amounts owed under the HPS Credit Facility. In connection with the issuance of the Notes, SmileDirectClub, Inc. entered into an intercompany convertible promissory note (“Intercompany Convertible Note”) with SDC Financial, LLC, whereby SmileDirectClub, Inc. provided the net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes to SDC Financial, LLC. The terms of the Intercompany Convertible Note mirrors the terms of the Notes issued by SmileDirectClub, Inc. The intent of the Intercompany Convertible Note is to maintain the parity of shares of Class A common stock with LLC Units as required by the SDC Financial LLC Agreement.
We are a holding company with no operations of our own and, as such, we depend on our subsidiaries for cash to fund all of our operations and expenses. We depend on the payment of distributions by our subsidiaries, and such distributions may be restricted as a result of regulatory restrictions, state and international laws regarding distributions, or contractual agreements, including agreements governing indebtedness. For a discussion of those restrictions, see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Organization and Structure-We are a holding company. Our sole material asset is our equity interest in SDC Financial, and as such, we depend on our subsidiaries for cash to fund all of our expenses, including taxes and payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement.” We currently anticipate that such restrictions will not impact our ability to meet our cash obligations.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
As of December 31, 2021, we had $224.9 million in cash, a decrease of $91.9 million compared to $316.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
Cash used in operating activities increased to $141.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $83.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of $58.0 million, primarily due to the increase in net loss during the period and changes in working capital.
Cash used in investing activities increased to $106.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $97.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities primarily consisted of purchases of manufacturing automation equipment and investments in technology equipment and software as well as international expansion for both periods.
Cash provided by financing activities decreased to $155.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $179.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consists of the issuance of approximately $747.5 million principal amount of the 2026 Convertible Senior Notes in a private placement offering, including options. We incurred transaction costs associated with the issuance of the Notes of approximately $21.2 million and entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain of the initial purchasers in the amount of approximately $69.5 million, which are expected to reduce dilution to the Class A common stockholders upon any conversion of the Notes. Approximately $434.2 million of the proceeds from the Notes were used to repay the HPS Credit Facility in full, including certain prepayment and make-whole provisions. In addition, we paid Align Technology, Inc. the remaining $43.4 million of equity value previously accrued plus interest pursuant to an arbitration award. In the prior year period, cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of approximately $388.0 million from the HPS Credit Facility, offset by the repayment of prior debt facilities.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
As of December 31, 2020, we had $316.7 million in cash, a decrease of $1.7 million compared to $318.5 million as of December 31, 2019.
Cash used in operating activities decreased to $83.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $333.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, or a decrease of $249.6 million, primarily resulting from a decrease in accounts receivable associated with our SmilePay offering and decreased net loss during the period. One-time cash compensation expense of approximately $83.6 million for the payment of cash bonus amounts pursuant to management incentive bonus agreements (“IBAs”) was incurred in October 2019.
Cash used in investing activities decreased to $97.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $106.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily resulting from a decrease in the number of SmileShop locations, partially offset by purchases of manufacturing automation equipment and investments in technology and software equipment as well as international expansion to support our planned growth.
Cash provided by financing activities decreased to $179.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $444.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in cash provided by financing activities is primarily due to net proceeds received from the JPM Facility and IPO in the prior year period as compared to net proceeds received from the HPS Credit Facility in the current year period.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Our purchase of LLC Units from SDC Financial, coupled with SDC Financial’s purchase and cancellation of LLC Units from the Pre-IPO investors in connection with the IPO and any future exchanges of LLC Units for our Class A common stock or cash are expected to result in increases in our allocable tax basis in the assets of SDC Financial that otherwise would not
have been available to us. These increases in tax basis are expected to provide us with certain tax benefits that can reduce the amount of cash tax that we otherwise would be required to pay in the future. We and SDC Financial are parties to the Tax Receivable Agreement with the Continuing LLC Members, pursuant to which we are obligated to pay the Continuing LLC Members 85% of the cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state, and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (a) the increases in tax basis attributable to exchanges by Continuing LLC Members and (b) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed to be paid by us as a result of the Tax Receivable Agreement. The amounts to be recorded for both the deferred tax assets and the liability for our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement will be estimated at the
time of an exchange of LLC Units. All of the effects of changes in any of our estimates after the date of the exchange will be included in net loss. Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net loss. Because we are the managing member of SDC Financial, which is the managing member of SDC LLC, which is the managing member of SDC Holding, we have the ability to determine when distributions (other than tax distributions) will be made by SDC Holding to SDC LLC and by SDC LLC to SDC Financial and the amount of any such distributions, subject to limitations imposed by applicable law and contractual restrictions (including pursuant to our debt instruments). Any such distributions will then be distributed to all holders of LLC Units, including us, pro rata based on holdings of LLC Units. The cash received from such distributions will first be used by us to satisfy any tax liability and then to make any payments required under the Tax Receivable Agreement. We expect that such distributions will be sufficient to fund both our tax liability and the required payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Indebtedness
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 9, 2021 we issued $650.0 million principal amount of Notes and also granted the initial purchasers of the Notes an option to purchase up to an additional $97.5 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes. The sale of the Notes concluded on February 16, 2021, with the initial purchasers exercising their options in full to buy the additional Notes. The Notes were issued and governed by an indenture, dated February 9, 2021, (the “Indenture”), between us and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee. Overall, we incurred $747.5 million principal amount of indebtedness as a result of this offering.
A portion of the proceeds of the offering of the Notes were used to fund the cost of privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain initial purchasers, and we used a portion of the remainder of the net proceeds to repay amounts owed under the HPS Credit Facility.
The Notes will mature on February 1, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. The Notes will not bear regular interest, and the principal amount of the Notes will not accrete.
If certain corporate events that constitute a “Fundamental Change” (as defined in the Indenture) occur or “Events of Default” (as defined in the Indenture) occur, then, noteholders may require the Company to repurchase their Notes at a cash repurchase price equal to the principal amount of the Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid special interest, if any.
HPS Credit Facility
On May 12, 2020, we and a wholly-owned special purpose subsidiary, SDC U.S. SmilePay SPV (“SPV”), entered into a Loan Agreement among SPV, as borrower, SmileDirectClub, LLC, as the seller and servicer, certain lenders, and HPS Investment Partners, LLC, as administrative agent and collateral agent, providing a five-year secured term loan facility to SPV in an initial aggregate maximum principal amount of $400 million, with the ability to request incremental term loans of up to an additional aggregate principal amount of $100 million with the consent of the lenders participating in such increase.
The proceeds of the HPS Credit Facility were used to repay all outstanding amounts under the previous JPM Credit Facility and for working capital and other corporate purposes.
Outstanding loans under the HPS Credit Facility bore interest at a variable rate equal to three-month LIBOR (subject to a 1.75% per annum floor), plus 7.50% per annum payable in cash, plus 3.25% per annum payable in kind or, at the Company’s election, wholly or partially in cash.
Subject to certain exceptions, the HPS Credit Facility was secured by first-priority security interests in SPV’s assets, which consist of certain receivables, cash, intellectual property and related assets. SPV’s obligations under the Loan Agreement were guaranteed on a limited basis by SmileDirectClub, LLC and SDC Financial.
The HPS Credit Facility could have been refinanced during the first year, provided that SPV would be required to pay the amount of interest that would have accrued during the remainder of the first year, plus 4% of the principal amount prepaid; and after the first year, for a fee of 4% of the principal amount prepaid, with the prepayment fee decreasing each year to 3% in the third year, 2% in the fourth year and 1% in the fifth year.
On March 29, 2021, the HPS Credit Facility was repaid in full.
See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the Notes.
Tax Receivable Agreement
The payments that we may be required to make under the Tax Receivable Agreement to the Continuing LLC Members may be significant and are dependent upon future taxable income. See “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions-Tax Receivable Agreement.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amounts. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition and equity-based compensation, among others. Each of these estimates varies in regard to the level of judgment involved and its potential impact on our financial results. Estimates are considered critical either 1) when a different estimate could have reasonably been used, or 2) where changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to occur from period to period, and such use or change would materially impact our financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. Actual results could differ from those estimates. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to a full understanding and evaluation of our reported financial results.
Revenue recognition
As discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have implemented ASC 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” as of January 1, 2017 using the full retrospective method.
Our revenue is generated through sales of aligners, retainers, and other oral care products. Our aligner sales commitment contains multiple promises which may include (i) initial aligners, and (ii) touch-up aligners. Our members are eligible for modified or refinement aligners, which we refer to as “touch-up aligners,” at any point during their treatment plan or immediately following their original treatment plan (which is typically between five and ten months), in each case, upon the direction of, and pursuant to a prescription from, the treating dentist or orthodontist. Under ASC 606, we evaluate whether the initial aligners and touch-up aligners represent separate or combined performance obligations. We have determined that these promises, within the aligner sales commitment, represent separate performance obligations.
The terms of the aligner and retainer sales include member rights to cancel the orders and return unopened aligner, impression kit, or retainer boxes for a refund of any consideration paid related to the returned products. The rights of return create variability in the amount of transaction consideration, and in turn, revenue we can recognize for fulfilling related performance obligations. We recognize revenue based on the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled, which excludes consideration received for products expected to be cancelled or refunded due to customer returns. Accordingly, we are required to make estimates of expected returns and related revenue adjustments. We estimate expected customer returns based upon our assessment of historical and expected cancellations. The estimated expected refunds are recorded as a refund liability.
We offer our members the option of paying for the entire cost of their aligners upfront or enrolling in SmilePay, a convenient monthly payment plan that requires a $250 down payment, with the remaining consideration due over a period up to 24 months. Approximately 60% of our members elect to purchase our aligners using SmilePay. The amount of contract consideration we estimate to be collectible from our SmilePay members results in an implicit price concession. We estimate the amount of implicit price concession based upon our assessment of historical write-offs and expected net collections, business and economic conditions, including the uncertainty of the lasting effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other collection indicators. We believe our analysis provides reasonable estimates of our revenues and valuations of our accounts receivable.
Revenue is recognized for touch-up aligners when the promised goods are transferred to the member. Touch-up aligners represent a promise to transfer goods to members, and not all members order touch-up aligners. We make our best estimate of touch-up aligner member usage rates, which we use to determine the amount of revenue to allocate to those performance obligations at inception of our aligner sales commitment. Our process for estimating usage rates requires significant judgment and evaluation of inputs, including historical data and forecasted usages. Any material changes to usage rates could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which may have a material effect on our financial position and result of operations.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the above revenue recognition criteria are recorded as a contract liability in deferred revenue in our historical consolidated balance sheets. The deferred revenue balance is subject to fluctuation depending on the timing and fulfillment of aligner orders.
Equity-based compensation
We account for equity-based compensation for team members in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation.” In accordance with ASC 718, compensation cost is measured at estimated fair value on grant date and is included as compensation expense over the vesting period during which a team member provides service in exchange for the award.
We used the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Method to allocate the total equity fair value to outstanding Options. The Black-Scholes Option Pricing Method includes various assumptions, including the expected life of Options, the expected volatility, and the expected risk-free interest rate. These assumptions reflect our best estimates, but they involve inherent uncertainties based on market conditions generally outside our control. As a result, if other assumptions had been used, equity-based compensation cost could have been materially impacted. Furthermore, if we use different assumptions for future grants, equity-based compensation cost could be materially impacted in future periods.
The fair value of RSUs is determined by our stock price on the date of grant and related compensation expense is generally recognized over the requisite service period.
Income tax expense
We are the managing member of SDC Financial and, as a result, consolidate the financial results of SDC Financial. SDC Financial and its subsidiaries are limited liability companies and have elected to be taxed as partnerships for income tax purposes except for a subsidiary, SDC Holding, that is treated like a corporation. As such, SDC Financial does not pay any federal income taxes, as any income or loss will be included in the tax returns of the individual members. SDC Financial does
pay state income tax in certain jurisdictions, and the Company’s income tax provision in the consolidated financial statements reflects the income taxes for those states. Additionally, certain wholly-owned entities are required to be looked at on a stand-alone basis resulting in federal income taxes, and such federal income taxes are included in the consolidated financial statements.
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes and apply the principles of ASC 740, “Income Taxes,” in determining when our tax positions should be recognized. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. If a net operating loss carryforward exists, we make a determination as to whether that net operating loss carryforward will be utilized in the future. A valuation allowance will be established for certain net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets where the recoverability is deemed to be uncertain. The carrying value of the net deferred tax assets is based upon estimates and assumptions related to our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions. If these estimates and related assumptions change in the future, we will be required to adjust our deferred tax valuation allowances.
In connection with the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO, we entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with certain of the Continuing LLC Members that provides for the payment by us of 85% of the amount of any tax benefits that the Company actually realizes, or in some cases is deemed to realize, as a result of (i) increases in the Company’s share of the tax basis in the net assets of SDC Financial resulting from any redemptions or exchanges of LLC Units, (ii) tax basis increases attributable to payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement, and (iii) deductions attributable to imputed interest pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement (the “TRA Payments”). We expect to benefit from the remaining 15% of any of cash savings, if any, that we realize.
The amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the amount, character, and timing of the taxable income of the Company in the future. If the valuation allowance recorded against the deferred tax assets applicable to the tax attributes referenced above is released in a future period, the Tax Receivable Agreement liability may be considered probable at that time and recorded within earnings.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements recently adopted and not yet adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.