Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. For further information regarding our forward-looking statements, see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are transforming the way therapeutics and materials are discovered. Our differentiated, physics-based software platform enables discovery of high-quality, novel molecules for drug development and materials applications more rapidly, at lower cost, and with, we believe, a higher likelihood of success compared to traditional methods. Our software platform is used by biopharmaceutical and industrial companies, academic institutions, and government laboratories around the world. Our multidisciplinary drug discovery team also leverages our software platform to advance collaborative drug discovery and development programs and our own pipeline of novel therapeutics to address unmet medical needs.
Since our founding, we have been primarily focused on developing our computational platform, which is capable of predicting critical properties of molecules with a high degree of accuracy, as well as advancing drug discovery programs both with our collaborators and internally. We have devoted substantially all of our resources to introducing new capabilities and refining our software, conducting research and development activities, recruiting skilled personnel, and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
We are using our computational platform for both collaborative and internal drug discovery programs. Over the last decade, we have entered into a number of collaborations with biopharmaceutical companies that have provided us with significant income and have the potential to produce additional milestone payments, option fees, and future royalties. Furthermore, in mid-2018, we launched a pipeline of internal, wholly-owned programs. We continue to advance multiple internal programs through investigational new drug, or IND, -enabling studies. We expect to submit an IND application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for our MALT1 program in the first half of 2022, subject to receiving regulatory clearance, we expect to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of our MALT1 inhibitor in patients with relapsed and resistant lymphoma in the second half of 2022. We also plan to submit IND applications to the FDA for our CDC7 program in early 2023 and our WEE1 program in 2023, subject to favorable data from IND-enabling studies. In addition, we plan to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of our CDC7 inhibitor in 2023, subject to receipt of regulatory clearance.
We have funded our operations to date principally from the sale of our equity securities, including our initial public offering and our follow-on public offering, and to a lesser extent, from sales of our software solutions and from upfront payments, research funding and milestone payments from our drug discovery collaborations, and from distributions on account of, or proceeds from the sale of, our equity stakes in our collaborators.
We currently conduct our operations through two reportable segments: software and drug discovery. The software segment is focused on selling our software to transform drug discovery across the life sciences industry, as well as to customers in materials science industries. The drug discovery segment is focused on generating revenue from a diverse portfolio of preclinical and clinical programs, internally and through collaborations, that have advanced to various stages of discovery and development.
Our software segment generates revenue from software product licenses, hosted software subscriptions, software maintenance, professional services, and contributions. The revenue we generate through our software solutions from each of our customers varies largely depending on the number of software licenses our customers purchase from us. The licenses that our customers purchase from us provide them the ability to perform a certain number of calculations used in the design of molecules for drug discovery or materials science. We deliver our software through either (i) a product license that permits our customers to install the software solution directly on their own in-house hardware and use it for a specified term, or (ii) a subscription that allows our customers to access our cloud-based software solution on their own hardware without taking control of licenses.
We currently generate drug discovery revenue from our collaborations, including upfront payments, research funding payments and discovery and development milestones. In the future, we may also derive drug discovery revenue from our collaborations from option fees, the achievement of commercial milestones, and royalties on commercial drug sales. In addition to revenue from our
collaborations, we may also derive drug discovery revenue from collaborating on or out-licensing our internal drug discovery programs when we believe it will help maximize the commercial potential of the program. In November 2020, we entered into an exclusive, worldwide collaboration and license agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, or BMS, pursuant to which we and BMS agreed to collaborate in the discovery, research and development of small molecule compounds for biological targets in the oncology, neurology and immunology therapeutic areas. The initial collaboration targets included HIF-2 alpha and SOS1/KRAS, which were two of our internal pipeline programs. In November 2021, we and BMS mutually agreed to replace the HIF-2 alpha target with another precision oncology target. Following the replacement election, all rights to the HIF-2 alpha target program reverted to us. Under the terms of the agreement, we received an upfront payment of $55.0 million, and we are eligible to receive up to $2.7 billion in total milestone payments across all potential targets, as well as a tiered percentage royalty on net sales of each product commercialized by BMS ranging from mid-single digits to low-double digits, subject to certain specified reductions. See “Business-Collaboration Agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company” for additional information relating to this agreement.
In August 2021, we entered into a global discovery, development and commercialization collaboration with Zai Lab Limited focused on a novel program in oncology targeting DNA damage response. Under the terms of the agreement, we are entitled to receive an upfront payment to help fund our share of research costs, and if we elect to co-fund clinical development of a product candidate under the collaboration, we will be entitled to receive 50% of any profits from the commercialization of an approved therapeutic in the United States. We are also eligible to receive up to approximately $338 million in preclinical, clinical, regulatory and sales-based milestone payments from Zai Lab Limited for any product candidate developed under the collaboration, and we are entitled to receive tiered royalties on net sales outside the United States.
We generated revenue of $137.9 million, $108.1 million, and $85.5 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 28% and 26%, respectively. Our net loss was $101.2 million, $26.6 million, and $25.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Business Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In order to safeguard the health of our employees in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, in early March 2020 we implemented a company-wide work-from-home policy. Beginning in June 2020, we began limited re-openings of certain of our offices in the United States and abroad. Our re-openings are being conducted on a limited basis and are voluntary for all of our employees. We have continued to phase-in the re-opening of our offices as our management and federal, state, or local authorities advise, and we may take further actions that alter our operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities, or which we determine are in our best interests.
We did not see material impacts to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021. While we do not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have future material impacts on our business, the full extent of the future impact will depend on many factors outside of our control, including, without limitation, the extent, trajectory and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, the development, availability and distribution of effective treatments and vaccines, the imposition of protective public safety measures, the emergence of new strains and variants of COVID-19 and the effectiveness of vaccines against such strains and variants, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy. For instance, with respect to our software business, some of our customers may experience increasing budgetary pressures as a result of downturns or uncertainty in their respective businesses, which may cause them to delay or reduce purchases. In addition, due to the restrictions related to COVID-19, our sales force has limited in-person interactions, and their ability to attend events that promote and expand knowledge of our company and platform, including industry conferences and events, has been hampered. Relative to our and our collaborators’ drug discovery programs, the COVID-19 pandemic could delay the progress of certain programs, particularly ones that are in preclinical studies and clinical trials. Such COVID-19-related delays may result in disruptions in current and future IND-enabling studies and clinical trials, manufacturing disruptions, trial site disruptions and impact the ability to obtain necessary institutional review board, or IRB, institutional biosafety committee, or IBC, or other necessary site approvals. For example, our contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and our contract research organizations, or CROs, have experienced reductions in the capacity to undertake research-scale production and delays in executing some preclinical studies, including our IND-enabling studies for our CDC7 program. We now expect to submit the IND application to the FDA for our CDC7 program in early 2023 and to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial in 2023. Such reductions could cause disruptions related to our current and future IND-enabling studies and clinical trials arising from delays in preclinical studies, manufacturing disruptions, and the ability to obtain necessary institutional review board, or IRB, institutional biosafety committee, or IBC, or other necessary site approvals, as well as other delays at clinical trial sites. We, together with our CMOs and CROs, are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on these operations. Furthermore, if our collaborators experience similar delays with their drug discovery and development programs, that could delay our achievement of milestones and related revenue. While there remains uncertainty about the extent of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, we do not envision a long-term impact from the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to execute on our strategy.
Management is actively monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its possible effects on our financial condition, liquidity, operations, customers, contractors, and workforce. For additional information on risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please see “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Operations - A widespread outbreak of an illness or other health issue, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, could negatively affect various aspects of our business and make it more difficult to meet our obligations to our customers, and could result in reduced demand from our customers as well as delays in our drug discovery and development programs,” included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have joined a multi-company philanthropic effort to discover and develop novel small-molecule antiviral therapeutics to address COVID-19. The intent of the alliance, which to date also includes Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Novartis AG, Alphabet, Inc., Gilead Sciences, Inc., and WuXi AppTec, Inc., is to make any discoveries from this alliance available to the public. There is no expectation that this effort will generate revenue for any of the companies involved in the alliance, including us.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Ability to drive additional revenue from our software solutions from existing customers
Our large existing base of customers represents a significant opportunity for us to expand our revenue through increased utilization of our software. The revenue that we generate through our software solutions from each of our customers varies depending on the number of licenses for each software solution that each customer purchases from us. Accordingly, we work with our customers to improve their experience and increase the utility of our platform in order to expand the scale at which they deploy our platform in their business. Biopharmaceutical companies are increasingly adopting our software at a larger scale, and we anticipate that this scaling-up will drive future revenue growth. Our ability to expand within our customer base is demonstrated by the increasing number of our customers with an annual contract value, or ACV, of over $100,000. We had 190, 153, and 131 of these customers for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. This subset of customers represented approximately 80%, 79%, and 78% of our total ACV for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. In addition, we had 15, 16, and 10 customers with an ACV of over $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
With respect to contracts that have a duration of one year or less, or contracts of more than one year in duration that are billed annually, we define ACV as the contract value billed during the applicable period. For contracts with a duration of more than one year that are billed upfront, ACV in each period represents the total billed contract value divided by the term. ACV should be viewed independently of revenue and does not represent revenue calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP, on an annualized basis, as it is an operating metric that can be impacted by contract execution start and end dates and renewal rates. ACV is not intended to be a replacement for, or forecast of, revenue. Our ACV was $112.1 million, $92.1 million, and $75.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Another important driver of our ability to expand our customer relationships is the retention of our customers with an ACV over $100,000. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our year-over-year customer retention rate for such customers was 98% and was 96% or higher for each of the previous eight fiscal years. We calculate year-over-year customer retention for our customers with an ACV over $100,000 by starting with the number of such customers we had in the previous fiscal year. We then calculate how many of these customers were active customers in the current fiscal year. We then divide this number by the number of customers with an ACV over $100,000 we had in the previous fiscal year to arrive at the year-over-year customer retention rate for such customers. We intend to leverage our existing relationships with our customers to drive larger-scale adoption of our software solutions. If we are unable to continue to increase revenue from existing customers, our financial performance will be adversely impacted.
Ability to increase our customer base for our software solutions
We believe that we have significant opportunity to continue to increase the number of customers who use our solutions. We had 1,647, 1,463, and 1,266 active customers for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We define the number of active customers as the number of customers who had an ACV of at least $1,000 in the fiscal year. We use $1,000 as a threshold for defining our active customers as this amount will generally exclude customers who only license our PyMOL software, which is our open-source molecular visualization system broadly available at low cost.
While we have significantly penetrated the pharmaceutical industry, with all of the top 20 pharmaceutical companies, measured by 2020 revenue, licensing our software in 2021, our strategy is to grow our customer base. We believe there remains a large opportunity for growth as there are thousands of biopharmaceutical companies that could benefit from our solutions. Additionally, since the physics underlying the properties of drug molecules and materials is the same, we have been able to extend our computational platform to materials science applications in fields such as aerospace, energy, semiconductors, and electronic displays.
We sell our software solutions to a growing number of materials science customers, and we believe materials science industries are only beginning to recognize the potential of computational methods. We continue to promote the education and recognition of our computational platform across industries. As part of our strategy, we have driven the adoption of our software by researchers, and we had more than 1,714 academic institutions across the world using our software in 2021. We believe that by introducing the benefits of our computational software at the academic stage, we will drive brand awareness and expand the use of our platform to industries that have historically relied on traditional methods for discovery of molecules. Our ability to continue to grow our customer base is dependent upon our ability to educate the market and support the business through investment in our sales and marketing efforts and the ongoing enhancement of our software solutions.
Advancement of our collaborations
We have entered into a number of collaborations with various biopharmaceutical companies to advance drug discovery. We will seek to enter into additional collaboration agreements, driven by the synergies we expect to achieve between our platform and the capabilities and expertise of our potential collaborators. We believe that our collaborations will be a significant driver of value for us in the form of equity stakes, research fees, preclinical, clinical, and commercial milestone payments, and option fees, as well as royalties on any potential future sales of products, if approved. We continue to work with our current collaborators to advance existing programs through discovery research stages and initiate additional programs. However, we do not generally exercise control over the development programs of our collaborators and often rely on decisions of the management of such companies with respect to clinical development and commercialization. Our ability to continue to derive value from our collaborations will be driven by both our capability to make progress in these programs as well as whether our collaborators successfully advance such programs beyond the discovery stage.
Ability to develop and expand our internal proprietary drug discovery pipeline
We are advancing our pipeline of internal drug discovery programs through extensive application of our software platform. Our initial programs are focused on discovering and developing inhibitors for targets in DNA damage response pathways and genetically defined cancers. Since then, we have expanded into other therapeutic areas, including in the areas of immunology and neurology. We continue to advance multiple internal programs through investigational new drug, or IND, -enabling studies. We expect to submit an IND application for our MALT1 program in the first half of 2022, and subject to receiving regulatory clearance, we expect to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of our MALT1 inhibitor in patients with relapsed and resistant lymphoma in the second half of 2022. We also plan to submit IND applications to the FDA for our CDC7 program in early 2023 and our WEE1 program in 2023, subject to favorable data from IND-enabling studies. In addition, we plan to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of our CDC7 inhibitor in 2023, subject to receipt of regulatory clearance. As we progress these programs, we will strategically evaluate on a program-by-program basis entering into preclinical and clinical development ourselves, entering into collaborations, or out-licensing programs to maximize commercial opportunities. As part of this strategy, in November 2020, we entered into an exclusive, worldwide collaboration and license agreement with BMS pursuant to which we and BMS agreed to collaborate in the discovery, research and development of small molecule compounds for biological targets in the oncology, neurology and immunology therapeutic areas. Furthermore, in August 2021, we entered into a global discovery, development and commercialization collaboration with Zai Lab Limited focused on a novel program in oncology targeting DNA damage response. We will need to continue to devote substantial resources to develop and expand our internal pipeline. Our ability to advance and build value in our internal drug discovery programs will impact our financial performance, especially as we increasingly shift our focus to these programs.
Components of Results of Operations
Software Products and Services Revenue
Our software business generates revenue from five sources: (i) on-premise software license fees, (ii) hosted software subscription fees, (iii) software maintenance fees, (iv) professional services fees, and (v) contributions.
On-premise software. Our on-premise software license arrangements grant customers the right to use our software on their own in-house servers or their own cloud instances for a specified term, typically for one year. We recognize revenue for on-premise software license fees upfront, either upon delivery of the license or the effective date of the agreement, whichever is later.
Hosted software. Hosted software revenue consists primarily of fees to provide our customers with hosted licenses, which allows these customers to access our cloud-based software solution on their own hardware without taking control of the licenses, and is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement, which is typically one year. When a customer enters into a hosted arrangement for which revenue is recognized over time, the amount paid upfront that is not recognized in the current period is included in deferred revenue in our statement of financial position until the period in which it is recognized.
Software maintenance. Software maintenance includes technical support, updates, and upgrades related to our on-premise software licenses. Software maintenance revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Software maintenance activities are performed in connection with the use of our on-premise software, and may fluctuate from period to period.
Professional services. Professional services, such as training, technical setup, installation or modeling services, where we use our software to perform tasks such as virtual screening and homology modeling on behalf of our customers, generally are not related to the core functionality of our software and are recognized as revenue when resources are consumed. Since each professional services agreement represents a unique, ad hoc engagement, professional services revenue may fluctuate from period to period.
Software contribution revenue. Contribution revenue consists of funds received under a non-reciprocal agreement with Gates Ventures, LLC entered into June 2020. The agreement is an unconditional non-exchange contribution without restrictions and the initial contribution was invoiced upon execution of the agreement. Revenue was recognized upon execution of the agreement and on the first anniversary of the agreement when invoiced, in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification, or ASC Topic 958, Not-for-Profit Entities as the agreement is not an exchange transaction. Additional revenue is expected to be recognized on the second anniversary of the agreement.
Drug Discovery Revenue
Drug discovery services. We currently generate drug discovery revenue from discovery collaboration arrangements, including research funding payments and discovery and development milestones. We expect our drug discovery revenue to trend higher over time as collaboration arrangements advance and we receive additional revenue from research funding payments, the achievement of discovery, development, and commercial milestones, option fees, and royalties on commercial drug sales. The majority of our current collaborations are in the discovery stage. Milestone payments typically increase in magnitude as a program advances. In addition to revenue from our collaborations, we may also derive drug discovery revenue from entering into collaborations or out-licensing our internal drug discovery programs when we believe it will help maximize the commercial potential of the program. For example, in November 2020, we entered into an exclusive, worldwide collaboration and license agreement with BMS, pursuant to which we received an upfront payment of $55.0 million from BMS, of which approximately $13.7 million and $1.0 million were included in our drug discovery revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. However, we expect that our revenue will fluctuate from period to period due to the inherently uncertain nature of the timing of milestone achievement and our dependence on the program decisions of our collaborators.
Drug discovery contribution revenue. Contribution revenue consists of funds received under an agreement with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation on a cost reimbursement basis, to perform services aimed at accelerating drug discovery in women’s health. Revenue is recognized as conditions are met in accordance with ASC Topic 958, Not-for-Profit Entities.
Cost of Revenues
Software products and services. Cost of revenues for software includes personnel-related expenses (comprised of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation) for employees directly involved in the delivery of software solutions, maintenance and professional services, royalties paid for products sold and services performed using third-party licensed software functionality, and allocated overhead (facilities and information technology support) costs. Pursuant to various third-party arrangements, we license technology that is used in our software. These arrangements require us to pay royalties based on sales volume, and such royalty payments represented 7.1%, 6.3%, and 6.7% of software revenues in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Drug discovery. Costs of revenue for drug discovery includes personnel-related expenses and costs of third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, that support discovery activities in our collaborations, royalties paid for services performed using third-party licensed software functionality, and allocated compute capacity and overhead costs. While we have incurred costs associated with discovery efforts since late 2017, we have recognized and expect to continue to recognize revenues in the future if and when milestones are achieved. Generally, drug discovery costs of revenue for collaborations are incurred in advance of the revenue milestone achievement.
Royalty payments to third-parties represented 4.6%, 11.2%, and 6.7% of drug discovery revenues in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We expect our drug discovery costs of revenue to trend higher over time as our discovery collaborations advance.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenues. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our software products and services gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue fluctuates, and as a result of changes in sales mix between on-premise and hosted software solutions. For example, the cost of royalties due for sales of our hosted software arrangements are recognized upfront, whereas the associated revenue is recognized over the term of the underlying agreement. Currently, gross margin is not meaningful for measuring the operating results of our drug discovery business.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense accounts for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We recognize research and development expense as incurred. Research and development expense consists of internal drug discovery and development program costs and costs incurred for continuous development of the technology and science that supports our computational platform, primarily:
•
personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third-party CROs and consultants involved in our internal discovery and development programs; and
•
allocated compute capacity on our internal discovery and development programs and overhead (facilities and information technology support) costs.
We expect our research and development expense to increase substantially in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in activities related to discovery and development of our internal drug discovery programs, in advancing our platform, and as we incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel directly involved in such efforts. At this time, we do not know, nor can we reasonably estimate, the nature, timing, or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of any of our internal drug discovery programs. Since our internal drug discovery efforts are in the early stages, currently we do not track research and development expense on a program-by-program basis.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel-related costs for our sales and marketing staff and application scientists supporting our sales efforts, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation. Other sales and marketing costs include promotional events that promote and expand knowledge of our company and platform, including industry conferences and events and our annual user group meetings in the United States and Europe, advertising, and allocated overhead costs. Due to the inherent scientific complexity of our software solutions, a high level of scientific expertise is needed to support our sales and marketing efforts. We plan to make focused investments in sales and marketing over the foreseeable future to foster the growth of our business as we aim to expand software sales to existing customers and increase our customer base.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists of personnel-related expenses associated with our executive, legal, finance, human resources, information technology, and other administrative functions, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees for external legal, accounting and other consulting services, allocated overhead costs, and other general operating expenses.
We expect to increase the size of our general and administrative staff to support the anticipated growth of our business. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a U.S. securities exchange and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC. In addition, as a public company, we expect to continue to incur increased expenses such as insurance and professional services. As a result, we expect the dollar amount of our general and administrative expense to increase for the foreseeable future.
(Loss) Gain on Equity Investments
(Loss) gain on equity investments consists of realized gains in the form of cash distributions received from our equity investments offset by realized losses on the sale of equity.
Change in Fair Value
Fair value gains and losses consist of adjustments to the fair value of our equity investments, including Nimbus Therapeutics, Inc., or Nimbus, ShouTi Inc., or ShouTi, Relay Therapeutics, Inc., or Relay, and Morphic Holding, Inc., or Morphic. We remeasure our investments at each period end.
In January 2021, we disposed of our equity stake in Relay for aggregate consideration of $15.7 million.
We expect that fair value gains and losses will fluctuate significantly in future periods.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Revenues
Software Products and Services Revenue
On-premise software. The increase in revenues for on-premise software was primarily attributable to existing and new customer growth, and an increase in multi-year arrangements during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Hosted software. The increase in revenues for hosted software was primarily due to increased spend from existing hosted customers, as well as new customers purchasing hosted software subscriptions, for which revenue is recognized ratably over time.
Software maintenance. The increase in revenues for software maintenance was primarily due to the increase in on-premise software sales in current and previous years. Software maintenance revenue is recognized over time.
Professional services. The decrease in revenues from professional services during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the completion of a significant technology service project in 2020 that resulted in an increase to recurring on-premise software revenue upon renewal, as well as the timing of technology and modeling service projects.
The increase in revenues from professional services during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to revenue from significant technology service projects that began in late 2019, as well as an increased number of modeling service contracts.
Software contribution revenue. Contribution revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to funds received under an agreement with Gates Ventures, LLC, which began in June 2020.
Drug Discovery Revenue
Drug discovery services. The increase in revenues for drug discovery services during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the BMS collaboration services that began in November 2020, the timing and amount of collaboration milestones achieved, as well as research funding received during 2021 as compared to 2020. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from period to period due to the inherently uncertain nature of the timing of milestone achievement and our dependence on the program decisions of our collaborators.
The decrease in revenues for drug discovery services during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the timing and amount of collaboration milestones achieved during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Drug discovery contribution revenue. Contribution revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to services performed under an agreement with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, aimed at accelerating drug discovery in women’s health, which began in November 2021.
Cost of Revenues
Software products and services. The increase in cost of revenues for software products and services during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to increases of approximately $5.5 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $2.3 million in royalty expense due to higher sales levels, and approximately $0.7 million in other expenses.
The increase in cost of revenues for software products and services during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to increases of approximately $2.6 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $1.5 million in royalty expense due to higher sales levels, and approximately $0.4 million in other expenses, offset by a decrease of approximately $0.2 million in travel and entertainment expense due to COVID-19.
Software products and services gross margin. The decrease in software gross margin during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects our investment to support the rollout of large-scale deployments of our platform, as well as an increase in royalty fees. The increase in software gross margin during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to sales mix.
Drug discovery. The increase in cost of revenues for drug discovery during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to increases of approximately $12.6 million in third-party CRO costs associated with the expansion and progression of collaboration drug discovery programs, including the BMS collaboration, approximately $6.7 million in personnel-related expense, and approximately $0.3 million in royalty expense, offset by a decrease of approximately $0.3 million in cloud computing expenses and approximately $0.1 million in other expenses.
The increase in cost of revenues for drug discovery during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to increases of approximately $3.3 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $0.7 million in cloud computing expenses, and approximately $0.4 million in royalty expense, offset by a decrease of approximately $0.6 million in third-party CRO costs to support collaborations.
Research and Development Expense
The increase in research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to increases of approximately $16.3 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $6.0 million in CRO costs associated with the expansion and progression of internal drug discovery programs, approximately $3.0 million in cloud computing expenses, and approximately $0.9 million in other expenses.
The increase in research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to increases of approximately $11.7 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $10.1 million in CRO costs associated with the expansion and progression of internal drug discovery programs, approximately $2.3 million in cloud computing expenses, and approximately $1.1 million in other expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expense
The increase in sales and marketing expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to increases of approximately $3.6 million in personnel-related expense, approximately $0.4 million in travel and entertainment expenses, and approximately $0.4 million in other expenses.
The decrease in sales and marketing expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to a decrease of approximately $2.7 million in personnel-related expense and a decrease of approximately $1.2 million in travel and entertainment expenses due to COVID-19, partially offset by an increase of $0.3 million in other expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
The increase in general and administrative expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to increases of approximately $16.5 million of personnel-related expense, approximately $5.1 million in other expenses, primarily reflecting costs necessary to build and maintain a public company infrastructure, and approximately $0.5 million in non-comparable costs related to the disposal of our equity stake in Relay.
The increase in general and administrative expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to an increase of approximately $10.5 million of personnel-related expense, and an increase of approximately $7.5 million in other expenses, primarily reflecting costs necessary to build a public company infrastructure, partially offset by a $3.3 million reduction for non-comparable items recognized during 2019.
(Loss) Gain on Equity Investments
The loss on equity investments during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the realized loss on the disposal of our equity stake in Relay. The gain on equity investments during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents realized gains in the form of a cash distribution received from the Petra Pharma Corporation, or Petra, merger in May 2020 on account of our equity stake in Petra. The gain on equity investments during the year ended December 31, 2019 represents realized gains in the form of a cash distribution received from our Nimbus investment.
Change in Fair Value
The change in fair value during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a gain on our investment in Morphic. The change in fair value during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a gain on our investment in Relay of $17.6 million and a gain on our investment in Morphic of $13.7 million, offset by a loss on our investment in Nimbus of $3.0 million. The change in fair value during the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to a $14.1 million gain on our investment in Morphic, offset by a $4.2 million loss on our investment in Nimbus.
Interest Income
The decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to an overall decline in interest rates on our investment portfolio.
The increase in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was attributable to increased earnings on our investment portfolio balance, which increased significantly year-over-year due to the investment of proceeds from our initial public offering in February 2020 and our follow-on public offering in August 2020, partially offset by a significant reduction in interest rates year-over-year.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Due to the full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets, income tax expense (benefit) represents our income tax obligations in certain states and taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. The income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2019 is due to alternative minimum tax credits previously utilized that are refundable under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
At December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $283.3 million and $148.1 million, respectively. These carryforwards, with the exception of federal net operating losses generated post 2017, will expire between 2022 and 2041 if not used by us to reduce income taxes payable in future periods. Utilization of post-2017 federal net operating loss carryforwards is limited to 80% of taxable income generated in a given tax year and carry forward indefinitely. At December 31, 2021, we had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of approximately $15.5 million and $1.0 million, respectively. These carryforwards will expire between 2022 and 2041 if not used by us to reduce income taxes payable in future periods.
As required by ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, our management has evaluated the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which are composed principally of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards. Management has determined that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefits of our federal and state deferred tax assets and, as a result, a valuation allowance of $95.3 million, $58.2 million, and $35.3 million has been established at December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The change in the valuation allowance for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $37.1 million, $22.9 million, and $7.7 million, respectively. We recorded income tax
expense of $0.4 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables summarize our selected unaudited quarterly results of operations data for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2021. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as our audited annual consolidated financial statements and reflect, in the opinion of management, all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the full fiscal year or any other period.
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation as indicated in the table located further below.
Revenues:
Deferred Revenue:
Gross Margin:
Stock-Based Compensation:
Depreciation:
Quarterly Revenue Trends
On-premise software revenue is subject to seasonality that generally favors the first and fourth quarter of each year, primarily due to the timing of customer renewals for on-premise software arrangements, for which revenue is recognized at a single point in time. Hosted software revenue grew more steadily in the periods presented, as existing customers and new customers increased their spend on hosted solutions, for which revenue is recognized over time. As a result, a portion of the software products and services revenue we reported in each period was attributable to sales we made in prior periods. Software maintenance revenue is related to on-premise software sales and also is recognized ratably over the term of the underlying agreement. Therefore, increases or decreases in customer sales, customer expansion, or renewals in a period may not be immediately reflected in revenue for the period. Our professional services arrangements are typically project-based and, therefore, fluctuated based on individual customer needs and ongoing project support. Drug discovery revenue fluctuated from period to period based on the achievement of specific collaboration milestones, including advancement of BMS collaborative services. The majority of our current collaborations are in the discovery stage. Milestone payments typically increase in magnitude as a program advances.
Quarterly Deferred Revenue Trends
Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of customer billings, which is recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy, as well as the unearned portion of unbilled collaboration milestones that are deemed probable in advance of actual achievement. Deferred revenue balances have fluctuated based on the timing of sales, shifts in product mix, fluctuations to the number and size of milestones that were deemed probable in advance of actual achievement, and the measurement of progress toward completion for service projects.
Quarterly Gross Margin Trends
Our software products and services gross margin experienced fluctuations over the periods presented due to increased headcount and the product mix for software and services, as the cost of royalties due on sales of our hosted software is recognized upfront, while the associated revenue is recognized over the term of the related agreement. Currently, gross margin is not meaningful for measuring the operating results of our drug discovery business.
Quarterly Operating Expense Trends
Operating expenses generally increased during the periods presented due to increased headcount and personnel-related expenses involved in research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative activities, and CRO costs related to our internal drug discovery programs. These increases in headcount across our operations have supported the overall growth and management of our business. CRO cost increases were driven by the expansion and progression of our internal drug discovery programs.
Quarterly Other (Expense) Income Trends
Other (expense) income during the periods presented consisted primarily of fair value gains and losses related to our equity investments in Nimbus, Morphic, ShouTi and Relay, a loss on the disposal of our equity stake in Relay, a gain from the Petra merger, and, to a lesser degree, interest income.
Segment Information
The following tables summarize segment information for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019. See Note 15 in our audited consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our segments.
Segment gross profit is derived by deducting operational expenditures, with the exception of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative activities, from U.S. GAAP revenue. Operational expenditures are expenditures made that are directly attributable to the reportable segment. In many cases, these expenditures are allocated to the segments based on headcount. The reportable segment expenditures include compensation, supplies, and services from contract research organizations.
Certain cost items are not allocated to our reportable segments. These cost items primarily consist of compensation and general operational expenses associated with our research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative activities. These costs are incurred by both segments and, due to the integrated nature of our software and drug discovery segments, any allocation methodology would be arbitrary and provide no meaningful analysis. Additionally, we report assets on a consolidated basis and do not allocate assets to our reportable segments for purposes of assessing segment performance or allocating resources.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Funding Requirements
We have a history of significant operating losses, and incurred negative cash flows from operations since inception through December 31, 2019, and again in the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $230.0 million.
We have funded our operations to date principally from the sale our equity securities, including our initial public offering and our follow-on public offering, and to a lesser extent, from sales of our software solutions and from upfront payments, research funding and milestone payments from our drug discovery collaborations, and from distributions on account of, or proceeds from the sale of, our equity stakes in our collaborators. Our operating cash flows are impacted by the magnitude and timing of our software sales and by the magnitude and timing of our drug discovery milestone achievements and research funding fees.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $579.5 million.
On February 10, 2020, we closed our initial public offering of our common stock, in which we sold 13,664,704 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds to us of $209.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses borne by us.
On August 17, 2020, we closed a follow-on public offering, in which we sold 5,250,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $66.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds to us of $325.6 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses borne by us.
On March 4, 2021, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 which allows us to offer and sell an indeterminate number of shares of common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares or warrants, or an indeterminate principal amount of debt securities, from time to time pursuant to one or more offerings at prices and terms to be determined at the time of the sale. As of December 31, 2021, no securities had been sold under the Form S-3.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through at least the next 24 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the growth of our software revenue, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the continued expansion of software sales and marketing activities, the timing and receipt of milestone payments from our collaborations, as well as spending to support, advance, and broaden our internal programs. Furthermore, our capital requirements will also change depending on the timing and receipt of any distributions we may receive from our equity stakes in our drug discovery collaborators and partners. The potential for these distributions, and the amounts which we may be entitled to receive, are difficult to predict due to the inherent uncertainty of the events which may trigger such distributions.
We plan to utilize the existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand primarily to fund our software and drug discovery activities. With respect to our internal programs, as part of our strategy we may choose to enter into collaborations or pursue out-licensing arrangements when we believe it will help maximize the commercial value of any such program.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to maintain or expand our operations and invest in our platform, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations and financial condition. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans.
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 include operating lease obligations of $132.2 million, consisting of our continuing rent obligations through December 2037, primarily for our principal offices located in New York, New York and Portland, Oregon, which expire in December 2037 and September 2026, respectively. In addition, see Note 6 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 of this Annual Report for information relating to executed leases that have not yet commenced.
In December 2020, we entered into a five-year agreement with a third-party cloud provider for compute power. The agreement contains a minimum payment obligation, which totals $60 million over the five years after the date we entered into the agreement. There is no annual commitment.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CRO vendors for research and preclinical studies, professional consultants for expert advice, and other vendors for various products and services. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. We have also agreed to pay volume-based royalties to third-parties for use of software functionality under various licensing and related agreements.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows for the periods shown:
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used approximately $70.7 million in cash primarily resulting from net loss of $101.2 million, which included an $11.4 million non-cash gain from changes in fair value, $26.5 million in stock-based compensation costs and $9.0 million of other non-cash operating expenses included in net loss, including depreciation and investment accretion costs, and a $1.8 million loss on equity investment that is classified as an investing activity. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities provided cash of approximately $4.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities provided approximately $16.8 million of cash. Cash provided by operating activities increased primarily from changes in our operating assets and liabilities, which provided cash of approximately $59.2 million primarily due to an increase of $59.7 million in deferred revenue, of which approximately $54.0 million is related to our agreement with BMS, and $12.5 million of non-cash operating expenses included in net loss, including depreciation and stock-based compensation costs. These increases are partially offset by our net loss of $26.6 million and $28.3 million non-cash gain from changes in fair value.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used approximately $26.1 million of cash, primarily resulting from net loss of $25.7 million, which included a $9.9 million non-cash gain from changes in fair value and a $0.9 million gain on equity investment that is classified as an investing activity, partially offset by $6.2 million of non-cash operating expenses included in net loss, including depreciation and stock-based compensation costs. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities provided cash of approximately $4.2 million.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities used approximately $16.8 million of cash, consisting of $22.1 million used for purchases of marketable securities, net of maturities, $7.2 million used for purchases of property and equipment and $3.7 million used to make equity investments in Ajax Therapeutics, Inc. and ShouTi, partially offset by $15.7 million provided by the sale of our equity stake in Relay and $0.4 million provided by the distribution of funds from Petra in connection with the Petra merger.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities used approximately $381.7 million of cash, primarily for purchases of marketable securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, investing activities used approximately $53.9 million of cash, primarily for purchases of marketable securities.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities provided approximately $8.0 million of cash, primarily attributable to proceeds from stock option exercises.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided approximately $541.3 million of cash, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuances of our common stock in our initial public and follow-on offerings.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, financing activities provided approximately $28.7 million of cash, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuances of our Series E preferred stock.
Seasonality
Generally, the first and fourth quarter of each year have typically been our largest quarters for software products and services revenue, primarily due to the timing of customer renewals of on-premise software arrangements, for which revenue is recognized at a single point in time. Seasonality has been a less significant factor for our hosted software arrangements, for which revenue is recognized ratably over time. Seasonality has not been a factor for our drug discovery revenues. Historical seasonality may not be indicative of future periods.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those that are both most important to the portrayal of a company's financial condition and results, and that require management's most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and our beliefs of what could occur in the future considering available information. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts, and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, are reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing in Item 8 of this Annual Report, we believe the following critical accounting estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and estimates and have had, or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Revenue
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as contribution grants and collaboration arrangements. In accordance with ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
Significant management judgment is applied to determine the allocation of the transaction price and measurement of progress, including (1) the constraint on variable consideration, (2) the allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations using their standalone selling price, or SSP, basis, and (3) the appropriate input or output based method to recognize collaboration revenue and the extent of progress to date.
Variable consideration: Our revenue may include upfront payments for the performance of services in the future, which have both fixed and variable consideration. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price.
Research and development, regulatory or commercial milestones in our collaboration agreements may include some, but not necessarily all, of the following types of events:
•
completion of preclinical research and development work leading to selection of product candidates;
•
initiation of Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3 clinical trials;
•
filing of regulatory applications for marketing approval in the United States, Europe or Japan;
•
marketing approval in major markets, such as the United States, Europe, or Japan;
•
commercial milestones and/or commercial royalties; and
•
achievement of certain other technical, scientific, or development criteria.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes research, development, or regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or that of the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on an SSP basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which may affect license, collaboration, and other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment. The process of successfully achieving the criteria for the milestone payments is highly uncertain. Consequently, there is a risk that we may not earn all of the milestone payments from each of our collaborators. We recognized $6.3 million, $11.9 million, and $12.1 million from drug discovery milestones for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Software performance obligations and transaction price allocation: At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract that falls under the scope of ASC 606 to identify distinct performance obligations, which requires significant judgment based on the nature of each transaction. We allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation on an SSP basis. We determine the SSP using information that includes historical discounting practices, market conditions, cost-plus analysis, and other observable inputs. We typically have more than one SSP for individual performance obligations due to the stratification of those items by classes of customers and circumstances. In these instances, we may use information such as the size and geographic region of the customer in determining the SSP. We may also estimate SSP based on management judgment by considering available data such as internal cost and margin objectives, pricing strategies, market/competitive conditions, historical profitability data, as well as other observable inputs. We establish SSP ranges for our products and services and reassesses them periodically. The determination of SSP required significant management judgment.
Collaboration agreement transaction price allocation and measurement of progress: At the inception of each arrangement, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the performance obligations to determine whether they are distinct or a single combined performance obligation. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative SSP of each performance obligation at inception, which will be determined based on each performance obligation’s estimated SSP. We determine the SSP at contract inception of the research activities based on internal estimates of the costs to perform the services, inclusive of a reasonable profit margin. Significant judgment is used to determine the inputs for total costs to perform the research activities, which may include the length of time required, the internal hours expected to be incurred on the services and the number and costs of various studies that will be performed by third-parties to complete the research plan. Revenue is recognized on a proportional performance basis over the period of service, using input-based measurements to estimate the performance. Changes to these assumptions may have a material effect on the amount and timing of revenue recognized. We recognized revenue of $14.6 million, $1.0 million, and zero related to collaboration agreements with proportional performance measurement for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee, consultant, and non-employee director stock option awards, is measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on fair value. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black Scholes option-pricing model. Expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which the awards are forfeited.
We estimate the fair value of our option awards to employees, directors and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility and the calculation of expected term of the award. Due to the lack of complete company-specific historical and implied volatility data for the full expected term of the stock-based awards, we base our estimate of expected volatility on a representative group of publicly traded companies. For these analyses, we selected companies with comparable characteristics to our own, including enterprise value, risk profiles, position within the industry and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available. We have estimated the expected term of our employee stock option using historical exercise data.
Our weighted average volatility was, 59%, 60% and 57% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, and our expected term was 4.66, 4.49 and 6.05 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.