ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Superior Drilling Products, Inc. is an innovative drilling and completion tool technology company providing cost saving solutions that drive production efficiencies for the oil and natural gas drilling industry. Our headquarters and manufacturing operations are located in Vernal, Utah. Our drilling solutions include the patented Drill-N-Ream® well bore conditioning tool (“Drill-N-Ream tool”) and the patented Strider™ Drill String Oscillation System technology (“Strider technology” or “Strider”). In addition, the Company is a manufacturer and refurbisher of PDC (polycrystalline diamond compact) drill bits for a leading oil field services company. We operate a state-of-the-art drill tool fabrication facility, where we manufacture solutions for the drilling industry, as well as customers’ custom products.
Our strategy for growth is to leverage our expertise in drill tool technology and precision machining in order to broaden our product offerings and solutions for the oil and gas industry. We believe through our patented technologies, as well as technologies under development, that we can offer the industry the solutions it demands to improve drilling efficiencies and reduce production costs.
In addition, in December 2020, the Company successfully obtained ISO 9000 certification and is now qualified to bid on projects in industries outside oil and gas. We believe that with this certification, and our history of supplying high quality parts to research and development departments operating in the aerospace industry, we can effectively execute our industry diversification strategy.
Industry Trends and Market Factors
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and continues to cause disruption to the U.S. and global economies, including the impact of government and company actions to reduce the spread of the virus and consumer behavior in response to the same; and, although the United States and other countries have continued to roll out vaccinations, it is uncertain how quickly and effectively such vaccinations will be distributed or help to control the spread of COVID-19 and its variants. We continue to actively monitor the impacts and potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in all aspects of our business. Although we are unable to predict the total impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources at this time, we expect we may be negatively affected if the pandemic and related public health measures result in substantial manufacturing or supply chain problems, disruptions in local and global future economies, volatility in the global financial markets, overall reductions in demand, delays in payment, restrictions on the shipment of our products, or other ramifications. Currently we are experiencing raw material delays and difficulties in hiring and retaining direct laborers. These current conditions are a result of COVID-19.
The total U.S. rig count as reported by Baker Hughes as of March 4, 2022 was 650 rigs, an increase of 299 rigs from the rig count as of December 31, 2020. We expect North American onshore activity to continue to improve throughout 2022 compared with 2020 and 2021.
The Middle East market is a softer market due to the COVID-19 impact. Although this segment of our business is rebounding, the improvements are at a slower rate compared to the Company’s domestic market.
How We Generate our Revenue
We are a drilling and completion tool technology company. We generate revenue from the refurbishment, manufacturing, repair, rental and sale of drill string tools. Our manufactured products are produced in a standard manufacturing operation, even when produced to our customer’s specifications. We also earn royalty fees under certain arrangements for certain tools we sell.
Tool sales, rentals and other related revenue
Tool and Product Sales: Revenue for tool and product sales is recognized upon shipment of tools or products to the customer. Shipping and handling costs related to tool and product sales are recorded gross as a component of both the sales price and cost of the product sold.
Tool Rental: Rental revenue is recognized upon completion of the customer’s job for which the tool was rented. While the duration of the rental will vary by job and number of runs, these rentals are generally less than one month. The rental agreements are typically based on the price per run or footage drilled and do not have any minimum rental payments or term.
Other Related Revenue: We receive revenue from the repair of tools upon delivery of the repaired tool to the customer. We earn royalty commission revenue when our customer invoices their customer for the use of our tools.
Contract Services
Drill Bit Manufacturing and Refurbishment: We recognize revenue for our PDC drill bit services upon transfer of control, which we have determined to be upon shipment of the product. Shipping and handling costs related to refurbishing services are paid directly by the customer at the time of shipment. We also provide contracting manufacturing services to customers.
Costs of Conducting Our Business
The principal elements of cost of sales for manufacturing, repair, rental and sale of tools (“product”) are the direct and indirect costs to manufacture, repair and supply the product, including labor, materials, utilities, equipment repair, lease expense related to our facilities, supplies and freight.
Selling, general and administrative expense is comprised of costs such as new business development, technical product support, research and development costs, compensation expense for general corporate operations including accounting, human resources, risk management, etc., information technology expenses, safety and environmental expenses, legal and professional fees and other related administrative functions.
Other income (expense), net is comprised primarily of interest expense associated with outstanding borrowings net of interest income, gains (losses) of disposed assets and recovery of related party note receivable.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table represents our condensed consolidated statement of operations for the periods indicated:
Material changes of certain items in our statements of operations included in our financial statements for the comparative periods are discussed below.
Revenue. Our revenue increased approximately $2,865,000, or 27%, to $13,336,000 driven by a 31%, or $2,198,000 increase in tool revenue over the prior year, which experienced lower revenues due to the global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Contract services revenue increased by approximately $667,000, or 19%, to $4,092,000. International sales decreased by $163,000, or 9%. The primary driver for our calendar year 2021 revenue increase for all of our product lines is the U.S. drilling rig count. From the Covid driven low of 351 rigs drilling on December 31, 2020, the U.S. drilling rig count increased by 235 rigs to 586 as of December 31, 2021.
Operating Costs and Expenses. Total operating costs and expenses declined by approximately $371,000, or 3%, during 2021 compared with 2020.
● Cost of revenue increased approximately $513,000 or 10% on higher volume reflected in the 27% increase in revenue compared with the year ended December 31,2021.
● Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $171,000 during 2021 compared with 2020, due primarily to a $204,000 reduction in our international SG&A payroll implemented in 2020 which continued into 2021.
● Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased approximately $713,000 to $2,103,000 for year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to a portion of the intellectual property intangible balance that reached its full amortization in May 2021.
Other Income (Expenses). Other income and expense primarily consist of interest income, interest expense, loan forgiveness and gain/loss on disposition of assets.
● Interest income for 2021 and 2020 was approximately $228 and $6,000, respectively. The decline in 2021 was due to lower cash balances.
● Interest expense for the years 2021 and 2020 was approximately $540,000 and $575,000, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was due primarily to the reduction in the balance outstanding on the Hard Rock Note.
● The Company recognized $933,000 of loan forgiveness for the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $892,000 was related to the Company’s PPP Loan and $41,000 related to an SBA equipment loan that was forgiven as part of the CARES Act.
●
The Company recognized $707,000 in other income pertaining to partial recovery of the related party note receivable (Tronco note - See Note 6 - Related Party Transactions to the financial statements). The Meiers applied this amount towards their Tronco note obligation from their accrued bonus in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $3,272,000. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, capital expenditures and debt service payments. Our operational and financial strategies include managing our operating costs and capital spending to reflect revenue trends, accelerating collections of international receivables, and controlling our working capital and debt to enhance liquidity. We will continue to work to grow revenue and manage costs and expect to be cash flow positive in 2022. If we are unable to do this, we may not be able to, among other things, (i) maintain our current general and administrative spending levels; (ii) fund certain obligations as they become due; and (iii) respond to competitive pressures or unanticipated capital requirements. We cannot provide any assurance that financing will be available to us in the future on acceptable terms.
The Hard Rock Note had a remaining balance of $750,000 as of December 31, 2021, accrues interest at 8.00% per annum and is fully payable with accrued interest on October 5, 2022.
Our Credit Agreement facilitated by Austin Financial Services (“AFS”) is comprised of $800,000 Term Loan and $3,500,000 Line of Credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $333,000 outstanding on the Term Loan and approximately $1,000,000 outstanding on the Line of Credit. Amounts outstanding under the Line of Credit at any time may not exceed the sum of: (a) up to 85% of accounts receivable or such lesser percentage as AFS in its sole discretion may deem appropriate if it determines that there has been a material adverse effect (less a dilution reserve as determined by AFS in its sole good faith discretion), plus (b) the lesser of (i) up to 50% of inventory or such lesser percentage as AFS in its sole discretion may deem appropriate if it determines that there has been a material adverse effect, or (ii) the inventory sublimit, minus (c) the borrowing base reserve as may be determined from time to time by AFS. Amounts outstanding on the Line of Credit at December 31, 2021, may not exceed $1,000,000, which is based on a calculation applying 85% of accounts receivable and 50% of inventory. A collateral management fee is payable monthly on the used portion of the Revolving Loan and Term Loan. If our borrowings are less than $1,000,000, we still pay interest as if we had borrowed $1,000,000. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $9,700 of accrued interest combined between the two loans.
The interest rate for the Term Loan and the Revolving Loan is prime plus 2%. At December 31, 2021, the interest rate was 8.85%, which includes a 3.6% management fee rate. The obligations of the Company under the agreement are secured by a security interest in substantially all of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company, other than any assets owned by the Company that constitute real property (and fixtures affixed to such real property), certain excluded equipment, intellectual property, or aircraft. The Credit Agreement matures on February 20, 2023.
On December 7, 2020, the Company closed a sale-leaseback agreement for its headquarters and manufacturing facilities. Under the terms of the transaction, the Company sold the property for $4.45 million and simultaneously entered into a 15-year lease. After fees, the Company netted approximately $4.26 million in proceeds of which $2.64 million was used to repay in full the outstanding mortgage on the property. Under the lease agreement, the Company has an option to extend the term of the lease and to repurchase the property. Due to this repurchase option, the Company was unable to account for the transfer as a sale under ASC Topic 842, Leases, and as such, the transaction is a failed sale-leaseback that is accounted for as a financing transaction.
The Company had no off balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021. Our obligations to make payments in the future may vary due to certain assumptions including the duration of our obligations and anticipated actions by third parties according to the following table (in thousands):
(1) Amounts represent the expected cash payments of principal and interest amounts associated with our long-term debt obligations.
(2) Relates to the sale-leaseback transaction the Company completed in December 2020.
The aggregate outstanding balance of our notes payable obligations net of discounts as of December 31, 2021, was approximately $2,452,000 with interest rates ranging from 5.94% to 8.85%.
Cash Flow
Operating Cash Flows
For 2021, net cash provided by our operating activities was approximately $526,000. The Company had approximately $530,000 of net loss, an approximately $1,526,000 increase in accounts receivable, an approximately $144,000 increase in inventories, which were offset in part by depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $2,104,000 and share-based compensation expense of approximately $757,000.
For 2020, net cash provided by our operating activities was approximately $1,521,000. The Company had approximately $3,430,000 of net loss, an approximately $933,00 gain of forgiveness of SBA loans, an approximately $174,000 gain which was primarily the disposition of a company airplane, which was offset in part by depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $2,816,000, an approximately $2,505,000 decrease in accounts receivable and share-based compensation of approximately $551,000.
Investing Cash Flows
For 2021, the Company used approximately $937,000 in investing activities for property, plant and equipment purchases, offset in part by proceeds from the sale of fixed assets of approximately $50,000.
For 2020, the Company used approximately $1,167,000 in investing in property, plant and equipment primarily for it’s Middle East rental tool fleet. Partially offsetting this were proceeds from the disposition of the Company’s airplane.
Financing Cash Flows
For 2021, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $1,221,000 and primarily related to proceeds the sale of common stock of $1,697,000. Total payments on debt, net of borrowings, were $476,000 consisting of principal payments on debt of $1,278,000, and a net borrowing on the line of credit of $802,000.
For 2020, net cash provided by our financing activities was approximately $241,000 and primarily related to $1,622,000 proceeds from the sale and leaseback of it’s Vernal, Utah facility, $892,000 proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program and partially offset by approximately $2,351,000 in debt principal payments.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. During the preparation of these financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including those discussed below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results of our analysis form the basis for making assumptions about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. While we believe that the estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and the impact of such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements. Our estimates and assumptions are evaluated periodically and adjusted when necessary. Described below are the most significant policies we apply in preparing our consolidated financial statements, some of which are subject to alternative treatment under GAAP. We also describe the most significant estimates and assumptions we make in applying these policies. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
Segment reporting is not applicable to us as we have a single, company-wide management team that administers the Company as a whole, rather than by discrete business units. While we have three business product lines and report the revenues by product line internally and externally, we do not capture expenses by product line and as such, we do not maintain complete separate financial statement information by product line. We evaluate our business performance as a single segment, and we report as a single segment. We operate in the United States and the Middle East. Approximately 87% of our revenue is from the United States and approximately 13% is from the Middle East for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, approximately 82% of our revenue was from the United States and approximately 18% was from the Middle East.
Revenue Recognition
We are a drilling and completion tool technology company, and we generate revenue from the manufacturing, repair, rental, and sale of drilling and completion tools. Our manufactured products are produced in a standard manufacturing operation, even when produced to our customer’s specifications. We earn royalty commission revenue when our customer invoices their customer for the use of the tools.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized ratably as an expense over the vesting period of the award. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards require the use of subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the stock-based payment awards and stock price volatility. Management uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value award grants and determine the related compensation expense. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and management uses different assumptions, the Company’s stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The Company expects to continue to grant stock-based awards in the future, and to the extent that the Company does, its actual stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Domestically accounts receivable are generally due within 60 days of the invoice date. Internationally our due date terms are generally 90 days from the invoice date. No interest is charged on past-due balances. We grant credit to our customers based upon an evaluation of each customer’s financial condition. We periodically monitor the payment history and ongoing creditworthiness of our customers. An allowance for doubtful accounts is established at a level estimated by management to be adequate based upon various factors including historical experience, aging status of customer accounts, payment history and financial condition of our customers. The allowance for doubtful accounts was $0 at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Substantially all of our revenue is derived from our refurbishing of PDC drill bits for Baker Hughes and from DTI when we 1) sell the Drill-N-Ream tool, 2) repair drilling bits and the Drill-N-Ream tool, and 3) earn royalty on our customer’s rental of the Drill-N-Ream tool to the end user. Internationally our revenue is derived from the rental of our Drill-N-Ream tool to large oilfield service companies. While our credit risk is concentrated, we have an excellent payment history with all of our customers and monitor, on a weekly basis, accounts receivable collections.
Valuation of Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials, work-in-process and finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost, determined using the weighted-average cost method, or net realizable value. Finished goods inventories include raw materials, direct labor and production overhead. The Company regularly reviews inventories on hand and current market conditions to determine if the cost of finished goods inventories exceed current market prices and impairs the cost basis of the inventory accordingly. The Company wrote off $0 and $4,800 related to slow moving inventory in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Related Party Note Receivable
In January 2014, we entered into a Note Purchase and Sale Agreement under which we agreed to purchase a loan made to Tronco Energy Corporation (“Tronco”), a party related to us through common control, in order to take over the legal position as Tronco’ s senior secured lender. That agreement provided that, upon our full repayment of the Tronco loan from the proceeds of our initial public offering, the lender would assign to us all of its rights under the Tronco loan, including all of the collateral documents. On May 30, 2014, we closed our purchase of the Tronco loan for a total payoff of $8.3 million, including principal, interest, and early termination fees.
The Meier Guaranties were determined not to be substantive based on GAAP that states that the substance of a personal guarantee depends on the ability of the guarantor to perform, the practicality of enforcing the guarantee, and the demonstrated intent to enforce the guarantee. Since the Company did not demonstrate intent by either enforcing the redemption of collateral or the guarantees by the borrowers to repay the loan when the related party note receivable was due and payable on December 31, 2017 and instead modified the loan by extending the payment term, the Company determined the guarantees are not substantive and therefore should not serve as the basis for concluding the loan is well secured and collateralized. As a result, the Company fully reserved the related party note receivable effective August 2017. The Company continues to hold the 8,267,860 shares of the Company’s common stock as collateral. The Company will record a recovery of the loan upon receiving repayment of the note, but there is no guarantee a full recovery of the loan will occur.