Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management Discussion and Analysis is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, Seaboard’s consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes in Item 8. Certain statements in this report contain forward-looking statements. See the introduction in Item 1 for more information on these forward-looking statements, including a discussion of the most significant factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
Sales and costs of Seaboard’s segments are significantly influenced by worldwide fluctuations in commodity prices and changes in foreign political and economic conditions. Accordingly, sales, operating income and cash flows can fluctuate significantly from year to year. As each segment operates in a distinct industry and a different geographic location, management evaluates their operations separately. Seaboard’s reporting segments are based on information used by Seaboard’s CEO to determine allocation of resources and assess performance, in his capacity as chief operating decision maker.
Pork Segment
The Pork segment primarily produces hogs to process and sells fresh and frozen pork products throughout the U.S. and to foreign markets. Sales prices are directly affected by both domestic and worldwide supply and demand for pork products and other proteins. Feed accounts for the largest input cost in raising hogs and is materially affected by price changes for corn and soybean meal. Market prices for hogs purchased from third parties for processing at the plant also represent a major cost factor. Within the portfolio of Seaboard’s businesses, management believes profitability of the Pork segment is most susceptible to commodity price fluctuations. As a result, this segment’s operating income and cash flows can materially fluctuate from year to year, significantly affecting Seaboard’s consolidated operating income and cash flows. This segment is Seaboard’s most capital-intensive segment, representing approximately 61% of Seaboard’s total fixed assets, in addition to approximately 42% of total inventories, as of December 31, 2021. With the plant generally operating at capacity, Seaboard is continually looking for ways to enhance the plant’s operational efficiency, while also looking to increase margins by introducing new, higher value-added products. This segment also produces biodiesel for sale to third parties, and is expected to begin producing renewable diesel in 2022. Sales prices are affected by the supply and demand of diesel and environmental credit initiatives.
CT&M Segment
The CT&M segment provides integrated agricultural commodity trading, processing and logistics services. The majority of the CT&M segment’s sales are derived from sourcing agricultural commodities from multiple origins which are delivered to third-party and affiliate customers in various international locations. This segment’s sales are also significantly affected by fluctuating prices of various commodities, such as wheat, corn and soybean meal. Exports from various countries can exacerbate volatile market conditions that may have a significant impact on this segment’s sales and operating income. Profit margins are sometimes protected by using commodity derivatives and other risk management practices. The execution of these purchase and delivery transactions have long cycles of completion, which may extend for several months with a high degree of price volatility. As a result, these factors can significantly affect sales volumes, operating income, working capital and related cash flows from period to period. This segment represents approximately 53% of Seaboard’s total inventories as of December 31, 2021. Consolidated and non-consolidated affiliates operate the grain processing mills in foreign countries that are, in most cases, lesser developed and can be significantly impacted by changes in local crop production, political instability and local government policies, as well as fluctuations in economic and industry conditions and foreign currency exchange rates. The CT&M segment has invested in several entities in recent years and continues to seek opportunities to expand its business.
Marine Segment
The Marine segment provides cargo shipping services in the U.S., the Caribbean and Central and South America. Fluctuations in economic conditions and political instability in the regions or countries in which this segment operates may affect trade volumes and operating profits. In addition, cargo rates can fluctuate depending on regional supply and demand for shipping services. Since the Marine segment time-charters the majority of its ocean cargo vessels, it is affected by fluctuations in charter hire rates as well as fuel costs. This segment continues to explore ways to increase volumes on existing routes while seeking opportunities to broaden its route structure in the regions it serves.
Sugar and Alcohol Segment
The Sugar and Alcohol segment produces and processes sugar and alcohol in Argentina, primarily to be marketed locally. The Sugar and Alcohol segment’s sales and operating income are significantly affected by local sugar and alcohol prices, and domestic sugar production levels and government regulations affect these local prices. The currency exchange rate can have an impact on reported U.S. dollar sales, operating income and cash flows.
Power Segment
The Power segment is an independent power producer in the Dominican Republic. Spot market rates are impacted by fuel prices and the various producers supplying power to the grid. While fuel is this segment’s largest cost component and is subject to price fluctuations, higher fuel costs generally have been passed on to customers.
Turkey Segment
The Turkey segment, accounted for using the equity method, produces turkeys to process and sells turkey products. Sales prices are directly affected by both domestic and worldwide supply and demand for turkey products and other proteins. Feed accounts for the largest input cost in raising turkeys and is materially affected by price changes for corn and soybean meal. As a result, commodity price fluctuations can significantly affect the profitability and cash flows of Butterball.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Management believes Seaboard’s combination of internally generated cash, liquidity, capital resources and borrowing capabilities will be adequate for its existing operations and any currently known potential plans for expansion of existing operations in both the short-term and long-term.
Summary of Sources and Uses of Cash
Seaboard’s principal funding source is cash from operating activities and principal cash requirements include primarily operating expenses and capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, Seaboard had cash and short-term investments of nearly $1.5 billion and additional total working capital of $1.0 billion. The following table presents a summary of Seaboard’s available borrowing capacity under lines of credit.
As of December 31, 2021, $63 million of the $1.5 billion of cash and short-term investments were held by Seaboard’s foreign subsidiaries. Historically, Seaboard has considered substantially all foreign profits as being permanently invested in its foreign operations, including all cash and short-term investments held by foreign subsidiaries. Seaboard intends to continue permanently reinvesting these funds outside the U.S. as current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate them to fund Seaboard’s U.S. operations. For any planned repatriation to the U.S., Seaboard would record applicable deferred taxes for state or foreign withholding taxes.
Cash and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 decreased $50 million from December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily the result of lower cash from operations and greater investments in capital expenditures, partially offset by higher draws under lines of credit. Cash from operating activities decreased $199 million primarily due to additional working capital needs, partially offset by higher cash earnings. Inventories were higher as of December 31, 2021 than December 31, 2020, associated with price volatility in the commodity markets. Also outstanding receivables were higher due to more sales in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. During 2021, the short-term investment portfolio was repositioned to reduce equity price risk and utilize short-term investment proceeds to partially fund capital expenditures.
Capital Expenditures, Acquisitions and Other Investing Activities
During 2021, Seaboard invested $460 million in property, plant and equipment, of which $343 million was in the Pork segment, $44 million in the Marine segment and $43 million in the Power segment. The Pork segment expenditures were primarily to complete construction of a renewable diesel plant, purchase and improve a fuel storage and distribution facility and fund biogas recovery projects and other investments. The Marine segment expenditures primarily related to the purchase of a used vessel to increase its company-owned fleet. The Power segment expenditures were primarily for construction of a barge expected to be completed in 2022, commonly referred to as Estrella Del Mar III (“EDM III”). All other capital expenditures were primarily of a normal recurring nature such as replacements of machinery and equipment and general facility modernizations and upgrades.
The total budget for 2022 capital expenditures is approximately $700 million, with $450 million planned in the Pork segment and $200 million in the Marine segment. The Pork segment’s budget primarily includes continued investment in biogas recovery projects, normal replacement of breeding herd and other investments. At certain hog farms, the Pork segment is covering lagoons and constructing biogas upgrade facilities to capture methane and inject renewable gas to the local pipeline infrastructure. The Marine segment’s budget primarily includes the purchase of two used vessels, that are currently chartered, and installment payments on three vessels that are being constructed with completion expected in 2024. The new ships are estimated to cost $60 million each for a total cash outlay of approximately $180 million that is payable in accordance with milestones achieved over the course of construction. As of December 31, 2021, long-term capital expenditure cash requirements include approximately $20 million in 2023 and $90 million in 2024 primarily related to the Marine segment’s vessels under construction. Management anticipates paying for these capital expenditures from a combination of available cash, the use of available short-term investments and Seaboard’s available borrowing capacity.
Seaboard has acquired businesses in 2021, 2020 and 2019, and intends to continue to look for opportunities to further grow and diversify its operations, but there are no definitive plans at this time. Management intends to utilize existing liquidity, available borrowing capacity and other financing alternatives to fund these opportunities. The terms and availability of such financing may be impacted by economic and financial market conditions, as well as Seaboard's financial condition and results of operations at the time Seaboard seeks such financing, and there can be no assurances that Seaboard will be able to obtain such financing on terms that will be acceptable or advantageous. Also, Seaboard may fund capital calls and issue borrowings for its equity method investments based on the specific facts and circumstances.
From time to time, proceeds from the sale of short-term investments may be used to fund capital expenditure purchases or working capital needs. Asset reallocation intended to reduce equity exposure resulted in $2 billion of gross cash flows related to both the sale and purchase of short-term investments in the consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021. Seaboard continues to make investments, including $98 million in long-term investments for the year-ended December 31, 2021, to effectively manage its assets. As of December 31, 2021, Seaboard is committed to invest approximately $20 million in certain long-term investments in 2022, primarily real-estate related.
Financing Activities
Seaboard believes it has adequate available borrowings to meet short-term and long-term operating needs. Draws under lines of credit have increased compared to prior years to fund working capital and greater investments in capital expenditures. Seaboard had long-term debt of $717 million as of December 31, 2021, which includes a term loan due 2028 of $677 million. Current maturities on long-term debt was $8 million as of December 31, 2021, with expected annual interest payments of approximately $12 million based on interest rates as of year-end. During 2021, Seaboard repaid foreign subsidiary debt related to a 2018 acquisition of $46 million upon its maturity. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of debt.
Future Contractual Obligations
Other than those obligations discussed above, future obligations mostly include normal operating expenses. For operating and finance leases, Seaboard has a current undiscounted obligation of $217 million and a long-term undiscounted obligation of $537 million as noted in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. The majority of Seaboard’s purchase commitments for materials or supplies are related to hog, grain, feedstock and fuel procurement contracts with a current obligation of approximately $1.7 billion and a long-term obligation of approximately $1.5 billion as noted in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements. Also, Seaboard is subject to obligations under its existing defined benefit pension plans. As of December 31, 2021, the accounting unfunded status of all plans was $135 million. Anticipated employer payments related to the unfunded nonqualified executive plans in 2022 are $18 million. For additional information about Seaboard’s pension plans, see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net sales for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $9.2 billion, $7.1 billion and $6.8 billion, respectively. The increase for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflected higher prices of commodities sold in the CT&M segment, higher prices for pork products, market hogs and biodiesel sold in the Pork segment and higher cargo volumes and rates in the Marine segment. The increase for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities in the CT&M segment and higher volumes for pork products and hogs sold in the Pork segment, partially offset by lower cargo volumes in the Marine segment and lower spot prices and generation in the Power segment.
Operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $458 million, $245 million and $110 million, respectively. The increase for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflected higher voyage revenue in the Marine segment, increased margins on pork product and market hog sales in the Pork segment, and higher commodity prices, partially offset by derivative commodity contract losses and other operational costs in the CT&M segment. The increase for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected lower derivative contract losses and higher margins on pork product sales in the Pork segment and higher margins on third-party sales and derivative contract gains in the CT&M segment, partially offset by lower revenues in the Power segment.
Seaboard’s operations have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with 2020 financial results impacted more than 2021 financial results, especially with regards to cargo volumes at Seaboard’s Marine segment. Continued challenges remain with labor availability and labor costs, resulting in higher production costs. The near and long-term impacts of COVID-19, including variants, on Seaboard’s operations and the global economy are unknown and impossible to predict with any level of certainty.
Pork Segment
Net sales for the Pork segment increased $540 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily the result of higher prices of pork products sold, and to a lesser extent, higher prices and volumes of market hogs and higher biodiesel prices, partially offset by lower volumes of pork products sold.
Operating income for the Pork segment increased $96 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher margins on pork product sales and market hogs due to higher sales prices, partially offset by higher hog costs related to feed and higher selling, general and administrative expenses. Management is unable to predict market prices for pork products, the cost of feed or third-party hogs, biodiesel prices or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, for future periods. However, management anticipates this segment will be profitable in 2022. The uncertainties and the volatility of the commodity grain markets could have a significant impact on this segment’s profitability.
Income from affiliates has increased due to improved results at both STF and Daily’s primarily related to the commodity markets and return of sales volumes post COVID-19 disruptions. In January 2022, the Pork segment sold 50% of its ham-boning operations in Mexico. The Pork segment will continue to sell raw materials for further processing to this affiliate, and earnings from the Mexico operations will be reflected in Income (loss) from affiliates effective in the first quarter of 2022.
Net sales for the Pork segment increased $90 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily the result of higher volumes of pork products, market hogs and biodiesel sold and the recognition of more federal blender’s credits than the prior year, partially offset by lower biodiesel prices. In December 2019, the President of the U.S. signed into law the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act that extended the federal blender’s credits through 2022.
Operating income for the Pork segment increased $71 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to lower derivative contract losses, higher pork product sales, lower costs for feed and third-party hogs, more income associated with the federal blender’s credits received, and no expense related to the withdrawal liability from a multi-employer pension fund recorded in 2019, partially offset by higher plant processing costs and lower margins on biodiesel sales.
CT&M Segment
Net sales for the CT&M segment increased $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase primarily reflected higher sales prices of most commodities, and to a lesser extent, higher volumes to third-party customers, partially offset by lower volumes to affiliates due to timing of shipments.
Operating income for the CT&M segment decreased $57 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease primarily reflected derivative contract losses of $22 million related to the change in mark-to-market adjustments, $18 million of goodwill and property, plant and equipment impairment charges related to plans to dispose of immaterial businesses, and higher selling, general and administrative expenses. Due to worldwide commodity price fluctuations, the uncertain political and economic conditions in the countries in which this segment operates, the volatility in the commodity markets and the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, management is unable to predict sales and operating results for this segment for future periods. However, management anticipates positive operating income for this segment in 2022, excluding the effects of marking to market derivative contracts.
Had Seaboard not applied mark-to-market accounting to its derivative instruments, operating income for this segment would have been higher by $7 million and $5 million in 2021 and 2019, respectively, and lower by $15 million in 2020. While management believes its commodity futures, options and foreign exchange contracts are primarily economic hedges of its firm purchase and sales contracts or anticipated sales contracts, Seaboard does not perform the extensive record-keeping required to account for these transactions as hedges for accounting purposes. Accordingly, while the changes in fair value of the derivative instruments were marked to market, the changes in value of the firm purchase or sales contracts were not. As products are delivered to customers, these existing marked-to-market adjustments should be primarily offset by realized margins or losses as revenue is recognized over time and therefore, these marked-to-market adjustments could reverse in fiscal 2022. Management believes eliminating these marked-to-market adjustments provides a more reasonable presentation to compare and evaluate period-to-period financial results for this segment.
Income from affiliates increased $20 million for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to improved results from several of this segment’s affiliates related to a return of sales volumes post COVID-19 disruptions.
Net sales for the CT&M segment increased $322 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher volumes of certain commodities for third-party customers, including sales from a business acquired in October 2019, and higher corn, soybean and other commodity prices, partially offset by lower volumes to affiliates.
Operating income for the CT&M segment increased $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher margins on third-party sales, including margins for a business acquired in October 2019, from higher prices and volumes, derivative contract gains of $20 million related to the change in mark-to-market adjustments and lower selling, general and administrative expenses.
Marine Segment
Net sales for the Marine segment increased $391 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in average freight rates due to strong demand and the current global shortage of vessels, and higher cargo volumes. In 2020, cargo volumes were lower due to many of Seaboard Marine’s customers temporarily shutting down due to government orders associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the recovery of operations taking time.
Operating income for the Marine segment increased $176 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily the result of higher voyage revenue, partially offset by higher fuel costs due to the increase in both price and consumption, higher charter hire costs due to increased rates, and higher terminal and intermodal trucking costs related to the increase in cargo volumes. Management cannot predict changes in fuel costs, cargo volumes and cargo rates, the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, for future periods. However, management anticipates this segment will be profitable in 2022, including consideration of continued high charter hire rates.
Net sales for the Marine segment decreased $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of lower cargo volumes, partially offset by higher rates due to a change in cargo mix with more refrigerated containers that generally have a higher freight rate.
Operating income for the Marine segment increased $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily the result of lower fuel costs due to the decrease in price and consumption and lower other voyage costs and terminal costs related to the reduction in cargo volumes.
Sugar and Alcohol Segment
Net sales for the Sugar and Alcohol segment increased $17 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase primarily reflected higher prices and volumes of alcohol sold related to strong demand post the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, partially offset by lower sugar sales. Sugar and alcohol sales are denominated in Argentine pesos, and an increase in local sales prices may be offset by exchange rate changes in the Argentine peso against the U.S. dollar. This segment’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar, which will continue to be effective as long as the Argentine economy is considered highly inflationary.
Operating income for the Sugar and Alcohol segment remained the same for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Higher margins on alcohol sales were primarily offset by lower sugar sales and higher sugar production costs. Management cannot predict local sugar and alcohol prices, the volatility in the currency exchange rate or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, for future periods. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2022.
Net sales for the Sugar and Alcohol segment decreased $15 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease primarily reflected lower volumes and prices of alcohol sold as a result of less demand for fuels with the lengthy COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, partially offset by higher sugar prices.
Operating income for the Sugar and Alcohol segment increased $18 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase primarily reflected higher margins on sugar due to higher prices and lower alcohol and sugar production costs.
Power Segment
Net sales for the Power segment decreased $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease primarily reflected lower production related to reduced operations associated with relocating and connecting the existing barge at a new site, temporary fuel constraints and more power generation from lower variable-cost producers, offset by an increase in spot market rates as a result of higher fuel prices. Typically, lower cost power plants are dispatched before those with higher costs.
Operating income for the Power segment decreased $12 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to lower revenues and higher operational costs related to increased fuel, maintenance and labor costs associated with the installation of EDM III. The commercial operations for EDM III are expected to begin in 2022.
Management cannot predict fuel costs, the extent that spot market rates will fluctuate compared to fuel costs or other power producers, or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, for future periods. Based on these conditions and the timing of EDM III’s commercial operations, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2022.
Net sales for the Power segment decreased $53 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease primarily reflected lower spot market rates as a result of lower fuel prices and lower production related to more power generation from lower variable-cost producers.
Operating income for the Power segment decreased $24 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower revenues, partially offset by lower fuel costs due to lower prices and fuel consumption.
Turkey Segment
The Turkey segment, accounted for using the equity method, represents Seaboard’s investment in Butterball. The increase in loss from affiliate for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily the result of lower sales volumes and higher live and plant production costs due to increased feed and labor prices, partially offset by higher sales due to increased prices. The decrease in loss from affiliate for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily the result of higher sales attributable to more whole bird volumes and increased prices related to a stronger sales mix of value-added products sold and less interest expense, partially offset by higher live and production costs. Management is unable to predict market prices for turkey products, the cost of feed or the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, for future periods. Based on these conditions, management cannot predict if this segment will be profitable in 2022. The uncertainties and the volatility of the commodity grain markets could have a significant impact on this segment’s profitability.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $31 million compared to 2020. The increase was primarily the result of higher personnel costs including annual raises and bonuses associated with improved financial performance, more consulting fees associated with legal and other advisory matters, an increase in travel costs as vaccinations became available and bad debt expense. SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $7 million compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily the result of lower costs related to Seaboard’s deferred compensation program, recovery of bad debt expense and lower travel costs and other cost reduction efforts, partially offset by higher personnel costs, which included higher pension settlement charges in 2020. The deferred compensation program costs are offset by the effect of the mark-to-market on investments recorded in other investment income (loss).
Interest Expense
Interest expense totaled $13 million, $19 million and $36 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in interest expense for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily related to mark-to-market fluctuations on interest rate swap agreements and lower interest rates on outstanding debt, partially offset by less capitalized interest related to capital expenditure investments. The decrease in interest expense for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily related to lower interest rates on outstanding debt and increased capitalized interest.
Interest Income
Interest income totaled $22 million, $22 million and $30 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest income primarily includes interest earned on debt securities.
Other Investment Income (Loss), Net
Other investment income (loss), net totaled $133 million, $84 million and $225 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in other investment income for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflected realized gains on short-term investments, partially offset by mark-to-market losses on short-term investments. The decrease in other investment income for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to mark-to-market fluctuations on short-term investments.
Foreign Currency Gains (Losses), Net
Foreign currency gains (losses), net totaled $16 million, $(31) million and $0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in foreign currency gains for 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflected gains in the euro, Zambian kwacha and South African rand, among fluctuations of other currency
exchange rates in several foreign countries. The decrease in foreign currency gains for 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected losses in the euro, Zambian kwacha and South African rand, among fluctuations of other currency exchange rates in several foreign countries.
Income Tax Expense
The 2021 effective tax rate was higher than the 2020 effective tax rate primarily due to increased earnings which decreased the proportional effect of tax credits available to offset the associated income tax. The 2020 effective tax rate was higher than the 2019 effective tax rate primarily due to decreased tax-exempt income and federal investment tax credits, partially offset by a decrease in foreign tax expense related to a change in the mix of domestic and foreign earnings as compared to the prior year. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on Seaboard’s income taxes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon Seaboard’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires Seaboard to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that can have a meaningful effect on the reporting of consolidated financial statements. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of significant accounting policies. Management has identified the accounting estimates believed to be the most important to the portrayal of Seaboard’s financial condition and results, and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management has reviewed these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Accrued Pension Liability - The measurement of Seaboard’s pension liability and related expense is dependent on a variety of assumptions and estimates regarding future events. These assumptions include discount rates, assumed rate of return on plan assets, compensation increases, mortality rates and retirement rates. The discount rate and return on plan assets are important elements of liability and expense measurement and are reviewed on an annual basis. The effect of decreasing both the discount rate and assumed rate of return on plan assets by 50 basis points would be an increase in pension expense of approximately $4 million per year. The effects of actual results differing from the assumptions (i.e. gains or losses) are primarily accumulated in accrued pension liability and amortized over future periods if it exceeds the 10% corridor and, therefore, could affect Seaboard’s recognized pension expense in such future periods, as permitted under GAAP. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the pension rates and assumptions.
Income Taxes - Income taxes are determined by management based on current tax regulations in the various worldwide taxing jurisdictions in which Seaboard conducts its business. In various situations, accruals have been made for estimates of the tax effects for certain transactions, business structures, the estimated reversal of timing differences and future projected profitability of Seaboard’s various business units based on management’s interpretation of existing facts, circumstances and tax regulations. Should new evidence come to management’s attention that could alter previous conclusions, if tax laws change or if taxing authorities disagree with the positions taken by Seaboard, the change in estimate could result in a material adverse or favorable impact on the financial statements. An increase in the future U.S. federal income tax rate of 5% would increase tax expense on the reversal of timing differences by approximately $23 million as a one-time adjustment, which would be fully reflected in the period of enactment.