Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations
The information in this MD&A should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes set forth in Part II, Item 8, as well as the discussion included in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All amounts and percentages are approximate due to rounding and all dollars are in millions, except per share amounts.
Business Overview and Reportable Segments
Sealed Air Corporation (“SEE”, “Sealed Air”, or the “Company”, also referred to as “we”, “us”, or “our”) is a leading global provider of packaging solutions integrating high-performance materials, automation, equipment and services. SEE designs and delivers packaging solutions that protect goods, preserve food, automate packaging processes, enable e-commerce and digital connectivity for packaged goods. Our packaging solutions are designed to help our customers automate their operations to be increasingly touchless and more resilient, safer, less wasteful, and enhance brand engagement with consumers. We deliver our packaging solutions to an array of end markets including fresh proteins, foods, fluids, medical and healthcare, e-commerce, logistics and omnichannel fulfillment operations, and industrials. Our portfolio of solutions includes leading brands such as CRYOVAC® brand food packaging, SEALED AIR® brand protective packaging, AUTOBAG® brand automated packaging, BUBBLE WRAP® brand packaging and SEE Automation™ solutions.
The Company’s Food and Protective segments are considered reportable segments under FASB ASC Topic 280. Our reportable segments are aligned with similar groups of products and customers. Corporate includes certain costs that are not allocated to the reportable segments. See Note 6, “Segments,” for additional information.
As of January 1, 2021, we consolidated the reporting of the North America and South America geographic regions, which are now collectively presented as Americas within discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations. No changes were made to EMEA or APAC.
We employ sales, marketing and customer service personnel throughout the world who sell and market our products to and through a widespread distribution network, fabricators, converters, e-commerce and mail order fulfillment firms, and contract packaging firms as well as directly to end-users such as food processors, food service businesses, supermarket retailers, lodging, retail pharmaceutical companies, healthcare facilities, medical device manufacturers, and other manufacturers. We generally do not impose annual minimum purchase volume requirements on our distributors. Product returns from our distributors in 2021 were not material. In 2021, 2020 or 2019, no customer or affiliated group of customers accounted for 10% or more of our consolidated net sales.
On a consolidated basis, there normally is minimal seasonality in the business, with net sales slightly lower in the first quarter and slightly higher towards the end of the third quarter through the fourth quarter. Our consolidated results of operations typically trend directionally the same as our net sales seasonality. In 2021, however, our pricing actions in response to raw material price increases and other inflationary pressures, including freight and labor costs, resulted in a higher portion of net sales in the second half compared to prior years. We expect that net sales and earnings may continue to be impacted by the timing of our pricing actions in response to future fluctuations of raw material costs and other inflationary pressures. Approximately one-third of Food's sales are subject to formula based pricing, predominantly within North America and APAC, which lags raw material cost movement by approximately six months, on average. Additionally, changes in end-consumer behavior, such as an increase in e-commerce sales, or temporary social distancing restrictions due to COVID-19 or other factors, have in the past impacted the timing and seasonality of results of operations.
Cash flow from operations tends to be lower in the first quarter and higher in the fourth quarter, reflecting seasonality of sales and working capital changes, including the timing of certain annual incentive compensation payments. During 2021, the Company generated $510 million in cash flow from operations in the second half, compared to $200 million in the first half of 2021. The proportion of cash generated in the second half of the year was relatively consistent with 2020.
The extent and timing of our results of operations may be difficult to predict if significant one-time transactions, events or non-recurring charges were to impact our business.
Competition for most of our packaging products is based primarily on packaging performance characteristics, automation, sustainability-related characteristics of the materials, service, and price. Since competition is also based upon innovations in packaging technology, we maintain ongoing research and development programs to enable us to maintain technological leadership. Competition is both global and regional in scope and includes numerous smaller, local competitors with limited product portfolios and geographic reach.
Our net sales are sensitive to developments in our customers’ business or market conditions, changes in the global economy, and the effects of foreign currency translation. Our costs can vary materially due to changes in input costs, including petrochemical-related costs (primarily resin costs), which are not within our control. Consequently, our management focuses on reducing those costs that we can control and using petrochemical-based and other raw materials efficiently. We also believe that our global presence helps to mitigate the impact of localized changes in business conditions.
We manage our businesses with a strategic capital allocation mindset to create economic value. We are making investments to create value while generating operating cash flow that will permit us to continue to spend on innovative research and development and to invest in our business by means of capital expenditures for property, equipment and acquisitions. Moreover, we expect that our ability to generate substantial operating cash flow should provide us with the flexibility to repay debt and to return capital to our stockholders.
Each issue of our outstanding senior notes imposes limitations on our operations and those of specified subsidiaries. Our Senior Secured Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for credit facilities of this type, including limitations on our indebtedness, liens, investments, restricted payments, mergers and acquisitions, dispositions of assets, transactions with affiliates, amendment of documents and sale leasebacks, and a covenant specifying a maximum leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA. We expect continued compliance with our debt covenants including the covenant leverage ratio over the next 12 months. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities” for further details.
Non-U.S. GAAP Information
We present financial information that conforms to U.S. GAAP. We also present financial information that does not conform to U.S. GAAP, as our management believes it is useful to investors. In addition, non-U.S. GAAP financial measures are used by management to review and analyze our operating performance and, along with other data, as internal measures for setting annual budgets and forecasts, assessing financial performance, providing guidance and comparing our financial performance with our peers. Non-U.S. GAAP financial measures also provide management with additional means to understand and evaluate the core operating results and trends in our ongoing business by eliminating certain expenses and/or gains (which may not occur in each period presented) and other items that management believes might otherwise make comparisons of our ongoing business with prior periods and peers more difficult, obscure trends in ongoing operations or reduce management’s ability to make useful forecasts. Non-U.S. GAAP information does not purport to represent any similarly titled U.S. GAAP information and is not an indicator of our performance under U.S. GAAP. Investors are cautioned against placing undue reliance on these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures. Further, investors are urged to review and consider carefully the adjustments made by management to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to arrive at these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, described below.
The non-U.S. GAAP financial metrics exclude certain specified items (“Special Items”), including restructuring charges and restructuring associated costs, adjustments in the valuation of our "SEE Ventures" portfolio (which may include debt or equity investments), certain transactions and other charges related to acquisitions and divestitures, gains and losses related to acquisitions and divestitures, special tax items or tax benefits (collectively, “Tax Special Items”) and certain other items. We evaluate unusual or Special Items on an individual basis. Our evaluation of whether to exclude an unusual or special item for purposes of determining our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures considers both the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the item, including among other things (i) its nature, (ii) whether or not it relates to our ongoing business operations, and (iii) whether or not we expect it to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis.
When we present non-U.S. GAAP forward-looking guidance, we do not also provide guidance for the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, as they are not available without unreasonable effort due to the high variability, complexity, and low visibility with respect to certain Special Items, including gains and losses on the disposition of businesses, the ultimate outcome of certain legal or tax proceedings, foreign currency gains or losses resulting from the volatile currency market in Argentina, and other unusual gains and losses. These items are uncertain, depend on various factors, and could be material to our results computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as Earnings before Interest Expense, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, adjusted to exclude the impact of Special Items. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as one of many measures to assess the performance of the business. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is the performance metric used by the Company's chief operating decision maker to evaluate performance of our reportable segments. Adjusted EBITDA is also a metric used to determine performance in the Company's Annual Incentive Plan. We do not believe there are estimates underlying the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, other than those inherent in our U.S. GAAP results of operations, which would render the use and presentation of Adjusted EBITDA misleading. While the nature and amount of individual Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of
Adjusted EBITDA is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful and consistent comparison of our Company's performance to other periods.
The following table shows a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations:
(1)Includes depreciation and amortization adjustment of $(0.8) million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company may also assess performance using Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is a useful measure to assess the profitability of sales made to third parties and the efficiency of our core operations.
Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted Earnings Per Share (“Adjusted EPS”) are also used by the Company to measure total company performance. Adjusted Net Earnings is defined as U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations excluding the impact of Special Items. Adjusted EPS is defined as our Adjusted Net Earnings divided by the number of diluted shares outstanding. We believe that Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS are useful measurements of Company performance, along with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, because they incorporate non-cash items of depreciation and amortization, including stock-based compensation, which impact the overall performance and net earnings of our business. Additionally, Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS reflect the impact of our Adjusted Tax Rate and interest expense on a net and per share basis. While the nature and amount of individual Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with other U.S. GAAP and non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS provide a useful and consistent comparison of our Company's performance to other periods.
The following table shows a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP Net Earnings and Diluted Earnings per Share from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS from continuing operations.
(1)Net earnings per common share are calculated under the two-class method.
(2)Includes pre-tax Special Items, less Tax Special Items and the tax impact of Special Items as seen in the following calculation of non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted income tax rate.
Adjusted Tax Rate
We also present our adjusted income tax rate (“Adjusted Tax Rate”). The Adjusted Tax Rate is a measure of our U.S. GAAP effective tax rate, adjusted to exclude the tax impact from the Special Items that are excluded from our Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS metrics as well as expense or benefit from any special taxes or Tax Special Items. The Adjusted Tax Rate is an indicator of the taxes on our core business. The tax circumstances and effective tax rate in the specific countries where the Special Items occur will determine the impact (positive or negative) to the Adjusted Tax Rate. While the nature and amount of Tax Special Items vary from period to period, we believe our calculation of the Adjusted Tax Rate is applied consistently to all periods and, in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP effective income tax rate, the Adjusted Tax Rate provides a useful and consistent comparison of the impact that tax expense has on our Company's performance.
The following table shows our calculation of the non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted income tax rate:
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2021, Tax Special Items reflect interest and other adjustments to existing unrecognized tax positions and deferred tax revaluations associated with legislative changes and administrative interpretations to enacted statutes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Tax Special Items reflect net benefits from audit settlements and retroactive application of new GILTI regulations, offset by withholding expense related to cash repatriation initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2019, Tax Special Items reflect net benefits from tax optimization initiatives and research and development credits.
(2)The tax rate used to calculate the tax impact of Special Items is based on the jurisdiction in which the item was recorded.
Organic and Constant Dollar Measures
In our “Net Sales by Geographic Region,” “Net Sales by Segment” and in some of the discussions and tables that follow, we exclude the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “constant dollar”, and we exclude acquisitions in the first year after closing, divestiture activity from the time of sale, and the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “organic.” Changes in net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency translation and/or acquisition and divestiture activity are non-U.S. GAAP financial measures. As a worldwide business, it is important that we consider the effects of foreign currency translation when we view our results and plan our strategies. Nonetheless, we cannot control changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Consequently, when our management analyzes our financial results including performance metrics such as sales, cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expense, to measure the core performance of our business, we may exclude the impact of foreign currency translation by translating our current period results at prior period foreign currency exchange rates. We also may exclude the impact of foreign currency translation when making incentive compensation determinations. As a result, our management believes that these presentations are useful internally and may be useful to investors.
Refer to these specific tables presented later in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for reconciliations of these non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Free Cash Flow
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and an indication of the strength and ability of our operations to generate cash. We define free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, free cash flow should not be considered a substitute for net income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow does not represent residual cash available for discretionary expenditures, including certain debt servicing requirements or non-discretionary expenditures that are not deducted from this measure.
Refer to the specific tables presented later in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under Analysis of Historical Cash Flow for reconciliations of this non-U.S. GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
Net Debt
In addition to total debt, we use Net Debt, which we define as total debt less cash and cash equivalents, as a useful measure of our total debt exposure. Net Debt is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, Net Debt should not be considered a substitute for amounts owed to creditors or other balance sheet information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and it may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Refer to the specific tables presented later in our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations under Outstanding Indebtedness for reconciliations of this non-U.S. GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
Executive Summary for 2021
Throughout 2021, we continued to focus on executing our strategies to drive growth through automation, digital, and sustainability solutions. Despite challenges, including the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, supply chain and raw material disruptions, and a tight labor market, SEE continued to work collaboratively across functions and countries. Net sales and net earnings grew in the current year, as we continued to deliver for our customers.
Automation - Since launching our SEE Automation Solutions strategy in 2020, we have experienced growth in equipment sales. We aim to solve our customers’ automation needs while creating significant return on their investments through savings and increased productivity. With SEE Automation, we are taking an integrated solutions approach and looking for opportunities to help customers eliminate waste, simplify processes, remove people from harm's way and drive 'touchless' operations.
Digital - We have launched the MySEE digital e-commerce platform to make doing business with SEE easier and more efficient. We are investing in automation and digital technologies that enhance performance, efficiency and monitoring in customers’ and our own operations. We are developing smart packaging that can enable traceability and
deliver digital content. We are investing in digital printing to drive customer savings, generate demand and enhance brand image and shelf impact.
Sustainability - Sustainability is embedded in our purpose and vision. We are designing high-performance packaging materials with recyclability in mind, to make sustainability more affordable, and to create a pathway for a circular economy.
We strive to deploy a purpose driven capital allocation strategy. As part of that strategy we invest and acquire to meet our strategic priorities. On November 1, 2021, the Company completed the sale of Reflectix, Inc. (“Reflectix”), a non-strategic business within the Protective reporting segment that sells reflective insulation solutions. The business was sold for $82.5 million in cash proceeds. We recorded a $45 million pre-tax gain on the sale of Reflectix, within Gain (Loss) on sale of businesses and property and equipment on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Throughout 2021, we continued to invest in disruptive technologies and innovations through our SEE Ventures initiative. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we invested $18 million in strategic equity and debt instruments.
We continue to execute our Reinvent SEE business transformation, focused on the 4P'SSM: Performance, People + Digital, Platforms, Processes and Sustainability. During the year, the Reinvent SEE business transformation delivered incremental Adjusted EBITDA benefits of $64 million. The restructuring component of the Reinvent SEE business transformation is now expected to conclude by mid-2022. The capabilities, operational disciplines, and governance processes established through the Reinvent SEE business transformation are embedded in our on-going continuous improvement system and demonstrating sustained results. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $31 million, or $23 million net of tax, in restructuring and restructuring associated charges primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives. Cash payments, including restructuring payments, primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation, were $28 million. See Note 12, “Restructuring Activities,” for additional details regarding each of the Company’s restructuring programs.
Supply Chain Disruptions and Raw Material Price Increases
Throughout 2021, the Company experienced supply chain disruptions and sharp raw material price increases resulting from various factors including general inflationary pressure, limited availability of certain raw materials, global transportation disruptions and natural disasters such as Winter Storm Uri in February 2021. In addition to higher raw material costs, we have incurred higher freight costs associated with the sourcing and movement of raw materials due to overall tight market conditions. As a result, cost of sales increased from 67.2% of sales to 69.6% of sales during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year.
The Company implemented price increases throughout the year. The associated timing lag on these increases and formula-based pricing has resulted in compressed gross margins (defined as the gross profit divided by net sales) during the year ended December 31, 2021. On average, our formula-based pricing lags raw material cost movement by approximately six months. Approximately one-third of Food's sales are subject to formula-based pricing, predominantly within the Americas and APAC. Formula-based pricing does not comprise a significant portion of sales in our Protective segment.
We continue to work closely with our customers and have been leveraging our global supply network and supplier relationships and implementing material substitution where available to meet customers' demands and mitigate supply continuity risks. However, the current environment continues to negatively impact the price and supply of certain raw materials. Additionally, the supply disruptions may result in longer lead times for some of our customers, the loss and/or delay of sales, or the inability to fulfill customer orders. Any of these developments may have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for information concerning operational risks, including customer responses to price increases, raw material pricing and availability.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic, including the outbreak of variants such as Delta and Omicron, and the related containment and mitigation measures that have been put into place across the globe, have had and may continue to have an adverse impact on the global economy and our business.
We continue to monitor the impact that COVID-19 has on all aspects of our business and geographies, including the impact on our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and distribution channels.
We and some of our customers have experienced facility shutdowns or reductions in operations during the pandemic. The outbreak of recent variants has adversely impacted staffing levels in our operations as affected employees recover from illness or contagious periods.
Our diverse end-markets and geographies continue to experience varying degrees of impact from COVID-19. The food service market, including restaurants, entertainment venues and hotels, experienced higher activity in 2021 as compared to the prior year when it was more adversely impacted by government mandated shut-downs and social distancing measures. This resulted in year-over-year volume growth for many of our products that support this market. Protective experienced year-over-year volume increases in 2021, particularly within industrial segments, as economies continued to reopen.
However, the environment remains volatile, and we cannot predict the future impacts of the pandemic on our business and the markets we serve. Government agencies may impose future restrictions on commercial activities to limit the spread of the virus, including new variants. Future developments of the pandemic, including future spikes or areas of significant regional spread, may cause uneven impacts to our geographies around the world.
The health and safety of SEE’s employees, suppliers and customers globally continues to be the Company’s top priority. Safety measures remain in place at our sites such as: enhanced cleaning procedures, employee temperature checks, use of personal protective equipment for location-dependent workers, social distancing measures within operating sites, and remote/flexible work arrangements for non-location dependent employees.
In remote working environments, we continue our efforts to mitigate information technology risks including failures in the physical infrastructure or operating systems that support our businesses and customers, or cyber attacks and security breaches of our networks or systems. Additionally, we continue to execute all activities related to our internal control over financial reporting in remote working environments. There has not been any change in our internal control over financial reporting during the year ended December 31, 2021 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” above for additional risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Current Trends and Forward Looking Expectations
We expect overall demand for our solutions will continue to be strong in 2022. We expect sales for our automated solutions and digital offerings, as well as sales through our online enterprise digital commerce channel, to continue to increase, as we execute on our growth strategies. We expect disciplines developed through our Reinvent SEE business transformation to continue to transform into our on-going continuous improvement program, SEE Operating Engine, driving operational efficiencies and benefits in 2022 and beyond.
However, supply chain disruptions and raw material availability will continue to pose challenges. We will continue to leverage our global supply network, although we expect continued higher freight costs and possible delays in our operations. Overall, we expect higher raw materials costs in 2022 in addition to higher non-material costs and labor inflation. In addition, inflation, labor challenges, the impact of COVID-19, and overall supply chain disruptions are expected to continue to impact our business in 2022.
In the future some of SEE's products will be subject to a tax on certain plastics, which is currently scheduled to go into effect in 2022 in the United Kingdom and other European countries in 2023. While we expect to pass through the plastics tax, there is no guarantee that we will be able to recover the impact of plastic taxes from our customers. Not all of our products are subject to the tax, as the tax is dependent on various factors including, weight, gauge, material recyclability and recycled content, among other factors. Even if we were not successful in passing through the expense, we do not believe the impact of the plastic taxes, as planned to go in effect in 2022 or 2023, would have a material impact on our results of operations. However, the impact of legislation or tax policies that may be amended or proposed and passed in the future is unknown. We maintain programs designed to comply with laws and regulations and to monitor their evolution.
Highlights of Financial Performance
Below are the highlights of our financial performance for the three years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
# Denotes a variance greater than or equal to 100% or equal to or less than (100)%.
(1)See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations.
(2)See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Adjusted Net Earnings and Adjusted EPS from continuing operations.
Foreign Currency Translation Impact on Consolidated Financial Results
Since we are a U.S. domiciled company, we translate our foreign currency-denominated financial results into U.S. dollars. Due to the changes in the value of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, translating our financial results from foreign currencies to U.S. dollars may result in a favorable or unfavorable impact. Historically, the most significant currencies that have impacted the translation of our consolidated financial results are the euro, the Australian dollar, the British pound, the Canadian dollar, the Chinese Renminbi, the Mexican peso, the Brazilian real and the New Zealand dollar.
The following table presents the approximate favorable or (unfavorable) impact that foreign currency translation had on certain components of our consolidated financial results:
Net Sales by Geographic Region
The following tables present the components of the change in net sales by geographic region for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
(1)As of January 1, 2021, we consolidated the reporting of the North America and South America geographic regions, which are now collectively presented as Americas. No changes were made to EMEA or APAC. This change has no impact on our prior period consolidated results and is only the aggregation of the previously bifurcated continents. Prior periods have been retrospectively adjusted to reflect the new geographic regions.
(2)Our volume reported above includes the net impact of changes in unit volume as well as the period-to-period change in the mix of products sold.
Net Sales by Segment
The following tables present the components of change in net sales by our segment reporting structure for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 2020, and for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with 2019.
(1)Our volume reported above includes the net impact of changes in unit volume as well as the period-to-period change in the mix of products sold.
Food
2021 compared with 2020
As reported, net sales increased $287 million, or 10%, in 2021 compared with 2020. Foreign currency had a positive impact of $32 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $255 million, or 9%, in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to the following:
•favorable pricing of $142 million, primarily in the Americas, due to pricing actions and the impact of formula-based pricing to offset rising costs on inputs, non-material components, and labor; and
•higher volumes of $113 million, with increases across all regions, on higher demand in the food service industries and increased automated equipment sales.
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, net sales decreased $55 million, or 2% in 2020 compared with 2019. Foreign currency had a negative impact of $82 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $27 million, or 1% in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to the following:
•favorable pricing of $14 million, primarily in the Americas, driven by U.S. dollar-based indexed pricing in South America, partially offset by formula-based pricing declines in North America;
•higher volumes of $7 million, primarily driven by increased demand for retail protein packaging and equipment sales, partially offset by a decline in global food service sales driven by COVID-19 stay-at-home restrictions; and
•contributions from acquisition activities of approximately $7 million.
Protective
2021 compared with 2020
As reported, net sales increased $343 million, or 17%, in 2021 compared with 2020. Foreign currency had a positive impact of approximately $36 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $308 million, or 15% in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to the following:
•higher volumes of $161 million, with increases across all regions on higher industrial segment demand, strength in automated equipment and continued momentum in fulfillment;
•favorable pricing of $154 million, primarily in the Americas, due to price actions to offset rising costs on inputs, non-material components, and labor; and
•a decrease of $7 million due to the divestiture of Reflectix in November 2021.
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, net sales increased $167 million, or 9%, in 2020 compared with 2019. The impact of foreign currency translation during the year was negligible. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $167 million, or 9% in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to the following:
•the contribution of $166 million in sales from the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition through July 2020, which was the 12 month anniversary of the acquisition;
•higher volumes of $16 million, primarily in Americas and APAC due to increased demand in e-commerce, fulfillment and automated equipment, partially offset by global softness in industrial end-markets due to COVID-19; and
•unfavorable pricing of $15 million, primarily in Americas.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
2021 compared with 2020
As reported, cost of sales increased by $559 million, or 17.0%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. Cost of sales was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $49 million. As a percentage of net sales, cost of sales increased by 240 basis points, from 67.2% in 2020 to 69.6% in 2021, primarily due to higher input costs resulting from raw material price increases and higher freight costs associated with global supply chain disruptions. Additionally, labor inflation negatively impacted cost of sales. Higher input, labor and freight costs were partially offset by productivity improvements resulting from our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives and the benefit of higher volumes on fixed cost components.
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, cost of sales increased by $68 million, or 2.1%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Cost of sales was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $60 million. As a percentage of net sales, cost of sales decreased by 10 basis points, from 67.3% in 2019 to 67.2% in 2020, primarily due to productivity improvements resulting from our Reinvent SEE business transformation initiatives and lower input costs during the year. Improvements were partially offset by the impact of inflationary cost increases including non-material and labor costs and additional expenses, related to COVID-19, higher employment costs and incremental freight due to sourcing changes along with other higher manufacturing related costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are included in the table below.
2021 compared with 2020
As reported, SG&A expenses decreased $1 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. SG&A expenses were impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $9 million. On a constant dollar basis, SG&A expenses decreased approximately $10 million, or 1%. The decrease in SG&A expenses was primarily the result of lower cash-based incentive compensation expense due to the achieved payout relative to the prior year and benefits from actions associated with our Reinvent SEE business transformation. Additionally, one-time or non-recurring items charged to SG&A were lower in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to lower expenses associated with acquisition and divestiture activity and lower restructuring associated items in support of our Reinvent SEE business transformation. Lower expenses resulting from these items were partially offset by labor inflation.
2020 compared with 2019
As reported, SG&A expenses decreased $140 million, or 15%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. SG&A expenses were impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $6 million. On a constant dollar basis, SG&A expenses decreased approximately $134 million, or 15%. The decrease was primarily driven by a $59 million charge related to a settlement agreement with Novipax in 2019, as well as lower restructuring associated costs and lower professional service fees, including legal fees, associated with Special Items. Travel and entertainment related expenses within SG&A were $19 million lower in 2020 compared to the prior year, primarily resulting from COVID-19 stay-at-home orders and travel restrictions. SG&A also benefited from reductions driven by our Reinvent SEE business transformation, including restructuring associated savings. These improvements were partially offset by the impact of higher incentive compensation expense and labor inflation.
Amortization Expense of Intangible Assets
Amortization expense of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The increase in amortization expense of intangibles in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in amortization for capitalized software.
The increase in amortization expense of intangibles in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in amortization for capitalized software and the full year impact of intangible amortization associated with the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems in August 2019.
See Note 5, “Divestiture and Acquisition Activity,” for additional details regarding the Company's recent acquisition activity.
Reinvent SEE Business Transformation and Restructuring Activities
See Note 12, “Restructuring Activities,” for additional details regarding the Company’s restructuring programs discussed below.
In December 2018 the Sealed Air Board of Directors approved a three-year restructuring program (the "Program") related to the Reinvent SEE business transformation. In December 2021, the Board of Directors approved a six-month extension of the
program primarily in consideration of on-going initiatives, including those related to SEE's continued transformation to increase digital platforms and offerings. The six-month extension did not expand the authorized spend of the program of $220 million. We now expect the program to be substantially completed by June 30, 2022.
We expect the continuous improvement capabilities and governance processes established through Reinvent SEE will continue to transform the SEE Operating Engine, which is rooted in economic value add with the goal to drive profitable, above market organic growth and attractive returns on invested capital.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Program generated incremental cost benefits of $60 million related to reductions in operating costs, of which $19 million was related to restructuring actions, and $4 million in benefits related to actions impacting price/cost spread.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Program generated incremental cost benefits of $118 million. Of the incremental cost benefits in 2020, $104 million related to reductions in operating costs, of which $33 million was related to restructuring actions, and $14 million in benefits related to actions impacting price/cost spread.
The decrease in cost benefits generated by the Program in 2021, as compared to 2020, primarily relates to the timing of when Program initiatives were implemented and the year-over-year incremental cost benefits already realized by the Program.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred restructuring associated expenses of $17 million, which were primarily related to third party fees in support of the Reinvent SEE business transformation. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded restructuring expense of $15 million.
Cash outlay for restructuring and restructuring related activities was $28 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $74 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect cash outlay for restructuring and restructuring associated costs to be approximately $20 million to $25 million during the year ending December 31, 2022.
The actual timing of future costs and cash payments related to the Program described above are subject to change due to a variety of factors that may cause a portion of the costs, spending and benefits to occur later than expected. In addition, changes in foreign exchange rates may impact future costs, spending, benefits and cost synergies.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net includes the interest expense on our outstanding debt, as well as the net impact of capitalized interest, interest income, the effects of terminated interest rate swaps and the amortization of capitalized senior debt issuance costs and credit facility fees, bond discounts, and terminated treasury locks.
Interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
(1)On August 1, 2019, Sealed Air Corporation, on behalf of itself and certain of its subsidiaries, and Sealed Air Corporation (US) entered into an amendment to its existing senior secured credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., as agent, and the other financial institutions party thereto. The amendment provided for a new incremental term facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $475 million, to be used, in part, to finance the acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
(2)In September 2021, Sealed Air issued $600 million of 1.573% Senior Secured Notes due 2026. The proceeds were used to retire the Company's 4.875% Senior Notes due 2022 and to repay the U.S. dollar tranche of Term Loan A due 2023. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
(3)In November 2019, the Company issued $425 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2027 and used the proceeds to retire the existing $425 million of 6.50% Senior Notes due 2020. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
Other (Expense) Income, net
Increase in fair value of equity investments
We hold strategic investments in other companies. As of December 31, 2021, these investments qualified and were accounted for under the measurement alternative, described in ASC 321, for equity investments that do not have readily determinable fair values. These investments are measured at cost, less impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer. We do not exercise significant influence over these companies. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded an increase in the fair value of these investments of $7 million and $15 million, respectively. The increases in fair value during 2021 and 2020 were directly related to an additional round of equity issuance from certain investees, issued during the third quarter of 2021 and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively. We concluded that these increases were attributable to observable price changes in orderly transactions for a similar investment of the same issuer. See Note 16, "Fair Value Measurements, Equity Investments and Other Financial Instruments," for further details.
Impairment of debt investment
During the year ended December 31, 2021, SEE made investments totaling $8 million in another company's convertible debt. The investments were made for strategic purposes as part of the SEE Ventures initiative. The principal and interest were due to Sealed Air in 2022. Alternatively, the debt was convertible into equity of the investee, at SEE's determination, upon maturity or based on the occurrence of qualifying conversion events. Based on information available to SEE and our current expectations of
recoverability, we recorded a credit loss resulting in an $8 million impairment of the convertible debt investment during the fourth quarter of 2021. SEE maintains no other available-for-sale debt securities as of December 31, 2021.
Brazil Tax Credits
Certain of our subsidiaries in Brazil received a decision from the Brazilian court regarding a claim in which SEE contended that certain indirect taxes paid were calculated on an incorrect amount. During the second quarter of 2019, the Company filed a return claim for the tax years of 2015 through 2018, resulting from a lower court decision regarding the matter, as such, the Company recorded a $5 million gain in the year ended December 31, 2019.
In 2021, the Supreme Court of Brazil issued a final decision that clarified the methodology companies should use in the indirect tax recovery calculation. This decision was published and certified by the courts during the third quarter of 2021. As a result of the court's actions, the Company recognized a benefit of $5 million primarily related to recovery for tax years not previously claimed. The claims related to indirect taxes will be used to offset future Brazilian indirect tax liabilities.
As a result of this activity, the Company has been utilizing credits on indirect tax payments.
Loss on debt redemptions
In September 2021, Sealed Air issued $600 million of 1.573% Senior Secured Notes due 2026. A portion of the proceeds were used to repurchase the Company's 4.875% Senior Notes due 2022. We recognized a $19 million pre-tax loss on such repurchase, primarily driven by the tender offer consideration beyond the principal amount of the notes tendered. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details.
In November 2019, Sealed Air issued $425 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2027. The proceeds were used to repurchase $425 million 6.50% Senior Notes due 2020. We recognized a $16 million pre-tax loss on such repurchase. The loss was primarily driven by the tender offer consideration beyond the principal amount of the notes tendered. See Note 14, "Debt and Credit Facilities," for further details on debt activity.
See Note 23, “Other (Expense) Income, net,” for the components of other (expense) income, net.
Income Taxes
The table below shows our effective income tax rate (“ETR”).
Our ETR for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 31.4%. The difference between the Company's ETR and the U.S. statutory rate of 21% related primarily to state income tax expense, foreign earnings subject to higher tax rates, an increase in unrecognized tax benefits and legislative and administrative changes to enacted statutes, partially offset by the benefit of research credits.
Our ETR for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 22.7%. The difference between the Company's ETR and the U.S. statutory rate of 21% related primarily to state income tax expense and foreign earnings subject to higher tax rates, partially offset by the benefit from GILTI regulations issued by the IRS in 2020, research credits, and a reduction in valuation allowance due to increased profitability in EMEA.
Our ETR for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 20.7%. The difference between the Company's ETR and the U.S. statutory rate of 21% related primarily to benefits related to tax optimization initiatives associated with the Reinvent SEE business transformation and restructuring activities, prior year research credits and a reduction in valuation allowance, offset by expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and the GILTI provisions.
Our ETR depends upon the realization of our net deferred tax assets. We have deferred tax assets related to accruals not yet deductible for tax purposes, state and foreign net operating loss carryforwards, tax credits, employee benefit items, intangible assets and other items.
The IRS completed its field examination of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 2011 through 2014 in the third quarter of 2020. As previously disclosed, the IRS has proposed to disallow for the 2014 taxable year the entirety of the deduction of the approximately $1.49 billion in settlement payments made pursuant to the Settlement agreement (as defined in Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies”) and the resulting reduction of our U.S. federal tax liability by approximately $525 million. We continue to believe that we have meritorious defenses to the proposed disallowance and have filed a protest with the IRS. The matter has been submitted to the IRS Independent Office of Appeals for review of the proposed disallowance, and we cannot predict when the Appeals Process will conclude, or the outcome of such process. It is possible that future developments in this matter could have a material impact on the Company's uncertain tax position balances and results of operations, including cash flows, within the next twelve months.
We have established valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets depends in part upon our ability to carryback any losses created by the deduction of these temporary differences, the future income from existing temporary differences, and the ability to generate future taxable income within the respective jurisdictions during the periods in which these temporary differences reverse. If we are unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions, or if there is a significant change in the time period within which the underlying temporary differences become taxable or deductible, we could be required to increase our valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets. Conversely, if we have sufficient future taxable income in jurisdictions where we have valuation allowances, we may be able to reduce those valuation allowances. We reported a net decrease in our valuation allowance for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $18 million, primarily related to foreign exchange revaluation on foreign net operating losses. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” for additional information.
We reported a net expense for unrecognized tax benefits in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $20 million, primarily related to North America tax positions. Interest and penalties on tax assessments are included in Income tax provision on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Net Earnings from Continuing Operations
Net earnings from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are included in the table below.
For 2021, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $50 million of Special Items, which were primarily the result of Tax Special Items of $32 million, restructuring and other restructuring associated costs of $31 million ($23 million net of taxes), loss on debt redemption of $19 million ($14 million net of taxes), and impairment of debt investment of $8 million ($6 million net of taxes). Tax Special Items primarily consisted of interest and other adjustments to existing unrecognized tax positions and deferred tax revaluations associated with legislative changes and administrative interpretations to enacted statutes. These expense items were partially offset by a gain on sale of Reflectix of $45 million ($28 million net of taxes) and an increase in the fair value of equity investments of $7 million ($5 million net of taxes).
For 2020, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $14 million of Special Items after tax, which were primarily the result of restructuring and other restructuring associated costs primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation of $31 million ($23 million net of taxes) and charges related to acquisition integrations and divestiture activities of $7 million ($5 million net of taxes), partially offset by an increase in the fair value of equity investments of $15 million ($11 million net of taxes). Tax Special Items included the benefit of $12 million, primarily due to benefits from audit settlements and retroactive application of the new GILTI regulations.
For 2019, net earnings were unfavorably impacted by $145 million of Special Items after tax, which were primarily the result of restructuring and other restructuring associated costs primarily related to our Reinvent SEE business transformation of $102 million ($76 million net of taxes), a $59 million ($44 million net of taxes) charge related to the Novipax settlement, loss on debt redemption and refinancing activities of $16 million ($12 million net of taxes) and charges related to acquisition integrations and divestiture activities of $15 million ($11 million net of taxes).
Gain (Loss) on Sale of Discontinued Operations, net of tax
Gain (loss) on sale of discontinued operations, net of tax for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
On March 25, 2017, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our Diversey Care division and the food hygiene and cleaning business within our Food Care division (collectively, "Diversey") for gross proceeds of $3.2 billion. The transaction was completed on September 6, 2017. The sale of Diversey qualified as discontinued operations.
During 2021, we recorded a net gain of $16 million on the sale of discontinued operations. The gain relates primarily to the expiration of statutes on Diversey tax-related indemnification liabilities and tax benefit associated with the remaining tax indemnification liabilities.
During 2020, we recorded a net gain of $19 million on the sale of discontinued operations. The gain primarily relates to changes in balance sheet positions associated with the settlement and release reached with Diversey related to a clawback claim connected with the sale of the business.
During 2019, we recorded a net loss of $31 million on sale of discontinued operations. The loss relates primarily to changes in balance sheet positions associated with the sale of Diversey including tax-related indemnification reserves and other receivable or payable positions arising from the sale.
Adjusted EBITDA by Segment
The Company evaluates performance of the reportable segments based on the results of each segment. The performance metric used by the Company's chief operating decision maker to evaluate performance of our reportable segments is Segment Adjusted EBITDA. We allocate and disclose depreciation and amortization expense to our segments, although depreciation and amortization are not included in the segment performance metric Segment Adjusted EBITDA. We also allocate and disclose restructuring and other charges and impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets by segment, although these items are not included in the segment performance metric Segment Adjusted EBITDA since restructuring and other charges and impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets are categorized as Special Items. The accounting policies of the reportable segments and Corporate are the same as those applied to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
See “Non-U.S. GAAP Information” for a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net earnings from continuing operations to non-U.S. GAAP Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations.
The following is a discussion of the factors that contributed to the change in Segment Adjusted EBITDA in the year ended December 31, as compared with the prior year.
Food
2021 compared with 2020
On a reported basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $41 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. Segment Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $6 million. On a constant dollar basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased approximately $34 million, or 5%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $50 million driven by actions reducing operating costs by $48 million, including restructuring savings of $9 million, and improvements to price/cost spread of $2 million; and
•higher volumes and favorable product mix of $47 million due to strength in automated equipment sales and higher food service demand.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher input costs resulting in unfavorable price/cost of $37 million; and
•higher operating costs of $26 million, primarily due to inflationary pressures, including labor and non-material inflation, and other costs associated with supply chain disruptions.
2020 compared with 2019
On a reported basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $18 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Segment Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency translation of $20 million. On a constant dollar basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $38 million or 6% in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $79 million driven by actions reducing operating costs by $69 million, including restructuring savings of $21 million, and improvements to price/cost spread of $10 million; and
•lower input costs resulting in favorable price/cost of $19 million.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $49 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation and investments in the business; and
•unfavorable product mix of $11 million.
Protective
2021 compared with 2020
On a reported basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $38 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. Segment Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $7 million. On a constant dollar basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $31 million, or 8%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to the impact of:
•higher volumes of $62 million on strength in fulfillment, higher industrial segment demand and increased automated equipment sales; and
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $14 million, driven by actions reducing operating costs, including restructuring savings of $10 million, and improvements to price/cost spread of $2 million.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $41 million, primarily due to inflationary pressures, including labor and non-material inflation, and other costs associated with supply chain disruptions; and
•unfavorable price/cost spread of $4 million.
2020 compared with 2019
On a reported basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $58 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Segment Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by favorable foreign currency translation of $1 million. On a constant dollar basis, Segment Adjusted EBITDA increased $57 million, or 16%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to the impact of:
•Reinvent SEE benefits of $39 million driven by actions reducing operating costs of $34 million, including restructuring savings of $12 million, and improvements to price cost spread of $5 million;
•contributions of $31 million from seven months of incremental Adjusted EBITDA from the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition; and
•the 2019 impact of a $7 million non-cash inventory step-up charge associated with the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition.
These increases were partially offset by:
•higher operating costs of $12 million, including labor inflation, higher incentive compensation expense and investments in the business;
•unfavorable price/cost spread of $5 million; and
•unfavorable product mix of $3 million.
Corporate
2021 compared with 2020
Corporate expenses decreased by $1 million on an as reported basis and constant dollar basis as compared to 2020, primarily driven by an increase in non-operating income on closed defined benefit plans which are not attributable to either reporting segment.
2020 compared with 2019
Corporate expenses decreased by $10 million on an as reported basis and $7 million on a constant dollar basis as compared to 2019, primarily driven by currency transaction gains in 2020 compared to currency transaction losses in 2019.
Material Commitments and Contingencies
Settlement Agreement Tax Deduction
The information set forth in Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” under the caption “Settlement Agreement Tax Deduction” is incorporated herein by reference.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations primarily consist of short-term borrowings, principal and interest payments on long-term debt, operating and financing leases, dividend payments, compensation and benefit related obligations, including defined benefit pension plans and other post-employment benefit plans, and other contractual obligations that arise in the normal course of business.
SEE has other principal contractual obligations which include agreements to purchase an estimated amount of goods, including raw materials, or services, including energy, assumed in the normal course of business. These obligations are enforceable and legally binding and specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased, minimum or variable price provisions and the approximate timing of the purchase. We may purchase additional goods or services above the minimum requirements of these obligations and, as a result use additional cash. See Note 20, “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the Notes for additional information.
Liability for Unrecognized Tax Benefits
At December 31, 2021, we had liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits and related interest of $403 million. Because of the inherent uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with some of our liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, we are not able to make reasonable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” of the Notes for further discussion.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have reviewed our off-balance sheet arrangements and have determined that none of those arrangements have a material current effect or is reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Income Tax Payments
We expect tax payments on our operations and the sale of Reflectix to be approximately $205 million to $215 million in 2022. Future payments are uncertain and dependent on a number of factors including the amount of future taxable income. The results of on-going appeals or audits by various taxing authorities, including the IRS, could increase our tax payments.
Interest Payments
Estimated future interest payments on the Company’s senior notes and senior secured credit facility through the fiscal 2033 are expected to be $715 million based on interest rates at December 31, 2021, including $148 million expected in 2022.
Contributions to Defined Benefit Pension Plans and Other Post-Employment Benefit Plans
We maintain defined benefit pension plans and other post-employment benefit plans for some of our U.S. and our non-U.S. employees. We currently expect our contributions to these plans to be approximately $5 million in 2022. Additionally, we expect benefits related to these plans paid directly by the Company to be $9 million in 2022. Future contributions and benefits paid directly by the Company are uncertain and rely on a number of factors including performance of underlying assets, future cash out flows of the plans, actuarial assumptions and funding discussions with boards charged with governance for some of our international plans. Refer to Note 17, “Profit Sharing, Retirement Savings Plans and Defined Benefit Pension Plans,” and Note 18, “Other Post-Employment Benefits and Other Employee Benefit Plans,” for additional information related to these plans.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to loss contingencies resulting from environmental laws and regulations, and we accrue for anticipated costs associated with investigatory and remediation efforts when an assessment has indicated that a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. These accruals do not take into account any discounting for the time value of money and are not reduced by potential insurance recoveries, if any. We do not believe that it is reasonably possible that the liability in excess of the amounts that we have accrued for environmental matters will be material to our consolidated financial position and results of operations. We reassess environmental liabilities whenever circumstances become better defined or we can better estimate remediation efforts and their costs. We evaluate these liabilities periodically based on available information, including the progress of remedial investigations at each site, the current status of discussions with regulatory authorities regarding the methods and extent of remediation and the apportionment of costs among potentially responsible parties. As some of these issues are decided (the outcomes of which are subject to uncertainties) or new sites are assessed and costs can be reasonably estimated, we adjust the recorded accruals, as necessary. We believe that these exposures are not material to our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. We believe that we have adequately reserved for all probable and estimable environmental exposures.
Indemnification obligations
We are a party to many contracts containing guarantees and indemnification obligations. These contracts include indemnities in connection with the sale of businesses, primarily related to the sale of Diversey in 2017. Because of the conditional nature of these obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement, we are unable to reasonably estimate the potential maximum exposure associated with these items
Capital Expenditures
We expect payments for capital expenditures to be in the range of $240 million to $260 million in 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Principal Sources of Liquidity
Our primary sources of cash are the collection of trade receivables generated from the sales of our products and services to our customers and amounts available under our existing lines of credit, including our senior secured credit facility, and our accounts receivable securitization programs. Our primary uses of cash are payments for operating expenses, investments in working capital, capital expenditures, interest, taxes, stock repurchases, dividends, debt obligations, restructuring expenses and other long-term liabilities. We believe that our current liquidity position and future cash flows from operations will enable us to fund our operations, including all of the items mentioned above, in the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $561 million, of which approximately $265 million, or 47%, was located outside of the U.S. We believe our U.S. cash balances and committed liquidity facilities available to U.S. borrowers are sufficient to fund our U.S. operating requirements and capital expenditures, current debt obligations and dividends. The Company does not expect that, in the near term, cash located outside of the U.S. will be needed to satisfy our obligations, dividends and other demands for cash in the U.S. In addition, an immaterial amount of our non-U.S. cash balance is deemed to be trapped as of December 31, 2021.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes our accumulated cash and cash equivalents:
See “Analysis of Historical Cash Flow” below.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Programs
At December 31, 2021, we had $141 million available to us and no outstanding borrowings under our U.S. and European accounts receivable securitization programs. At December 31, 2020, we had $146 million available to us and no outstanding borrowings under the such programs.
Our trade receivable securitization programs represent borrowings secured by outstanding customer receivables. Therefore, the use and repayment of borrowings under such programs are classified as financing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We do not recognize the cash flow within operating activities until the underlying invoices have been paid by our customer. The trade receivables that served as collateral for these borrowings are reclassified from trade receivables, net to prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 10, “Accounts Receivable Securitization Programs” for further details.
Accounts Receivable Factoring Agreements
We account for our participation in our customers' supply chain financing arrangements and our trade receivable factoring program in accordance with ASC 860 which allows the ownership transfer of accounts receivable to qualify for sale treatment when the appropriate criteria are met. As such, the Company excludes the balances sold under such programs from Trade receivables, net on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We recognize cash flow from operating activities at the point the receivables are sold under such programs. See Note 11, “Accounts Receivable Factoring Agreements” for further details.
Gross amounts received under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $687 million, of which $207 million was received in the fourth quarter. Gross amounts received under these programs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $466 million, of which $157 million was received in the fourth quarter. If these programs had not been in effect for the year ended December 31, 2021, we would have been required to collect the invoice amounts directly from the relevant customers in accordance with the agreed payment terms. Approximately $148 million in incremental trade receivables would have been outstanding at December 31, 2021 if collection on such invoice amounts were made directly from our customers on the invoice due date and not through our customers' supply chain financing arrangements or our factoring program.
The increase in gross amounts factored under these programs from 2020 to 2021 primarily relates to a customer supply chain financing arrangement used throughout 2021 which we entered during the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as increased usage of
our trade receivable factoring program. During the fourth quarter 2020, we increased the maximum amount available to be sold under that factoring program from $20 million per month to $35 million per month.
Payments received through customers' supply chain financing arrangements tend to be higher in the fourth quarter. The increased use of our trade receivable factoring program had a favorable impact on cash provided by operating activities during the year.
Lines of Credit
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a $1 billion revolving credit facility. We had no outstanding borrowings under the facility at December 31, 2021 or 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $1 million and $7 million, respectively, outstanding under various lines of credit extended to our subsidiaries. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
LIBOR Phase Out
In July 2017, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates LIBOR, announced the phase out LIBOR. In March 2021, the FCA announced that specific U.S. dollar LIBOR tenors (overnight, 1-month, 3-month, 6-month and 12-month) will continue to be published until June 30, 2023, while the 1-week and 2-month tenors are no longer being published effective December 31, 2021. Similarly, all tenors for EUR, CHF, JPY and GBP LIBOR currencies are no longer being published effective December 31, 2021. Regulators in the U.S. and other jurisdictions have worked to replace these rates with alternative reference interest rates that are supported by transactions in liquid and observable markets, such as the Secured Overnight Financing Rate. The phase-out of LIBOR will not have a material impact on our financing or liquidity. In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04. This ASU, along with subsequently issued ASU 2021-01, are designed to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform; however, neither the LIBOR phase-out nor these ASUs had a material impact on the Company.
Covenants
At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our financial covenants and limitations, as discussed in “Covenants” within Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities”, which require us, among other things, to maintain a maximum leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA of 4.50 to 1.00. At December 31, 2021, our leverage ratio of debt to EBITDA, as calculated under the covenant, was 2.41 to 1.00. We expect to be in continued compliance with all of our debt covenants including the covenant leverage ratio over the next 12 months.
Supply Chain Financing Programs
As part of our ongoing efforts to manage our working capital and improve our cash flow, we work with suppliers to optimize our purchasing terms and conditions, including extending payment terms. We also facilitate a voluntary supply chain financing program to provide some of our suppliers with the opportunity to sell receivables due from us (our accounts payables) to participating financial institutions at the sole discretion of both the suppliers and the financial institutions. These programs are administered by participating financial institutions. Should the supplier choose to participate in the program, it will receive payment from the financial institution in advance of agreed payment terms; our responsibility is limited to making payments to the respective financial institutions on the terms originally negotiated with our supplier. The range of payment terms is consistent regardless of a vendor's participation in the program. We monitor our days payable outstanding relative to our peers and industry trends in order to assess our conclusion that these programs continue to be trade payable programs and not indicative of borrowing arrangements. The liabilities continue to be presented as trade payables in our Consolidated Balance Sheets until they are paid, and they are reflected as cash flows from operating activities when settled.
As of December 31, 2021, our accounts payable balance included $161 million related to invoices from suppliers participating in the programs. As of December 31, 2020, our accounts payable balance included $149 million related to invoices from suppliers participating in the programs. The cumulative amounts settled through the supply chain financing programs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $417 million, compared to $423 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These programs did not significantly improve our cash provided by operating activities or free cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Debt Ratings
Our cost of capital and ability to obtain external financing may be affected by our debt ratings, which the credit rating agencies review periodically. Below is a table that details our credit ratings by the various types of debt by rating agency.
In September 2021, upon the issuance of our 1.573% Senior Secured Notes due 2026, Moody’s Investor Services updated our Senior Secured Credit Facility Rating from Baa1 to Baa2. See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details related to the note issuance.
In May 2021, Moody's Investor Services updated our Corporate Rating from Ba2 to Ba1, our Senior Unsecured Rating from Ba3 to Ba2 and our Senior Secured Credit Facility Rating from Baa3 to Baa1.
These credit ratings are considered to be below investment grade (with the exception of the Baa2 and BBB- Senior Secured Credit Facility Rating and Senior Secured Rating from Moody’s Investor Services and Standard & Poor’s, respectively, which are classified as investment grade). A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Outstanding Indebtedness
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our total debt outstanding and our non-U.S. GAAP net debt consisted of the amounts set forth in the following table.
(1) Amounts are net of unamortized discounts and debt issuance costs of $19 million and $20 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
See Note 14, “Debt and Credit Facilities,” for further details.
Analysis of Historical Cash Flow
The following table shows the changes in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
In addition to net cash provided by operating activities, we use free cash flow as a useful measure of performance and as an indication of the strength and ability of our operations to generate cash. We define free cash flow as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures (which is classified as an investing activity). Free cash flow is not defined under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, free cash flow should not be considered a substitute for net income or cash flow data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Free cash flow does not represent residual cash available for discretionary expenditures, including certain debt servicing requirements or non-discretionary expenditures that are not deducted from this measure. We historically have generated the majority of our annual free cash flow in the second half of the year. Below are the details of non-U.S. GAAP free cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Activities
2021 vs. 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities was $710 million during 2021, as compared to $737 million during 2020.
Net cash used by our working capital accounts (inventories, trade receivables, and accounts payable) was $74 million unfavorable during 2021, as compared to 2020. The impact of inventory on cash flow from operating activities was $141 million unfavorable compared to the prior year, as a result of higher balances due primarily to raw material cost inflation, coupled with business growth and stock build to mitigate continued global supply chain disruptions. Trade receivables was $138 million unfavorable to prior year, due to the impact of higher sales and the year over year impact of our accounts receivable factoring program (2020 year over year increase was more significant than the 2021 increase). The unfavorable cash flow impact of inventory and trade receivables was partially offset by accounts payable, which generated $205 million higher cash flow than the prior year. Accounts payable was favorable due to continued raw material price increases throughout 2021 compared to price decreases during 2020, as well as higher logistic and freight balances throughout 2021 due to global supply chain disruptions.
The impact of incentive compensation had a $46 million unfavorable impact on operating cash flow. Specifically, on an indirect basis, the December 31, 2021 accrual for payout in the first quarter 2022 was approximately $30 million lower than the accrual at December 31, 2020. The lower accrual is due to achievement of performance metrics in the respective years. Additionally, incentive compensation cash payments made during the first quarter 2021 were approximately $16 million higher than those made in first quarter 2020. Indirect Taxes were unfavorable by $25 million compared to the prior year primarily due to the timing of payments and business performance.
This activity was partially offset by a $46 million decrease in restructuring and restructuring associated payments made for our Reinvent SEE business transformation, as compared to 2020, as well as $77 million favorable indirect cash flow benefit for income taxes, year over year, driven by changes in the income tax receivable balance.
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities improved by $226 million during 2020 compared to 2019. This was primarily the result of higher net earnings including non-cash add backs in the comparative years.
Net earnings were $503 million in 2020 as compared to $263 million in 2019.
Non-cash add backs to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities were $307 million during 2020 compared to $221 million during 2019. The increase in non-cash add backs was primarily driven by the change in deferred tax balances generating $137 million, year over year. Depreciation and amortization increased $23 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to amortization of intangibles for capitalized software and the full year impact of intangible amortization from our acquisition of Automated Packaging Systems. These non-cash add-backs were partially offset by the non-cash gain on sale of businesses which was $19 million in 2020 compared to a loss of $31 million in 2019, representing a change of $50 million. The increase in non-cash add backs during 2020 was also partially offset by a gain on an equity investment of $15 million in 2020.
The year over year improvement in cash provided by operating activities was also due to decreased cash payments made for our Reinvent SEE business transformation including restructuring and restructuring associated payments, which were $74 million during 2020 compared to $91 million during 2019.
Working capital, which represents cash generated by trade receivables, inventories and accounts payable, represented a source of cash of $3 million during 2020 compared to $14 million during 2019. Cash generation from working capital during 2020 declined primarily due to an increase in cash used for inventory, driven by a purposeful build in 2020 for contingency planning against the risk of raw material shortages or supply disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Cash generated from trade receivables benefited from improved days sales outstanding, resulting partially from the increased use of our trade receivable factoring program. The year over year changes in accounts payable were largely due to the timing of payments to suppliers. Cash generated from customer advance payments increased $8 million, as the Company increased automation and equipment sales.
Investing Activities
2021 vs. 2020
Net cash used in investing activities was $126 million during 2021, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $160 million during 2020.
In 2021, SEE generated a total of $89 million from the sale of businesses and property and equipment. This was primarily driven by the fourth quarter 2021 sale of Reflectix, Inc. which generated proceeds of $83 million. Cash received from the sale of businesses and property and equipment was $12 million in 2020.
Additionally, the settlement of foreign currency forward contracts generated $8 million during 2021 and Corporate Owned Life Insurance contracts generated $8 million during 2021, this compares to cash generation from foreign currency forward contracts of $2 million during 2020. The Company previously maintained a corresponding asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for the Corporate Owned Life Insurance. There was no impact to the Statements of Operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the Corporate Owned Life Insurance proceeds.
These investing cash sources were offset by investments in the business under our SEE Ventures initiative as well as higher capital expenditures as we invest in our growth strategies.
Capital expenditures were $32 million higher during 2021 than compared to 2020. The increase reflects the Company's continued investment in assets which support growth coupled with lower spending in the prior year due to the impact of COVID-19.
During 2021, we invested a total of $18 million in SEE Ventures, comprised of the following activity:
•$9 million as an additional equity investment in a previously existing investee focused on e-commerce and fulfillment operations;
•$8 million made in the form of a convertible debt of an investee company focused on developing digital advancements in packaging; and
•$1 million investment in a fund aimed to advance scalable recycling technologies, equipment upgrades and infrastructure solutions, which is being accounted for as an equity method investment.
See Note 16, “Fair Value Measurements, Equity Investments and Other Financial Instruments,” for more information on our equity investments.
Investing activity in 2020 also included cash generation of $14 million from the maturity of cash deposits greater than 90 days (marketable securities), with no similar activity in the current year.
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash used in investing activities was $160 million during 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $666 million during 2019. The change in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to 2019 business acquisitions activity of $454 million, predominately related to the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition. A favorable purchase price adjustment of $4 million was received during the first quarter 2020 related to the Automated Packaging Systems acquisition.
In 2019, the Company invested in cash deposits with maturities greater than 90 days (marketable securities) which matured in 2020 and then converted back into a cash equivalent, generating a net favorable impact to investing activities of $26 million during 2020 compared to 2019.
Proceeds related to the sale of businesses and property increased $15 million compared to 2019, resulting from the sale of two discrete properties in EMEA generating $6 million cash inflow during 2020 as well as the impact of recoveries of tax refund amounts related to Diversey entities which were owed to us.
During 2020, we made a total investment of $8 million in an equity holding. This is classified as an investing cash flow activity based on our strategic investment thesis of anticipated partnership in increasing plastic circularity.
Financing Activities
2021 vs. 2020
Net cash used in financing activities was $576 million during 2021, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $262 million during 2020. The increase in cash outflows for financing activities was primarily related to increased share repurchases, dividend payments and payments for debt extinguishment costs.
During 2021, the Company paid $403 million for share repurchases, compared to $33 million during in 2020.
Dividends paid of $116 million were $15 million higher than the prior year due to the increase in quarterly dividend announced in the second quarter 2021.
Debt related activities was a cash use of $32 million during 2021, compared to a use of cash of $105 million during 2020. Cash used for debt related activities during 2020 was primarily related to payment of the outstanding balance on the Company's revolving credit facility from 2019 utilization. Current year cash activity related to debt primarily relates to receipts from the issuance of $600 million 1.573% Senior Secured Notes due 2026, net of $5 million in capitalized issuance costs. This partially was offset by the payment of $442 million related to the early extinguishment of the 4.875% Senior Note due 2022 (including early payment premium of $17 million), and $183 million in payments on the Company's Term Loan A, which includes the scheduled quarterly payments and the early repayment of $175 million in principal amount using the proceeds of the 1.573% Senior Secured Notes issuance.
We continue to employ a purpose-driven capital allocation strategy to determine the best use of cash, including decisions regarding share repurchases, our debt-leverage ratio, acquisitions, and investments in growth and operational efficiency.
2020 vs. 2019
Net cash used in financing activities was $262 million during 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $140 million during 2019. The change in net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was primarily due to borrowing activity in 2019. Specifically, during 2019 we received proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $895 million, including the $475 million representing the Term Loan A due 2022 and the issuance of $425 million of 4.00% of senior notes, which were partially offset by the $425 million repurchase of the 6.50% senior notes. Lower repayments of short-term borrowings of $29 million were primarily due to higher payments on our revolving credit facility in 2019 compared to 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had no amounts outstanding on our revolving credit facility.
Cash outlay for share repurchases were $33 million during 2020 compared to $67 million during 2019.
Changes in Working Capital
The $452 million, or 88%, decrease in working capital was primarily due to the following:
•increase in Current portion of long-term debt of $465 million primarily due to the reclassification of $475 million related to the Term Loan A due August 2022;
•increase in Accounts payable of $206 million, primarily due to higher raw material prices and freight expense; and
•decrease in Income tax receivables of $42 million.
The decreases in working capital were partially offset by:
•increase in Inventory of $129 million, primarily on rising input costs;
•increase in Trade receivables of $79 million, primarily on higher sales in the current year;
•decrease in Other current liabilities of $23 million, primarily on lower incentive compensation related accruals at year-end; and
•increases in the Cash and cash equivalents and Other receivable balances of $12 million and $14 million, respectively.
Changes in Stockholders’ Equity
The $76 million increase in stockholders’ equity in 2021 compared with 2020 was due to:
•net earnings of $507 million;
•a net decrease in accumulated other comprehensive loss of $35 million on unrecognized pension items due primarily to market conditions impacting actuarial assumptions as of our annual pension valuation date;
•unrealized gains on derivative instruments of $33 million;
•the effect of share-based incentive compensation of $30 million, including the impact of share-based compensation expense and netting of shares to cover the employee tax withholding amounts; and
•stock issued for profit sharing contribution paid in stock of $28 million.
These increases were partially offset by:
•repurchases of 7.9 million shares of our common stock for $402 million, including commissions paid (See Note 21, “Stockholders’ (Deficit) Equity” for further details);
•dividends paid on our common stock and dividend equivalent accruals related to unvested equity awards of $117 million; and
•Cumulative Translation Adjustment (“CTA”) loss of $39 million.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Interest Rate Swaps
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Interest Rate Swaps” is incorporated herein by reference.
Net Investment Hedge
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Net Investment Hedge” is incorporated herein by reference.
Other Derivative Instruments
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Other Derivative Instruments” is incorporated herein by reference.
Foreign Currency Forward Contracts
At December 31, 2021, we were party to foreign currency forward contracts, which did not have a significant impact on our liquidity.
The information set forth in Note 15, “Derivatives and Hedging Activities,” under the caption “Foreign Currency Forward Contracts Designated as Cash Flow Hedges” and “Foreign Currency Forward Contracts Not Designated as Hedges” is incorporated herein by reference.
For further discussion about these contracts and other financial instruments, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.”
Recently Issued Statements of Financial Accounting Standards, Accounting Guidance and Disclosure Requirements
We are subject to numerous recently issued statements of financial accounting standards, accounting guidance and disclosure requirements. Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards,” which is contained in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, describes these new accounting standards and is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
Our estimates and assumptions are evaluated on an ongoing basis and are based on all available evidence, including historical experience and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. To derive these estimates and assumptions, management draws from those available sources that can best contribute to its efforts. These sources include our officers and other employees, outside consultants and legal counsel, third-party experts and actuaries. In addition, we use internally generated reports and statistics, such as aging of trade receivables, as well as outside sources such as government statistics, industry reports and third-party research studies. The results of these estimates and assumptions may form the basis of the carrying value of assets and liabilities and may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from estimates under conditions and circumstances different from those assumed, and any such differences may be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We believe the following accounting policies are critical to understanding our consolidated results of operations and affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. The critical accounting policies discussed below should be read together with our significant accounting policies set forth in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards”.
Commitments and Contingencies - Litigation
On an ongoing basis, we assess the potential liabilities and costs related to any lawsuits or claims brought against us. We accrue a liability when we believe a loss is probable and when the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Litigation proceedings are evaluated on a case-by-case basis considering the available information, including that received from internal and outside legal counsel, to assess potential outcomes. While it is typically very difficult to determine the timing and ultimate outcome of these actions, we use our best judgment to determine if it is probable that we will incur an expense related to the settlement or final adjudication of these matters and whether a reasonable estimation of the probable loss, if any, can be made. In assessing probable losses, we consider insurance recoveries, if any. We expense legal costs, including those legal costs expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency, as incurred. We have historically adjusted existing accruals as proceedings have continued, been settled or for which additional information has been provided on which to review the probability and measurability of outcomes, and will continue to do so in future periods. Due to the inherent uncertainties related to the eventual outcome of litigation and potential insurance recovery, it is possible that disputed matters may be resolved for amounts materially different from any provisions or disclosures that we have previously made.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
For finite-lived intangible assets, such as customer relationships, contracts, and intellectual property, and for other long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, whenever impairment indicators are present, we perform a review for impairment. The impairment model is a two step test under which we first calculate the recoverability of the carrying value by comparing the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows associated with the asset or asset group, including its estimated residual value, to the carrying amount. If the cash flows associated with the asset or asset group are less than the carrying value, we would perform a fair value assessment of the asset, or asset group. If the carrying amount is found to be greater than the fair value, we record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over the fair value. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate.
For indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as trademarks and trade names, each year and whenever impairment indicators are present, we determine the fair value of the asset and record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over fair value, if any. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review we re-evaluate whether continuing to characterize the asset as indefinite-lived is appropriate. We recorded no impairment to indefinite lived assets in the current year.
Goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for possible impairment at least annually on a reporting unit level during the fourth quarter of each year. A review of goodwill may be initiated before or after conducting the annual analysis if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may no longer be recoverable.
A reporting unit is the operating segment unless, at businesses one level below that operating segment - the “component” level - discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by management, and the component has economic characteristics that are different from the economic characteristics of the other components of the operating segment, in which case the component is the reporting unit.
In our annual impairment review, we may elect to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. In a qualitative assessment, we would consider the macroeconomic conditions, including any deterioration of general economic conditions, industry and market conditions, including any deterioration in the environment where the reporting unit operates, increased competition, changes in the products/services and regulatory and political developments; cost of doing business; overall financial performance, including any declining cash flows and performance in relation to planned revenues and earnings in past periods; other relevant reporting unit specific facts, such as changes in management or key personnel or pending litigation; and events affecting the reporting unit, including changes in the carrying value of net assets.
If the results of our qualitative assessment indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we are required to perform a quantitative assessment to determine the fair value of the reporting unit.
Alternatively, if an optional qualitative goodwill impairment assessment is not performed, we may perform a quantitative assessment. Under the quantitative assessment, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including the goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value, there would be no indication of impairment. If the fair value of the reporting unit were less than the carrying value, an impairment charge would be recognized for the difference.
Under the quantitative assessment, we derive an estimate of fair values for each of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach and appropriate market approaches. Absent an indication of fair value from a potential buyer or similar specific transactions, we believe that the use of these methods provides a reasonable estimate of a reporting unit’s fair value. Fair value computed by these models is arrived at using a number of factors and inputs. There are inherent uncertainties, however, related to fair value models, the inputs and our judgment in applying them to this analysis. Nonetheless, we believe that the combination of these methods provides a reasonable approach to estimate the fair value of our reporting units.
We believe the most significant inputs while performing a quantitative assessments include:
•Forecasted future operating results: On an annual basis, the Company prepares annual and medium-term financial projections. These projections are based on input from the Company's leadership, strategy, commercial leadership and finance teams and presented to our Board of Directors annually.
•Discount rate: Our third-party valuation specialists provide inputs into management's determination of the discount rate. The rate is dependent on a number of underlying assumptions, the most impactful of which are the risk-free rate, tax rate, equity risk premium, debt to equity ratio and pre-tax cost of debt.
•Long-term growth rate: Long-term growth rates are applied to the terminal year of our cash flow valuation approach. The long-term growth rates are tied to growth rates we expect to achieve beyond the years for which we have forecasted operating results. We also consider external benchmarks, including forecasted long-term GDP growth and other data points which we believe are applicable to our industry and the composition of our global operations.
The Company performed a qualitative assessment of the goodwill by reporting unit as of October 1, 2021. Based on our qualitative assessment, we believe it is more likely than not that the fair value of each of our reporting units sufficiently exceeds the carrying value. As part of our analysis, we performed a look back over the key assumptions impacting the quantitative test performed in 2020, including forecasted operating results and discount rates.
The Company also assesses its goodwill for impairment from time to time when warranted by the facts and circumstances surrounding individual reporting units. Subsequent to our annual reporting period, we continued to assess whether there were
changes in facts or circumstances that would lead us to believe goodwill may be impaired. No indication of goodwill impairment has been identified subsequent to our annual testing date.
In the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, we performed quantitative assessments for our annual impairment test. No indication of goodwill impairment was identified in either 2020 or 2019.
See Note 9, “Goodwill and Identifiable Intangible Assets, net,” for details of our goodwill balances as of 2021, 2020 and 2019 and additional information related to the qualitative assessment performed in 2021.
Pensions
For a number of our current and former U.S. and international employees, we maintain defined benefit pension plans. Under current accounting standards, we are required to make assumptions regarding the valuation of projected benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets for our defined benefit pension plans.
The projected benefit obligation and the net periodic benefit cost are based on third-party actuarial assumptions and estimates that are reviewed and approved by management on a plan-by-plan basis each fiscal year. We believe the most significant assumptions are the discount rate used to measure the projected benefit obligation and the expected future rate of return on plan assets. We revise these assumptions based on an annual evaluation of long-term trends and market conditions that may have an impact on the cost of providing retirement benefits.
In determining the discount rate, we utilize market conditions and other data sources management considers reasonable based upon the profile of the remaining service life or expected life of eligible employees. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by taking into consideration the weighted-average expected return on our asset allocation, asset return data, historical return data, and the economic environment. We believe these considerations provide the basis for reasonable assumptions of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The measurement date used to determine the benefit obligation and plan assets is December 31.
At December 31, 2021, the total projected benefit obligation for our U.S. pension plan was $185 million, and the total benefit income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3 million. At December 31, 2021, the total projected benefit obligation for our international pension plans was $714 million, and the total benefit cost for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2 million. The employer service cost of our pension plans is charged to Cost of sales and Selling, general and administrative expenses. All other components of benefits expense are recorded to Other (expense) income, net.
Material changes to the principal assumptions could have a material impact on the costs and liabilities recognized on our Consolidated Financial Statements. A 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate and a 100 basis point change in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would have resulted in the following increases (decreases) in the projected benefit obligation at December 31, 2021 and the expected net periodic benefit cost for the year ending December 31, 2022:
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company purchased a buy-in insurance contract which covered the remaining portion of the liability for one of our defined benefit pension plans in the U.K. The total projected benefit obligation of the plan is $15 million. The projected benefit obligation was developed using actuarial assumptions that would be used in a plan termination or buy-out basis. Under a full buy-out, the liabilities are fully transferred to an insurance or annuity provider and SEE would no longer maintain the liability or administrative responsibilities. We expect this plan to move to full buy-out in 2022 or 2023. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the assets for this plan matched the projected benefit obligation and there was no material net balance sheet position for this plan recorded within our assets or liabilities. The plan has an accumulated comprehensive loss of $7 million, recorded within Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss in Stockholders' Equity on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. Upon plan termination or full buy-out, the accumulated comprehensive loss would be recognized to other (expense) income within the statement of operations.
Income Taxes
Estimates and judgments are required in the calculation of tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of our deferred tax assets. Our deferred tax assets arise from net deductible temporary differences, carryforwards of tax losses, and tax credits. We provide a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, we estimate future taxable earnings and consider the feasibility of ongoing planning strategies, the realizability of tax loss carryforwards, and past operating results to determine which deferred tax assets are more likely than not to be realized in the future. Changes to tax laws, statutory tax rates and future taxable earnings can have an impact on valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates in future periods, we may need to adjust the valuation allowance, which could have a material impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
In calculating our worldwide provision for income taxes, we also evaluate our tax positions for years where the statutes of limitations have not expired. Based on this review, we may establish a liability for additional taxes and interest that could be assessed upon examination by relevant tax authorities. We adjust this liability to take into account changing facts and circumstances, including the results of tax audits and changes in tax law. If the payment of additional taxes and interest ultimately proves unnecessary or less than the amount of the liability, the reversal of the liability would result in tax benefit being recognized in the period when we determine the liability is no longer necessary. If an estimate of the tax liability proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to the income tax provision would result. These adjustments to liabilities and related expenses could materially affect our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized on the Consolidated Financial Statements from such positions are measured based on the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon settlement with tax authorities. See Note 19, “Income Taxes,” for further discussion.