Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Our mission is to imagine and pioneer new ways to decode the secrets of the proteome to improve human health. Our initial product, the Proteograph Product Suite (Proteograph), leverages our proprietary engineered nanoparticle (NP) technology to provide unbiased, deep, rapid and large-scale access to the proteome. The Proteograph Product Suite is an integrated solution that is comprised of consumables, an automation instrument and software.
We believe that characterizing and understanding the full complexity of the proteome is foundational for accelerating biological insights and will lead to broad potential end-markets for proteomics, encompassing basic research and discovery, translational research, diagnostics and applied applications. This full understanding of the complexity of the proteome and its dynamic nature requires large-scale, unbiased and deep interrogation of thousands of samples across time, which we believe is unavailable with the proteomic approaches available today. We believe that the Proteograph Product Suite has the potential to enable researchers to perform these proteomics studies at scale.
Since we were incorporated in 2017, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities, including with respect to the Proteograph Product Suite, building our commercial infrastructure including manufacturing, operations, sales and marketing and service and support functions, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital, becoming a publicly-traded company, and providing general and administrative support for these activities.
Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, if ever, will depend on the successful commercialization of the Proteograph Product Suite. We are commercializing the Proteograph Product Suite as an integrated solution comprised of consumables, our SP100 automation instrument and software. Our commercial strategy is focused on growing adoption by the research community of the Proteograph, expanding the installed base and increasing utilization to generate revenue from the purchase of the Proteograph consumables. We expect a highly efficient sales model because our workflow integrates with most existing proteomics laboratories’ workflows and also complements large-scale genomics research.
We are broadly commercializing the Proteograph Product Suite through a direct sales channel in the United States, and through both direct and distributor sales channels in regions outside the United States. Given our recent launch of broad commercialization, we have built, and will continue to build, sales, marketing, support and product distribution capabilities. We will continue to build the necessary infrastructure for these activities in the United States, European Union, the United Kingdom, and other countries and regions, including Asia-Pacific, as we execute on our broad release commercialization strategy for the Proteograph.
We leverage well-established unit operations to formulate and manufacture our NPs at our facilities in Redwood City, California. We procure certain components of our consumables from third-party manufacturers, which includes the commonly-available raw materials needed for manufacturing our proprietary engineered NPs. We are currently manufacturing using our pilot line and building out our manufacturing capabilities as we enter broad commercial availability. We obtain some of the reagents and components used in the Proteograph workflow from third-party suppliers. While some of these reagents and components are sourced from a single supplier, these products are readily available from numerous suppliers. While we perform some filling and packaging of the Proteograph assay and the related consumables, in the future, we may have our filling and packaging outsourced to a third-party. We conduct vendor and component qualification for components provided by third-party suppliers and quality control tests on our NPs.
We have designed our SP100 automation instrument and have outsourced the manufacturing of our SP100 to Hamilton Company, a leading manufacturer of automated liquid handling workstations. We have entered into a non-exclusive agreement with Hamilton that covers the manufacturing of our SP100 automation instrument and its continued supply on a purchase order basis. The agreement has an initial term that runs three years following our commercial launch. Pricing for the supply of our SP100 is on a fixed schedule during the initial term of the agreement, with tiered pricing dependent upon the number of units purchased in a twelve-month period.
On December 8, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,592,106 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $19.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $183.9 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 7,105,262 shares of our Class A common stock in a private placement for net proceeds of $130.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 1, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 1,650,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $67.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $103.0 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred a net loss of $71.2 million and $32.8 million and used $46.3 million and $20.8 million of cash in operations, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $126.5 million and cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $493.3 million. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•broadly commercialize the Proteograph Product Suite;
•attract, hire and retain qualified personnel;
•continue to build our sales, marketing, service, support and distribution infrastructure as part of our broad commercialization efforts;
•build-out and expand our in-house NP manufacturing capabilities;
•continue to engage in research and development of other products and enhancements to the Proteograph Product Suite;
•implement operational, financial and management information systems;
•obtain, maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•build the infrastructure to operate and scale as a public company.
PrognomIQ
In August 2020, we transferred certain assets related to human disease testing to PrognomIQ, Inc. (PrognomIQ), a new wholly-owned subsidiary, in exchange for all of its outstanding equity interests. Following the transfer, we completed a pro-rata distribution to our stockholders of most of the shares of capital stock of PrognomIQ. Following the distribution and a subsequent $55.0 million equity financing of PrognomIQ, we hold approximately 19% of the outstanding capital stock in PrognomIQ as of December 31, 2021.
The rationale for this transaction was to enable the growth of ecosystems around new applications that leverage unbiased, deep and large-scale proteomic information. The transaction allows us to remain focused on our core strategy, which is to be a provider, rather than a consumer, of proteomics solutions to all customers across these ecosystems. By focusing on our role as a provider of proteomics solutions, we are no longer potentially competing with, or creating the perception that we are competing with, our customers. Our relationship with PrognomIQ does not preclude us from selling the Proteograph Product Suite to any customer in any geography, nor does it preclude our customers from using the Proteograph in any way. PrognomIQ has indicated that it plans to combine the protein data from the Proteograph solution with genomics and other -omics data, to create a multi-omics approach to health
and disease testing. We believe PrognomIQ’s use of proteomics and the potential for other similar companies which use proteomics in their research and products will help us drive the adoption of the Proteograph Product Suite in these applications. We have entered into certain agreements with PrognomIQ.
Omid Farokhzad, Chief Executive Officer and Chair of our board of directors, serves as the Chair of PrognomIQ’s board of directors. Philip Ma, Ph.D. our former Chief Business Officer serves as the Chief Executive Officer of PrognomIQ. Dr. Ma has fully transitioned to PrognomIQ, but will remain our consultant through April 2022. In addition, three of our other employees also transitioned to PrognomIQ. We provided general transition services and support, including laboratory and office space to PrognomIQ during the transition period.
We granted PrognomIQ a non-exclusive license to certain patents and patent applications that we own and a non-exclusive sublicense to certain patent applications we exclusively licensed from Brigham and Women’s Hospital (BWH), in each case relating to our core technology, to develop, manufacture and commercialize licensed products for the field of human diagnostics on a worldwide basis. In consideration of the non-exclusive sublicense to certain patent applications licensed from BWH, PrognomIQ paid us a low-five digit figure, and would pay a low single digit royalty, in an amount equivalent to what we would have to pay under our license with BWH, on net sales of sublicensed products beginning with the first commercial sale of a sublicensed product during the term of the agreement. We do not view these amounts to be material to our financial condition and results of operations nor do we expect these amounts to be material to us in the future. In accordance with the non-exclusive license agreement with PrognomIQ, we entered into a supply agreement with PrognomIQ in June 2021. The PrognomIQ supply agreement provides that we will supply PrognomIQ with the Proteograph Product Suite and associated consumables.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we could experience disruptions that could severely impact our business. For example, we have experienced longer lead times from Hamilton for orders of our SP100 automation instruments and may experience delays and longer lead times from our other suppliers of critical hardware, instrumentation and consumables used for product development, manufacturing and commercial operations. Pandemic precautions and preventative measures may also impact our commercialization plans due to restrictions on our customers’ ability to access laboratories, causing delays in the delivery and installation of the Proteograph products, training such customers on our products, and their ability to conduct research. We have experienced delays in our ability to access customers in certain countries with strict COVID-19 policies to provide installation and training services. The ongoing build-out of our expansion facilities may also be delayed by COVID-related restrictions. Furthermore, COVID-19 has adversely affected the broader economy and financial markets, resulting in an economic downturn that could curtail the research and development budgets of our customers, our ability to hire additional personnel and our financing prospects. Any of the foregoing could harm our operations and we cannot anticipate all the ways in which it could be adversely impacted by health epidemics such as COVID-19.
For additional details, see the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from product sales, including sales of the Proteograph Product Suite, which consists of an instrument with embedded software essential to the instrument’s functionality and associated consumables as well as our platform evaluation agreements. In addition, we may at times generate revenue from performing services and the receipt of grant revenue for the reimbursement of research-related expenses. Our revenue is primarily generated domestically. We intend to focus our commercial efforts in the United States and expect to grow our international presence. A portion of our revenue is generated by sales to a related party and we anticipate a portion of our revenue to continue to be generated by sales to such related party. Our grant-funded activities are expected to decrease as a percentage of total revenue as we decrease grant-funded activities and continue to ramp up commercialization of the Proteograph Product Suite.
Cost of Revenue
We utilize third-party manufacturers for production of our SP100 instrument and we manufacture our NPs and assemble our assay kits internally. Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs of the components of Proteograph Product Suite, including the SP100 instrument with embedded software essential to the instrument’s functionality, and consumables, and distribution-related expenses such as logistics and shipping costs. In addition, cost of revenue includes stock-based compensation and related employee benefits and allocated overhead.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include cost associated with performing services under research and development service contracts and research and development of our technology and product candidates. R&D expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and related employee benefits, laboratory supplies used for in-house research, consulting costs, costs related to clinical studies for the collection of biological samples for research use, which relate to the assets transferred to PrognomIQ, and allocated overhead, including rent, depreciation, information technology and utilities.
We plan to increase our investment in our R&D efforts related to the Proteograph Product Suite, our product development pipeline and our proprietary engineered NP and other technologies. Therefore, we expect R&D expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel, purchasing supplies and materials, and the allocation of facility expense associated with the build-out of our expansion facilities to support our R&D efforts.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, and related benefits for executive management, sales and marketing, service and support, finance, administration and human resources, legal, allocated overhead, professional service fees and other general overhead costs to support our operations.
We expect to incur additional selling, general and administrative expenses as we continue to invest in our personnel as we grow our commercial operations and with the additional costs incurred as a result of operating as a public company, including accounting, human resources, legal, insurance and investor relations costs. As a result, we expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Results of Operations
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented:
* Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue increased by $6.0 million, or 909%, from $0.7 million in 2020 to $6.6 million in 2021, due to sales of products related to the Proteograph Product Suite in the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenue recognized primarily consisted of sales of the Proteograph SP100 instrument, consumable kits and platform evaluations, of which $2.3 million was attributed to related parties and $0.5 million was attributable to a research-related service agreement. Revenue related to our grant-funded activities related to our Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) grant from the National Institutes of Health Grant (NIH) decreased between the two periods by ($0.1) million and research collaboration revenue decreased by ($0.3) million.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.2 million compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the initial sales of the Proteograph Product Suite. Cost of revenue related to the Proteograph Product Suite consist of costs of the SP100 instrument, consumable kits and other related costs, including labor and overhead.
Research and Development
R&D expenses increased by $10.2 million, or 54%, from $18.9 million in 2020 to $29.1 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase in product development efforts related to the Proteograph Product Suite including $11.1 million in employee compensation costs and other related expenses, including stock-based compensation. This was offset by a decrease in clinical study fees of ($0.8) million related to the costs associated with the ramp down of site enrollment for clinical studies related to the collection of biological samples for research use. These clinical studies are related to the assets transferred to PrognomIQ.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $30.4 million, or 198%, from $15.4 million in 2020 to $45.8 million in 2021, primarily due to a $7.5 million increase in employee compensation and other related expenses, and a $13.3 million increase in stock-based compensation. Other increases are attributable to $0.8 million in marketing costs related to the Limited Release phase of our commercial launch, and costs related to becoming a publicly traded company including a $4.2 million increase in professional and consulting fees related to accounting and audit services, and a $4.7 million increase in general business expenses which includes insurance premiums.
Total Other Income
Total other income decreased by ($0.6) million or (65%), from $0.9 million in 2020 to $0.3 million in 2021. Short-term interest rate yields decreased significantly during fiscal year 2020 and remained low during fiscal year 2021. These decreases were partially offset quantitatively by higher amounts of cash invested in money market funds and U.S. Treasury securities during fiscal year 2020 and fiscal year 2021 as a result of multiple private and public financing events.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since the date of our incorporation, we have not generated significant revenue from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. Our operations have been funded primarily through the sale and issuance of equity securities since inception. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. However, based on our cash on hand, we believe we will have adequate liquidity over the next twelve months following the date of this Annual Report to operate our business and to meet our cash requirements.
In connection with our IPO that closed on December 8, 2020, we sold 10,592,106 shares of Class A common stock and received net proceeds of $183.9 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 7,105,262 shares of our Class A common stock in a private placement for net proceeds of $130.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 1, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 1,650,000 shares of our Class A common stock and received net proceeds of $103.0 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
In 2021, cash used in operating activities was $46.3 million, attributable to a net loss of $71.2 million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of ($5.9) million and non-cash charges of $30.7 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $25.9 million in stock-based compensation, $2.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $1.2 million of net amortization of premiums on available-for-sales securities and $1.0 million of non-cash operating lease expense. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventory levels of $3.6 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $2.5 million and a decrease of $0.6 million in accrued research and development and partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $1.6 million.
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $20.8 million, attributable to a net loss of ($32.8) million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $2.7 million and non-cash charges of $9.2 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $7.3 million in stock-based compensation, $1.6 million of depreciation and amortization and $0.3 million of net amortization of premiums on available-for-sales securities. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to increased accrued liabilities related to employee-related compensation of $1.3 million, and professional, consulting and legal fees related to our initial public offering of $1.1 million.
Investing Activities
In 2021, cash used in investing activities was $170.9 million, which related to cashflow used in purchases of available-for-sale securities, net of proceeds from maturities of ($164.0) million, in addition to ($6.9) million in payments primarily for laboratory equipment.
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $34.6 million, which related to cashflows provided by purchases of available-for-sale securities, net of proceeds from maturities of $30.0 million, in addition to $4.5 million in payments primarily for laboratory equipment.
Financing Activities
In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $116.6 million. This was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $103.0 million from issuance of common stock upon our follow-on offering, net of issuance costs, $11.4 million in short-swing profits from a beneficial owner and $1.9 million from the exercise of stock options.
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $371.5 million. This was attributable to net proceeds of $183.9 million from issuance of common stock upon initial public offering, net of issuance costs, net proceeds of $130.3 million from the concurrent private placement, net of issuance costs, and net proceeds of $54.9 million from the issuance of Series D-1 convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into agreements as a part of normal course of business with various vendors, which are generally cancellable without material penalty upon written notice. Payments associated with these agreements are not included in this discussion of contractual obligations.
Our operating lease obligations reflect our lease obligations for our headquarters facility in Redwood City, California. In June 2020, we amended the lease agreement for this facility to expand the office and laboratory space covered by the lease, extend the lease through February 2032, and increase the annual base rent for the expanded premises. Upon occupancy of the expansion facility that is anticipated to occur in the first quarter of 2022, the annual base rent will be $0.9 million in the first twelve months of the lease term (subject to an abatement period of nine months), and increases on an annual basis to $1.2 million in the final twelve months of the lease term. The amendment also provides for tenant incentives in the amount of $2.4 million.
In April 2021, we entered into a lease amendment for this facility to further expand the office and laboratory space for an approximate term of eleven years. Payments associated with this operating lease agreement will result in additional operating lease obligations not included in the above paragraph of approximately $160,000 per month plus operating expenses.
We have certain purchase commitments related to our inventory management with certain manufacturing suppliers wherein the Company is required to purchase the amounts forecasted in a blanket purchase order within a certain time period. The contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties and exclude orders for goods and services entered into in the normal course of business that are not enforceable or subject to change. These outstanding commitments amounted to $5.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated primarily from the sale of products and services. Product revenue consists of sales of an instrument with embedded software essential to the instrument’s functionality and consumables as well as platform evaluation agreements. Service revenue primarily consists of revenue received from the generation and analysis of proteomic data on behalf of our customers.
We recognize revenue when control of our products and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service.
Revenue from product sales is recognized when control of the product is transferred, which is generally upon shipment to the customer. In instances where right of payment or transfer of title is contingent upon the customer’s acceptance of the product, revenue is deferred until all acceptance criteria have been met. Revenue from services is recognized once the report is delivered to a customer, which is when the customer obtains benefit of the service.
Revenue is recorded net of discounts and sales taxes collected on behalf of governmental authorities. Customers are invoiced generally upon shipment, or upon order for services, and payment is typically due within 30 or 60 days. Cash received from customers in advance of product shipment or providing services is recorded as a contract liability. Our contracts with our customer generally do not include rights of return or a significant financing component.
We have elected the practical expedient to account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control as a fulfillment activity. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period is one year or less or the amount is immaterial. We exclude from the transaction price all taxes assessed by a governmental authority on revenue-producing transactions that are collected by us from a customer.
We regularly enter into contracts that include various combinations of products and services which are generally distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation in proportion to its standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling price using average selling prices with consideration of current market conditions. If the product or service has no history of sales or if the sales volume is not sufficient, we rely upon prices set by management, adjusted for applicable discounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by measuring and recognizing compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees and non-employees based on estimated grant-date fair values. We use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We recognize actual forfeitures by reducing the stock-based compensation in the same period as the forfeitures occur. We estimate the fair value of share-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including fair value of common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield, which are described in greater detail below.
Estimating the fair value of equity-settled awards as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. These inputs are as follows:
•Fair value of common stock-Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock. As such, the estimated fair value of our common stock and underlying stock options has been determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management, based on the information known to us on the grant date and upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated per share fair value of our common stock. As part of these fair value determinations, our board of directors obtained and considered valuation reports prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. For valuations after the completion of our initial public offering, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
•Expected term-The expected term for options granted to employees and directors represents the average period that our options granted are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the weighted-average vesting date and the end of the contractual term). We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock option grants. The expected term for options granted to non-employees is the contractual term.
•Expected volatility-As we had no publicly available stock price information prior to our IPO and limited publicly available stock price information subsequent to our IPO, the expected volatility was estimated based on the historical average volatility for comparable publicly traded life sciences technology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, life cycle stage, or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until enough historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the options.
•Expected dividend yield-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms, and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation calculations on a prospective basis. Assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.