Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References in this section to the “Company,” “SES AI Corporation,” “Ivanhoe Capital Acquisition Corp.,” “Ivanhoe,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Ivanhoe Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of Ivanhoe’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K,
words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we were a blank check company, incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on July 8, 2020, and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Recent Developments
On February 3, 2022, we consummated the previously announced business combination (the “Business Combination”) pursuant to that certain Business Combination Agreement dated July 12, 2021 (the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Ivanhoe, Wormhole Amalgamation Sub Pte. Ltd., a Singapore private company limited by shares and our direct wholly-owned subsidiary (“Amalgamation Sub”), and SES Holdings Pte. Ltd. (“SES”), a Singapore private company limited by shares. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”), a business combination between the Company, Amalgamation Sub and SES was effectuated through the merger of Amalgamation Sub with and into SES, with SES continuing as the surviving company. On the Closing Date, we changed our name from Ivanhoe Capital Acquisition Corp. to “SES AI Corporation”.
We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
See our Current Report on Form 8-K
filed with the SEC on February 1, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $100,000 in our operating bank account and working deficit of approximately $200,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of $500,000 from the Sponsor pursuant to the Note, and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the Note in full on January 15, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. On April 9, 2021, we issued an unsecured convertible promissory note (the “Convertible Note”) to our Chief Executive Officer, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $1,500,000 for ongoing expenses reasonably related to our business and the consummation of the Business Combination. The Convertible Note does not bear any interest. All unpaid principal under the Convertible Note will be due and payable in full on the earlier of (i) January 11, 2023 and (ii) the effective date of the Business Combination (such earlier date, the “Maturity Date”). As of December 31, 2021, $945,000 was drawn on the convertible note-related party, presented at its fair value of approximately $1.2 million on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Subsequently, the loan was repaid in full with cash at the closing of our Business Combination no February 3, 2022. There were no amounts outstanding under the Convertible Note as of December 31, 2020.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a business combination target, including activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of SES. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on the investments held in the trust account from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $11.5 million, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of approximately $7.2 million, general and administrative expenses to related party of $120,000, net loss from the change in fair value of convertible note to related party of approximately $210,000, net loss from the change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of approximately $3.2 million, offering costs to derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $855,000, and investment income on the Trust Account of approximately $58,000.
For the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $32,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Right
s
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the Initial Public Offering prospectus to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 11, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option. The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC Subtopic 815-15
“Derivatives and Hedging - Embedded Derivatives” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) and the Private Placement Warrants (as defined in Note 4) (collectively, the “Warrant”) are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants have been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC Subtopic 815-15
“Derivatives and Hedging - Embedded Derivatives” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) and the Private Placement Warrants (as defined in Note 4) (collectively, the “Warrant”) are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants have been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of ordinary shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,213,333 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share ordinary for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from July 8, 2020 through December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity
, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We early adopted the ASU on January 21, 2021 (inception). Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Issued Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.