Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis reviews our consolidated financial statements and other relevant statistical data and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. The information in this section has been derived from the Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes thereto that appear in "Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K. The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with these Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes and the business and financial information provided in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Our principal business consists of attracting retail and commercial deposits from the general public and investing those funds, along with borrowed funds, in loans secured by first and second mortgages on one-to-four family residences (including home equity loans and lines of credit), commercial and multifamily real estate, construction and land, and consumer and commercial business loans. Our commercial business loans include unsecured lines of credit and secured term loans and lines of credit secured by inventory, equipment and accounts receivable. We also offer a variety of secured and unsecured consumer loan products, including manufactured home loans, floating home loans, automobile loans, boat loans and recreational vehicle loans. As part of our business, we focus on residential mortgage loan originations, a portion of which we sell to Fannie Mae and other investors and the remainder of which we retain for our loan portfolio consistent with our asset/liability objectives. We sell loans which conform to the underwriting standards of Fannie Mae (“conforming”) in which we retain the servicing of the loan in order to maintain the direct customer relationship and to generate noninterest income. Residential loans which do not conform to the underwriting standards of Fannie Mae (“non-conforming”), are either held in our loan portfolio or sold with servicing released. We originate and retain a significant amount of commercial real estate loans, including those secured by owner-occupied and nonowner-occupied commercial real estate, multifamily property, mobile home parks and construction and land development loans.
We originated $243.9 million and $321.3 million of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We also purchased $24.1 million of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans during the year ended December 31, 2021. During these same periods, we sold $147.4 million and $258.2 million, respectively, of one-to-four family residential mortgage loans.
Our strategic plan targets consumers, small- and medium-size businesses, and professionals in our market area for loans and deposits. In pursuit of these goals and by managing the size of our loan portfolio, we focus on including a significant amount of commercial business and commercial and multifamily real estate loans in our portfolio. A significant portion of these loans have adjustable rates, higher yields or shorter terms and higher credit risk than traditional fixed-rate mortgages. Our commercial loan portfolio (commercial and multifamily real estate and commercial business loans) decreased to $306.2 million or 44.5% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021, from $330.0 million or 53.6% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020, as most of the PPP loans held in our commercial business loan portfolio have been repaid to us by the SBA. Our consumer loan portfolio, which includes manufactured and floating homes and other consumer loans, increased to $97.7 million or 14.2% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021, from $75.8 million or 12.4% of our loan portfolio at December 31, 2020.
Our operating revenues are derived principally from earnings on interest-earning assets, service charges and fees, and gains on the sale of loans. The continuing low interest rate environment is expected to continue to put downward pressure on loan yields and the yields on other floating rate interest earning assets as well, which may adversely affect our net interest income and net interest margin in 2021. Our primary sources of funds are deposits (both retail and brokered), FHLB advances, borrowings through the Federal Reserve, and payments received on loans and securities. We offer a variety of deposit accounts that provide a wide range of interest rates and terms, including savings, money market, NOW, interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing demand accounts, and certificates of deposit.
An offset to net interest income is the provision for loan losses, or the recapture of the provision for loan losses, that is required to establish the allowance for loan losses at a level that adequately provides for probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio. As our loan portfolio increases, or due to an increase for probable losses inherent in our loan portfolio, our allowance for loan losses may increase, resulting in a decrease to net interest income after the provision. Improvements in loan risk ratings, increases in property values, or receipt of recoveries of amounts previously charged off may partially or fully offset any required increase to allowance for loan losses due to loan growth or an increase in probable loan losses. Our provision for loan losses was $425 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $925 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to economic improvements in our markets as initial COVID-19 restrictions implemented in the second quarter of last year have been lifted.
Our noninterest expenses consist primarily of salaries, employee benefits, incentive pay, expenses for occupancy, online and mobile services, marketing, professional fees, data processing, charitable contributions, FDIC deposit insurance premiums and regulatory expenses. Salaries and benefits consist primarily of the salaries paid to our employees, payroll taxes, directors' fees, retirement expenses, share-based compensation and other employee benefits. Occupancy expenses, which are the fixed and variable costs of buildings and equipment, consist primarily of lease payments, property taxes, depreciation charges, maintenance and the cost of utilities.
Recent Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recent accounting standards, see "Note 2-Accounting Pronouncements Recently Issued or Adopted" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in "Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report on Form 10-K.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain of our accounting policies are important to an understanding of our financial condition, since they require management to make difficult, complex or subjective judgments, which may relate to matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates associated with these policies are susceptible to material changes as a result of changes in facts and circumstances. Facts and circumstances that could affect these judgments include, but are not limited to, changes in interest rates, changes in the performance of the economy and changes in the financial condition of borrowers. Management believes that its critical accounting policies include determining the allowance for loan losses, accounting for other-than-temporary impairment of securities, accounting for MSRs, accounting for other real estate owned, and accounting for deferred income taxes. For additional information on our accounting policies see "Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in "Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report on Form 10-K.
Allowance for Loan Loss. The allowance for loan losses is the amount estimated by management as necessary to cover losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. The allowance is established through the provision for loan losses, which is charged to income. Determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses necessarily involves a high degree of subjectivity and requires us to make various assumptions and judgments about the collectability of our loan portfolio, including the creditworthiness of our borrowers and the value of the real estate and other assets serving as collateral for the repayment of many of our loans.
The allowance consists of specific, general and unallocated components. The general component of the allowance for loan losses covers non-impaired loans and is determined using a formula-based approach. The formula first incorporates either the historical loss rates of the Company or the historical loss rates of their peer group if minimal loss history exists. This historical loss rate factor is then adjusted for qualitative factors. Qualitative factors are used to estimate losses related to factors that are not captured in the historical loss rates and are based on management’s evaluation of available internal and external data and involve significant management judgement. Qualitative factors include changes in lending standards, changes in economic conditions, changes in the nature and volume of loans, changes in lending management, changes in delinquencies, changes in the loan review system, changes in the value of collateral, the existence of concentrations, and the impact of other external factors. Finally, the general component of the allowance for loan losses is adjusted for changes in the assigned grades of loans, which include the following: pass, watch, special mention, substandard, doubtful, and loss. As loans are downgraded from watch to the lower categories, they are assigned an additional factor to account for the increased credit risk. Loan grades involve significant management judgment. For such loans that are also classified as impaired, a specific component within the allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan are lower than the carrying value of that loan. An unallocated component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management's estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating specific and general losses in the portfolio.
Management reviews the level of the allowance at least quarterly and performs a sensitivity analysis on the assumptions utilized in the estimate. To strengthen our loan review and classification process, we engage an independent consultant to review our classified loans and a significant sample of recently originated non-classified loans annually. We also enhanced our credit administration policies and procedures to improve our maintenance of updated financial data on commercial borrowers. While we believe the estimates and assumptions used in our determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, there can be no assurance that such estimates and assumptions will not be proven incorrect in the future, or that the future provisions will not exceed past provisions or that any increased provisions that may be required will not adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, the determination of the amount of our allowance for loan losses is subject to
review by bank regulators as part of the routine examination process, which may result in the adjustment of reserves based upon their judgment of information available to them at the time of their examination.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairment of Securities. Management reviews investment securities on an ongoing basis for the presence of OTTI, taking into consideration current market conditions; fair value in relationship to cost; extent and nature of the change in fair value; issuer rating changes and trends; whether management intends to sell a security or if it is likely that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the amortized cost basis of the investment, which may be upon maturity; and other factors. For debt securities, if management intends to sell the security or it is likely that we will be required to sell the security before recovering our cost basis, the entire impairment loss would be recognized in earnings as an OTTI loss. If management does not intend to sell the security and it is not more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security, but management does not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security, only the portion of the impairment loss representing credit losses would be recognized in earnings. The credit loss on a security is measured as the difference between the amortized cost basis and the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected. Projected cash flows are discounted by the original or current effective interest rate depending on the nature of the security being measured for potential OTTI. The remaining impairment related to all other factors, i.e., the difference between the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected and fair value, is recognized as a charge to other comprehensive income (loss). Impairment losses related to all other factors are presented as separate components within accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Mortgage Servicing Rights. We record MSRs on loans sold to Fannie Mae with servicing retained as well as for acquired servicing rights. We stratify our capitalized MSRs based on the type, term and interest rates of the underlying loans. MSRs are carried at fair value. The value is determined through a discounted cash flow analysis, which uses interest rates, prepayment speeds and delinquency rate assumptions as inputs. All of these assumptions require a significant degree of management judgment. If our assumptions prove to be incorrect, the value of our MSRs could be negatively impacted. We use a third party to assist us in the preparation of the analysis of the market value each quarter.
Other Real Estate Owned. OREO represents real estate that we have taken control of in partial or full satisfaction of significantly delinquent loans. At the time of foreclosure, OREO is recorded at the fair value less costs to sell, which becomes the property's new basis. Any write-downs based on the asset's fair value at the date of acquisition are charged to the allowance for loan losses. After foreclosure, management periodically performs valuations such that the real estate is carried at the lower of its new cost basis or fair value, net of estimated costs to sell. Subsequent valuation adjustments are recognized within net (loss) gain on OREO. Revenue and expenses from operations and subsequent adjustments to the carrying amount of the property are included in other noninterest expense in the consolidated statements of income. In some instances, we may make loans to facilitate the sales of OREO. Management reviews all sales for which it is the lending institution for compliance with sales treatment under provisions established by Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 360, "Accounting for Sales of Real Estate". Any gains related to sales of OREO are deferred until the buyer has a sufficient initial and continuing investment in the property.
Income Taxes. Income taxes are reflected in our financial statements to show the tax effects of the operations and transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently payable plus deferred taxes. ASC Topic 740, "Accounting for Income Taxes," requires the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities result from differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. They are reflected at currently enacted income tax rates applicable to the period in which the deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be realized or settled and are determined using the assets and liability method of accounting. The deferred income provision represents the difference between net deferred tax asset/liability at the beginning and end of the reported period. In formulating our deferred tax asset, we are required to estimate our income and taxes in the jurisdiction in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual current tax exposure for the reported period together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation and the provision for loan losses, for tax and financial reporting purposes. Valuation allowances are established to reduce the net carrying amount of deferred tax assets if it is determined to be more likely than not all or some portion of the potential deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Business and Operating Strategies and Goals
Our goal is to deliver returns to stockholders by increasing higher-yielding assets (including consumer, commercial and multifamily real estate and commercial business loans), increasing lower-cost core deposit balances, managing expenses, managing problem assets and exploring expansion opportunities. We seek to achieve these results by focusing on the following objectives:
Focusing on Asset Quality. We believe that strong asset quality is a key to our long-term financial success. We are focused on monitoring existing performing loans, resolving nonperforming assets and selling foreclosed assets. Nonperforming assets were
$6.2 million, or 0.68% of total assets, at December 31, 2021 compared to $3.5 million or 0.40% of total assets, at December 31, 2020. We continue to seek to reduce the level of nonperforming assets through collections, modifications and sales of OREO. We also take proactive steps to resolve our non-performing loans, including negotiating payment plans, forbearances, loan modifications and loan extensions on delinquent loans when such actions have been deemed appropriate. Our goal is to maintain or improve upon our level of nonperforming assets by managing all segments of our loan portfolio in order to proactively identify and mitigate risk.
Improving Earnings by Expanding Product Offerings. We intend to prudently maintain the percentage of our assets consisting of higher-yielding commercial and multifamily real estate and commercial business loans, which offer higher risk-adjusted returns, shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest-rate fluctuations than one-to-four family mortgage loans, while maintaining our focus on residential lending. In addition, we continue to focus on consumer products, such as floating and manufactured home loans. With our long experience and expertise in residential lending we believe we can be effective in capturing mortgage banking opportunities and grow consumer deposits. We continue to develop correspondent relationships to sell nonconforming mortgage loans servicing released. We also intend to selectively add additional products to further diversify revenue sources and to capture more of each client's banking relationship by offering additional services to our clients. We continue to refine our products and services for additional business and automate services, such as automating consumer loans originations this past year, in an effort to improve customer service. We intend to further build relationships with medium and small businesses through new and improving existing service offerings, including remote deposit.
Emphasizing Lower Cost Core Deposits to Manage the Funding Costs of Our Loan Growth. Our strategic focus is to emphasize total relationship banking with our clients to internally fund our loan growth. We also emphasize reducing wholesale funding sources, including FHLB advances, through the continued growth of core deposits. We believe that a continued focus on client relationships will help increase the level of core deposits and retail certificates of deposit from consumers and businesses in our market area. We intend to increase demand deposits by growing retail and business banking relationships. New technology and services are generally reviewed for business development and cost saving opportunities. We continue to experience growth in client use of our online and mobile banking services, which allow clients to conduct a full range of services on a real-time basis, including balance inquiries, transfers and electronic bill paying, while providing our clients greater flexibility and convenience in conducting their banking. In addition to our retail branches, we maintain state of the art technology-based products, such as business cash management, business remote deposit products, business and consumer mobile banking applications and consumer remote deposit products. Total deposits increased to $798.3 million at December 31, 2021, from $748.0 million at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021, core deposits, which we define as our non-time deposit accounts and time deposit accounts of less than $250 thousand, increased $131.3 million to $755.2 million from $623.9 million at December 31, 2020. As a result of the increased liquidity from core deposits, we did not borrow against our lines of credit.
Maintaining Our Client Service Focus. Exceptional service, local involvement (including volunteering and contributing to the communities where we do business) and timely decision-making are integral parts of our business strategy. Our employees understand the importance of delivering exemplary customer service and seeking opportunities to build relationships with our clients to enhance our market position and add profitable growth opportunities. We compete with other financial service providers by relying on the strength of our customer service and relationship banking approach. We believe that one of our strengths is that our employees are also significant stockholders through our ESOP and 401(k) plans. We also offer incentives that are designed to reward employees for achieving high-quality client relationship growth.
Expanding Our Presence, Including Through Digital Channels and Streamlining Operations, Within Our Existing and Contiguous Market Areas and by Capturing Business Opportunities Resulting from Changes in the Competitive Environment. We believe that opportunities currently exist within our market area to grow our franchise. We anticipate continued organic growth as the local economy and loan demand remains strong, through our marketing efforts and as a result of the opportunities created as a result of the consolidation of financial institutions that is occurring in our market area. In addition, by delivering high-quality, client-focused products and services, we expect to attract additional borrowers and depositors and thus increase our market share and revenue generation. We continue to be disciplined as it pertains to future expansion, acquisitions and de novo branching focusing on the markets in Western Washington, which we know and understand.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
General. Total assets increased by $58.3 million, or 6.8%, to $919.7 million at December 31, 2021, from $861.4 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in loans held-for-portfolio and BOLI, partially offset by lower balances in cash and cash equivalents and decreases in loans held-for-sale.
Cash and Securities. Cash, cash equivalents and our available-for-sale securities decreased by $12.0 million, or 5.9%, to $192.0 million at December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $10.2 million, or 5.3%, to $183.6 million due to deploying cash earning a nominal yield into higher earning loans and investments. Available-for-sale securities, which consist of agency mortgage-backed securities and municipal bonds, decreased $1.8 million, or 17.6%, to $8.4 million at December 31, 2021, primarily due to calls of securities, regularly scheduled payments and maturities outpacing purchases of securities during the year.
Loans. Loans held-for-portfolio, net, increased $72.7 million, or 12.0%, to $680.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $607.4 million at December 31, 2020. Loans held-for-sale decreased to $3.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $11.6 million at December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decline in mortgage originations reflecting reduced refinance activity.
The following table reflects the changes in the loan mix, excluding premiums and deferred fees, of our portfolio at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
The largest dollar increases in the loan portfolio were in one-to-four family loans portfolio, which increased $77.0 million, or 58.9%, to $207.7 million driven largely by jumbo residential mortgages, floating home loans which increased $19.4 million, or 48.7%, to $59.3 million, and commercial and multifamily real estate loans, which increased $12.4 million or 4.7%, to $278.2 million. These increases were partially offset by decreases in commercial business loans, which decreased $36.2 million or 56.4% to $28.0 million, resulting from the forgiveness by the SBA of $82.8 million of PPP loans, and a decrease in home
equity loans of $3.0 million, or 18.5%, to $13.3 million. We had 32 PPP loans outstanding totaling $4.2 million as of December 31, 2021.
The loan portfolio remains well-diversified with commercial and multifamily real estate loans accounting for 40.4% of the portfolio, one-to-four family real estate loans, including home equity loans, accounting for approximately 32.1% of the portfolio and consumer loans, consisting of manufactured homes, floating homes, and other consumer loans accounting for 14.2% of the total loan portfolio at December 31, 2021. Construction and land loans accounted for 9.2% of the portfolio and commercial business loans accounted for the remaining 4.1% of the portfolio at December 31, 2021.
We are continuing to provide payment relief for both consumer and business clients, most of which relief involves interest only or payment deferrals that range from 90 to 180 days. Deferred loans are re-evaluated at the end of the deferral period and will either return to the original loan terms or be reassessed at that time to determine if a further modification should be granted and if a downgrade in risk rating is appropriate. All of these loan modifications have been made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. At December 31, 2021, there were two one-to-four family residential loans totaling $64 thousand operating under forbearance agreements due to COVID-19. Since these loans were performing loans that were current on their payments prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, these modifications are not considered TDRs pursuant to applicable accounting and regulatory guidance until January 1, 2022. We believe the steps we are taking are necessary to effectively manage our portfolio and assist our clients through the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the duration, impact and government response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Nonperforming Assets. At December 31, 2021, our nonperforming assets totaled $6.2 million, or 0.68% of total assets, compared to $3.5 million, or 0.40% of total assets, at December 31, 2020.
The table below sets forth the amounts and categories of nonperforming assets in our loan portfolio at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands):
Nonperforming loans increased $2.7 million or 92.5%, to $5.6 million at December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year primarily due to a $2.4 million commercial and multifamily loan. Nonperforming loans were 0.81% of total loans at December 31, 2021, compared to 0.47% of total loans at December 31, 2020. We had no loans greater than 90 days delinquent and still accruing at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained to cover losses that are probable and can be estimated on the date of evaluation in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. It is our best estimate of probable incurred credit losses in our loan portfolio.
The following table reflects the adjustments in our allowance during 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Our allowance for loan losses increased $306 thousand, or 5.1%, to $6.3 million at December 31, 2021, from $6.0 million at December 31, 2020.
Specific loan loss reserves decreased to $293 thousand at December 31, 2021, compared to $378 thousand at December 31, 2020, while general loan loss reserves increased to $5.6 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $5.2 million at December 31, 2020 and the unallocated reserve decreased to $395 thousand at December 31, 2021, compared to $406 thousand at December 31, 2020. The decrease in the unallocated reserve was primarily a result of the increase in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021, partially offset by a positive adjustment in the qualitative factors applied to real estate related loans as a result of the improvement in economic conditions related to the strong housing market. The $4.2 million balance of PPP loans was omitted from the calculation for the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021, as these loans are 100% guaranteed by the SBA and management expects that the majority of the remaining PPP borrowers will seek full or partial forgiveness of their loan obligations from the SBA within a short time frame, which in turn will reduce the Bank’s loan balance for the amount forgiven. Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $119 thousand, compared to $565 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans and nonperforming loans was 0.92% and 113.59%, respectively, compared to 0.98% and 208.04%, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Deposits. Total deposits increased $50.3 million, or 6.7%, to $798.3 million at December 31, 2021 from $748.0 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was due primarily due to higher balances in existing client accounts, developing further relationships with PPP borrowers who were not previously clients, as well as reduced withdrawals reflecting changes in customer spending habits due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue our efforts to grow noninterest-bearing deposits, which increased $58.0 million, or 43.8%, to $190.5 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $132.5 million at December 31, 2020. Noninterest-bearing deposits represented 23.9% of total deposits at December 31, 2021, compared to 17.7% at December 31, 2020.
A summary of deposit accounts with the corresponding weighted-average cost at December 31, 2021 and 2020 is presented below (dollars in thousands):
(1)Escrow balances shown in noninterest-bearing deposits on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Borrowings. FHLB advances remained at zero throughout 2021, as we utilized our increase in deposits for funding needs. We rely on FHLB advances to fund interest-earning assets when deposits alone cannot fully fund interest-earning asset growth. Subordinated notes, net totaled $11.6 million at each of December 31, 2021 and 2020. For additional information regarding our borrowings, see "Note 10-Borrowings, FHLB Stock and Subordinated Notes" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in "Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report on Form 10-K.
Stockholders' Equity. Total stockholders’ equity increased $7.9 million, or 9.2%, to $93.4 million at December 31, 2021, from $85.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase primarily reflects $9.2 million in net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by the payment of cash dividends of $2.0 million to common stockholders during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Average Balances, Net Interest Income, Yields Earned and Rates Paid
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the total dollar amount of interest income from average interest-earning assets and the resultant yields, as well as the interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, expressed both in dollars and rates. Income and yields on tax-exempt obligations have not been computed on a tax equivalent basis. All average balances are daily average balances. Nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield for the period they have been on nonaccrual (dollars in thousands).
(1) Calculated net of deferred loan fees, loan discounts and loans in process.
(2) Total funding is the sum of average interest-bearing liabilities and average noninterest-bearing deposits. The cost of total funding is calculated as annualized total interest expense divided by average total funding.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following schedule presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for major components of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. It distinguishes between changes related to outstanding balances and changes due to interest rates. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, information is provided on changes attributable to (i) changes in volume (i.e., changes in volume multiplied by old rate) and (ii) changes in rate (i.e., changes in rate multiplied by old volume). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate (dollars in thousands).
Comparison of Results of Operation for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
General. Net income increased $219 thousand, or 2.5%, to $9.2 million, or $3.46 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $8.9 million, or $3.42 per diluted common share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of a $3.5 million decrease in interest expense and a $500 thousand decrease in the provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in interest income and a $2.7 million increase in noninterest expense.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $1.1 million, or 3.0%, to $33.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $34.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a 65 basis point decline in average yield on interest-earning assets and a $15.3 million decline in the average balance of outstanding loans. Interest income on loans decreased $1.1 million, or 3.0%, to $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $34.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by lower average total loans resulting primarily from the decline in commercial and multifamily loans and commercial business loans, partially offset a two basis points decline in the average yield on loans. The average balance of total loans was $650.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $665.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The average yield on total loans was 5.14% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 5.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the average balance of PPP loans was $35.3 million and the average yield on PPP loans was 8.55%, including the recognition of the net deferred fees, with a positive impact on average loan yield of 20 basis points. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average balance of PPP loans was $46.7 million and the average yield on PPP loans was 4.30%, including the recognition of deferred fees, with a negative impact on average loan yield of six basis points. Interest income included $3.0 million in fees earned related to PPP loans in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.0 million in the same period a year ago.
Interest income on the investment portfolio and cash and cash equivalents decreased $12 thousand, or 2.4%, to $485 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $497 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the interest income on investment securities and cash and cash equivalents was due to lower average yields, partially offset by higher average balances. The average yield on investments and cash and cash equivalents was 0.22% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 0.48% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the substantial increase in cash and cash equivalents earning a nominal yield.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $3.5 million, or 46.9%, to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of declining deposit costs and a higher percentage of noninterest bearing deposits to total deposits.
Interest expense on deposits decreased $3.7 million, or 53.1%, to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.0 million for the same period a year ago. The decrease was primarily the result of a decline in the average cost of deposits reflecting reduced market rates paid on deposits and the change in the mix of deposits reflecting the managed runoff of higher cost certificates of deposit. The average cost of total deposits decreased 60 basis points to 0.41% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 1.01% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense on borrowings and subordinated notes increased $226 thousand, or 50.7%, to $672 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was comprised solely of interest expense on our subordinated notes, compared to $446 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was comprised of interest expense on subordinated notes for one quarter in 2020 and FHLB advances. Average borrowings and subordinated notes decreased $8.3 million, to $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted solely of subordinated notes, from $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of both FHLB advances and subordinated notes. The average cost of the subordinated notes and FHLB advances was 5.79% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2.23% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $2.4 million, or 8.9%, to $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net interest margin was 3.43% and 3.57% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in net interest income primarily resulted from the decline in the average rate paid on deposits and a decline in the average balance of certificates of deposit accounts, partially offset by a decline in the average loan balance. The decrease in net interest margin was primarily due to a decline in rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities exceeding the decline in yields earned on interest-earning assets. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the average yield earned on PPP loans, including the recognition of the net deferred fees for PPP loans repaid and forgiven by the SBA, resulted in a positive impact to the net interest margin of 22 basis points, compared to a positive impact of five basis points from our origination of low yielding PPP loans during the same period in 2020.
Provision for Loan Losses. We establish provisions for loan losses, which are charged to earnings, based on our review of the level of the allowance for loan losses required to reflect management’s best estimate of the probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio. In evaluating the level of the allowance for loan losses, management considers historical loss experience, the types of loans and the amount of loans in the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect borrowers’ ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral, peer group data, prevailing economic conditions, and current factors. Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans, such as one- to four- family, small commercial and multifamily, home equity and consumer loans, are evaluated in the aggregate using historical loss factors adjusted for current economic conditions and other relevant data. Loans for which management has concerns about the borrowers’ ability to repay, are evaluated individually and specific loss allocations are provided for these loans when necessary.
A provision for loan losses of $425 thousand was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $925 thousand provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $500 thousand decrease in the provision for loan losses during the year was primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of loans held-for-portfolio between the periods, a positive adjustment to the qualitative factors applied to real estate related loans as a result of improvement in economic conditions related to the strong housing market, partially offset by a $2.7 million increase in non-performing loans from December 31, 2020. Our allowance for loan losses as of December 31, 2021, not only reflects probable and inherent credit losses based upon the economic conditions that existed as of December 31, 2021, but also reflects the inherent economic improvements in our markets as initial COVID-19 restrictions implemented in the second quarter of last year have been lifted. Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $119 thousand, compared to $565 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
While we believe the estimates and assumptions used in our determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, there can be no assurance that such estimates and assumptions will not be proven incorrect in the future, that future provisions will not exceed past provisions, or that any increased provisions which may be required in the future will not adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, the determination of the amount of our allowance for loan losses is subject to review by bank regulators as part of the routine examination process, which may result in the adjustment of reserves based upon their judgment of information available to them at the time of their examination.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income decreased $116 thousand, or 1.6%, to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $7.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as reflected below (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in noninterest income during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020 primarily was due to the decrease in net gain on sale of loans, partially offset by improvement in the fair value adjustment on mortgage servicing rights, and increases in service charges and fees, and mortgage servicing income. Net gain on sale of loans decreased due to the decrease in sales volume, primarily due to lower originations due to reduced refinance activity, partially offset by higher margins on sale. Loans sold during the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $147.4 million, compared to $176.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Service charges and fee income increased primarily due to higher debit/ATM interchange fees. Mortgage servicing income was higher as a result of our mortgage servicing portfolio increasing to $508.1 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $488.7 million at December 31, 2020.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense increased $2.7 million, or 12.0%, to $25.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $22.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as reflected below (dollars in thousands):
Salaries and benefits, the largest driver of noninterest expense, increased primarily due to discretionary bonuses paid for added efforts associated with the Company's COVID-19 response, higher wages, lower deferred compensation and higher medical expenses, partially offset by a decrease in commission expense related to a decline in mortgage originations during 2021 as compared to 2020. Data processing expense increased due to technology investments and variable costs associated with increased loan originations. Operations expense increased primarily due to increases in marketing expenses, reserve for unfunded commitments, and professional fees. The increase in the reserve for unfunded commitments primarily resulted from an increase in construction loan commitments. Regulatory assessments decreased due to lower FDIC assessments in 2021 and regulatory exam costs included in the 2020 balance. Occupancy expense decreased due to the closure of one branch location in June 2020.
The efficiency ratio for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 68.18%, compared to 64.92% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The weakening in the efficiency ratio for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to higher noninterest expense and lower revenues.
Income Tax Expense. The provision for income taxes decreased $119 thousand, or 5.0% to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a lower effective tax rate, partially offset by an increase in taxable net income. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 19.9% and 21.1%, respectively.
Capital and Liquidity
Capital. Shareholders’ equity totaled $93.4 million at December 31, 2021 and $85.5 million at December 31, 2020. In addition to net income of $9.2 million, other sources of capital during 2021 included $182 thousand in proceeds from stock option exercises, $468 thousand related to the allocation of ESOP shares during the year and $360 thousand related to stock-based compensation. Uses of capital during 2021 included $2.0 million of dividends paid on common stock, other comprehensive loss, net of tax, of $101 thousand and $152 thousand of stock repurchases.
We paid regular quarterly dividends of $0.17 per common share and a special dividend of $0.10 per common share during 2021, and regularly quarterly dividends per share of $0.15 per share during 2020 and a special dividend of $0.20 per common share during 2020. This equates to a dividend payout ratio of 22.3% in 2021 and 23.2% in 2020. The Company currently expects to continue the current practice of paying quarterly cash dividends on common stock subject to the Board of Directors' discretion to modify or terminate this practice at any time and for any reason without prior notice. Assuming continued payment during 2022 at this rate of $0.17 per share, our average total dividend paid each quarter would be approximately $446 thousand based on the number of our current outstanding shares (which assumes no increases or decreases in the number of shares, except in connection with the anticipated vesting of currently outstanding equity awards).
The dividends, if any, we may pay may be limited as more fully discussed under “Business-How We Are Regulated-Limitations on Dividends and Stock Repurchases” contained in Item 1, Part I of this Form 10-K.
Stock Repurchase Plans. From time to time, our board of directors has authorized stock repurchase plans. In general, stock repurchase plans allow us to proactively manage our capital position and return excess capital to shareholders. Shares purchased under such plans may also provide us with shares of common stock necessary to satisfy obligations related to stock compensation awards. On April 28, 2021, the Company’s board of directors authorized a stock repurchase program to allow the Company to repurchase, over a six-month period, up to $2.0 million of the Company’s outstanding shares in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. On October 27, 2021, the Company’s board of directors authorized a new stock repurchase, effective upon the expiration of the prior stock repurchase program on October 28, 2021, with the same parameters as the prior stock repurchase program. See “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities” contained in Item 5, Part II of this Form 10-K for additional information relating to stock repurchases.
Liquidity. Liquidity measures the ability to meet current and future cash flow needs as they become due. The liquidity of a financial institution reflects its ability to meet loan requests, to accommodate possible outflows in deposits and to take advantage of interest rate market opportunities. The ability of a financial institution to meet its current financial obligations is a function of its balance sheet structure, its ability to liquidate assets and its access to alternative sources of funds. The objective of our liquidity management is to manage cash flow and liquidity reserves so that they are adequate to fund our operations and to meet obligations and other commitments on a timely basis and at a reasonable cost. We seek to achieve this objective and ensure that funding needs are met by maintaining an appropriate level of liquid funds through asset/liability management, which includes managing the mix and time to maturity of financial assets and financial liabilities on our balance sheet. Our liquidity position is enhanced by our ability to raise additional funds as needed in the wholesale markets.
Asset liquidity is provided by liquid assets which are readily marketable or pledgeable or which will mature in the near future. Liquid assets generally include cash, interest-bearing deposits in banks, securities available for sale, maturities and cash flow from securities, sales of fixed rate residential mortgage loans in the secondary market and federal funds sold. Liability liquidity generally is provided by access to funding sources which include core deposits and advances from the FHLB and other borrowing relationships with third party financial institutions.
Our liquidity position is continuously monitored and adjustments are made to the balance between sources and uses of funds as deemed appropriate. Liquidity risk management is an important element in our asset/liability management process. We regularly model liquidity stress scenarios to assess potential liquidity outflows or funding problems resulting from economic disruptions, volatility in the financial markets, unexpected credit events or other significant occurrences deemed problematic by management. These scenarios are incorporated into our contingency funding plan, which provides the basis for the identification of our liquidity needs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $192.0 million in cash and available-for-sale investment securities and $3.1 million in loans held-for-sale. At December 31, 2021, we had the ability to borrow an additional $101.5 million in FHLB advances and access to additional borrowings of $22.4 million through the Federal Reserve's discount window, in each case subject to certain collateral requirements. We had no outstanding advances or borrowings with the FHLB or Federal Reserve at December 31, 2021. In addition, we also had available $20.0 million of credit facilities with other financial institutions, with no balance outstanding at December 31, 2021. Subject to market conditions, we expect to utilize these borrowing facilities from time to time in the future to fund loan originations and deposit withdrawals, to satisfy other financial commitments, repay maturing debt and to take advantage of investment opportunities to the extent feasible. As of December 31, 2021, management is not aware of any events that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our liquidity, capital resources or operations. In addition, management is not aware of any regulatory recommendations regarding liquidity that would have a material adverse effect on us. For additional details, see “Note 10-Borrowings, FHLB Stock and Subordinated Notes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
In the ordinary course of business, we have entered into contractual obligations and have made other commitments to make future payments. Refer to the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this report for the expected timing of such payments as of December 31, 2021. These include payments related to (i) long-term borrowings (Note 10-Borrowings, FHLB Stock and Subordinated Notes), (ii) time deposits with stated maturity dates (Note 9-Deposits) (iii) operating leases (Note 12-Leases) and (iv) commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit (Note 18-Commitments and Contingencies).
Sound Financial Bancorp is a separate legal entity from Sound Community Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to its own operating expenses (many of which are paid to Sound Community Bank), Sound Financial Bancorp is responsible for paying for any stock repurchases, dividends declared to its stockholders, interest and principal on outstanding debt, and other general corporate expenses.
Sound Financial Bancorp is a holding company and does not conduct operations; its sources of liquidity are generally dividends up-streamed from Sound Community Bank, interest on investment securities, if any, and borrowings from outside sources. Banking regulations may limit the dividends that may be paid to us by Sound Community Bank. See, “Business - How We Are Regulated - Limitations on Dividends and Stock Repurchases” contained in Item 1, Part I of this Form 10-K. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company completed a private placement of $12.0 million in aggregate principal of subordinated notes resulting in net proceeds, after placement fees and offering expenses, of approximately $11.6 million. The Company contributed $5.5 million of the net proceeds from the sale of the subordinated notes to the Bank and retained the remaining net proceeds to be used for general corporate purposes. At December 31, 2021 Sound Financial Bancorp, on an unconsolidated basis, had $4.2 million in cash, noninterest-bearing deposits and liquid investments generally available for its cash needs.
See also the "Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows" included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K, for further information.
Regulatory Capital. Sound Community Bank is subject to minimum capital requirements imposed by regulations of the FDIC. Capital adequacy requirements are quantitative measures established by regulation that require Sound Community Bank to maintain minimum amounts and ratios of capital. Based on its capital levels at December 31, 2021, Sound Community Bank exceeded these requirements at that date. Consistent with our goals to operate a sound and profitable organization, our policy is for Sound Community Bank to maintain a "well-capitalized" status under the regulatory capital categories of the FDIC.
Beginning January 2020, the Bank elected to use the CBLR framework. A bank that elects to use the CBLR framework as provided for in the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act will generally be considered "well-capitalized" and to have met the risk-based and leverage capital requirements of the capital regulations if it has a leverage ratio greater than 9.0%. At December 31, 2021, the Bank’s CBLR was 10.92%, which exceeded the minimum requirements. For additional details, see “Note 16-Capital” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and "Item 1. Business-How We Are Regulated-Regulation of Sound Community Bank-Capital Rules" of this Form 10-K.
For a bank holding company with less than $3.0 billion in assets, the capital guidelines apply on a bank-only basis and the Federal Reserve expects the holding company's subsidiary banks to be "well-capitalized" under the prompt corrective action regulations. If Sound Financial Bancorp was subject to regulatory guidelines for bank holding companies with $3.0 billion or more in assets, at December 31, 2021, Sound Financial Bancorp would have exceeded all regulatory capital requirements. The estimated CBLR calculated for Sound Financial Bancorp at December 31, 2021 was 10.09%.