Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs and that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
The following discussion contains references to periods prior to the Reorganization Transactions which were effective February 12, 2021. Therefore, the financial results referenced for those periods relate to Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries. Any information related to periods subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions refer to Signify Health and its consolidated subsidiaries, including Cure TopCo.
Overview
Signify Health is a leading healthcare platform that leverages advanced analytics, technology, and nationwide healthcare provider networks to create and power value-based payment programs. Our mission is to transform how care is paid for and delivered so that people can enjoy more healthy, happy days at home. Our customers include health plans, governments, employers, health systems and physician groups. We believe that we are a market leader in two fast-growing segments of the value-based healthcare payment industry: (1) payment models based on individual episodes of care and (2) IHEs. Payment models based on individual episodes of care organize, or “bundle”, payments for all, or a substantial portion of, services received by a patient in connection with an episode of care, such as a surgical procedure, particular condition or other reason for a hospital stay. IHEs are health evaluations performed by a clinician in the home to support payors’ participation in Medicare Advantage and other government-run managed care plans. Our episode payment platform managed $4.62 billion and $5.21 billion of spend in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021 and 2020, our mobile network of providers completed evaluations for over 1.9 million and 1.4 million unique individuals, respectively, participating in Medicare Advantage and other managed care plans. We believe that these core businesses have enabled us to become integral to how health plans and healthcare providers successfully participate in value-based payment programs, and that our platform lessens the dependence on facility-centric care for acute and post-acute services and shifts more services towards alternate sites and, most importantly, the home.
Our solutions support value-based payment programs by aligning financial incentives around outcomes, providing tools to health plans and healthcare organizations designed to assess and manage risk and identify actionable opportunities for improved patient outcomes, coordination and cost-savings. Through our platform, we coordinate what we believe is a holistic suite of clinical, social, and behavioral services to address an individual’s healthcare needs and prevent adverse events that drive excess cost. Our business model is aligned with our customers, as we generate revenue only when we successfully engage members for our health plan customers and generate savings for our provider customers.
Factors affecting our results of operations
As a result of a number of factors, our historical results of operations may not be comparable to our results of operations in future periods, and our results of operations may not be directly comparable from period to period. Set forth below is a discussion of the key factors impacting our results of operations.
Seasonality
Historically, there has been a seasonal pattern to our revenue in our Home & Community Services segment, with the revenues in the fourth quarter of each calendar year generally lower than the other quarters. Each year, our IHE customers provide us with a Member List, which may be supplemented or amended during the year. Our customers generally limit the number of times we may attempt to contact their members. Throughout the year, as we complete IHEs and attempt to contact members, the number of members who have not received an IHE and whom we are still able to contact declines, typically resulting in fewer IHEs scheduled during the fourth quarter. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led to a large number of in-person IHEs being conducted in the second half of the year, particularly in the fourth quarter, and as a result, for 2020, we did not see the historical seasonality we would normally expect with respect to IHE volume. In 2021, we returned to a seasonality trend in our Home & Community Services segment more consistent with historical trends, with fewer IHEs being conducted in the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to the second and third quarters. However, any further developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic and / or timing of receiving member lists from our customers may impact seasonality trends.
Revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment generally is higher in the second and fourth quarters because of the timing of the receipt of the semi-annual reconciliations from CMS, although this can be affected by negative changes in estimates of savings rate and program size during the relevant period. We recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each 6-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. As a result, during the first and third quarters of each year, we recognize three months of revenue for each of two overlapping performance obligation periods (i.e., three months of revenue from one performance obligation period, and three months of revenue from a second, overlapping performance obligation period). In contrast, during the second and fourth quarters of each year, we recognize revenue relating to three overlapping performance obligation periods (i.e., three months of revenue from one performance obligation period, three months of revenue from a second, overlapping performance obligation period, and one month of revenue from a third, overlapping performance obligation period - representing the thirteenth month of the third performance obligation period). We also recognize Episodes of Care Services revenue based on our estimates of savings realized. The semiannual reconciliations for each performance measurement period under our Episodes of Care Services programs are received or generated in the second and fourth quarters of each year, and indicate the actual savings realized. See “-Critical Accounting Policies-Revenue recognition.” In addition, due to the semiannual reconciliations for our Episodes programs, and BPCI-A in particular, we typically receive cash during the first and third quarters of each year, which can cause our liquidity to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Customer mix
Our customer mix can affect our revenue and profitability in both of our segments. For example, due to the different contractual arrangements we have with different health plans, health plan mix during the period can affect our average per-visit fee, the geographic mix of plan members we are visiting, the mix of members we see that are covered by Medicare versus Medicaid and the selection of IHE or vIHE solutions, each of which has a different price point and cost structure, and can affect the conversion rate associated with the number of members who agree to receive IHEs, the total number of IHEs completed and the number and type of ancillary services selected.
The amounts we receive for our services in our Episodes of Care Services segment are similarly determined by customer mix, as the amount of our administrative fee, our share of episode savings and risk for episode losses and the payors’ and providers’ share of savings, as well as the overall program size, customer bundle selections and the savings rate generated under each managed episode vary by customer.
Impact of IHE volume and margins
Our revenue and profitability in our Home & Community Services segment are affected by the number of IHEs we complete during a period and how cost effectively we are able to complete them. The number of IHEs we are able to complete during a period can be affected by a variety of factors. For example, decisions by our customers with respect to the Member List, including any increase or reduction in the number of members included in the Member List (or the member list from which it is derived), may impact our IHE completion rate and, as a result, our revenue. Similarly, our ability to complete IHEs is affected by the level of member engagement. In our experience, members of existing customers are more likely to have had an IHE from us in the past and are more likely to be responsive to our outreach. In contrast, for new customers, their members are often just getting to know us and may have never had an IHE before, which can make it harder to successfully contact them and obtain their consent to an IHE.
Our ability to complete IHEs is also affected by the capacity of our mobile network of providers, which impacts our ability to efficiently reach all of the members on our Member Lists. The capacity of our mobile network is affected by our ability to recruit and retain providers in our contracted network. As overall healthcare utilization increases, demand for providers from other participants in the healthcare industry increases, which may make it more difficult for us to recruit new providers and retain existing providers. The capacity of our mobile network is also affected by factors such as the ability of providers to obtain necessary state licenses within a reasonable timeframe, the availability of pandemic-related waivers that allow providers to provider services in states in which they are not licensed, the willingness of providers to make more of their time available to us, and our ability to efficiently schedule appointments and route providers to maximize the number of IHEs they are able to complete in a day.
We believe we will benefit from demographic trends in the coming years. As the U.S. population ages, the number of Medicare eligible individuals is increasing. Moreover, Medicare Advantage is growing faster than the Medicare Classic or FFS program according to CMS. We believe we are well positioned to capture the growth in Medicare Advantage enrollment in the coming years and further increase the number of members to whom we provide IHEs.
Our long-term profitability in the Home & Community Services segment is also impacted by how cost-effectively we are able to complete IHEs. For example, it tends to be less costly for us to perform IHEs in densely populated urban areas and more costly for us to perform IHEs in difficult-to-reach or less densely populated areas. Our ability to cost-effectively perform IHEs is also affected by how efficiently we are able to schedule a provider’s day to maximize the number of IHEs he or she is able to complete in a day. The mix of providers we use may also impact our costs. We use a mix of physicians, nurse practitioners and physicians’ assistants, with physicians being the most costly to contract with for IHEs. If we increase or decrease our usage of a particular type of provider, it impacts the average cost of performing IHEs and our margins. As previously indicated, as overall healthcare utilization increases, demand for providers from other participants in the healthcare industry is increasing, which may create pressure for us to increase provider compensation in certain geographic areas in order to recruit and retain providers in our network. This pressure may be exacerbated by rising inflation in the United States. These factors may further impact the average cost of performing IHEs and our margins.
In 2021, we completed and invoiced to customers over 1.9 million IHEs, including vIHEs, compared to 1.4 million IHEs in 2020.
Impact of program size and savings rate
Our revenue and profitability in our Episodes of Care Services segment are affected by the program size of our episodes programs and the savings rates we are able to achieve under these programs. Program size for a particular customer represents the number of episodes we managed for a customer during a period multiplied by the respective baseline price of each episode, which represents the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. Our program size grows by increasing the number of episodes we manage. In connection with our episodes offerings, we receive an administrative fee that is based on the program size we manage for a customer.
The BPCI-A program, in its current form, expires at the end of 2023, and as of the end of 2020, participation in the BPCI-A program was fixed, meaning that new healthcare providers cannot enter the program, and participating healthcare providers cannot choose to participate in any additional episode types. Accordingly, our ability to grow our revenue under the BPCI-A program through the end of 2023 requires us to maximize savings rates. Generally, we expect our program size to increase as healthcare utilization increases and decrease as healthcare utilization declines. Program size may also be negatively impacted by the occurrence of natural disasters, as episodes are automatically excluded in areas impacted by natural disasters if certain conditions are satisfied. See “-Changes to the BPCI program” and “-COVID-19” below.
Revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment is also affected by the savings rate we are able to achieve. Under our contracts with our provider partners in our episodes programs, we receive a share of any savings generated by the relevant provider for each episode managed. The savings rate and our estimates thereof, during each period, affects our revenue period to period. The savings rate during each period is affected by a variety of factors, including how quickly new customers are able to integrate with our technology and data analytics tools, how long provider partners have been participating in an episode program and their resulting level of familiarity with the program, the types of episodes they are participating in and the degree of implementation of care redesign. The savings rate also varies by the type of solution we offer, and as a result, the savings rate will fluctuate depending on the number of episodes we manage under one type of program, such as BPCI-A, versus another program, such as our non-BPCI-A Episodes of Care programs.
Our ability to increase overall program size and savings rate will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our advanced data analytics capabilities and operating platform, market adoption of our solutions and the adoption of care redesign and bundled payment models overall. Our program size and savings rate were both negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021. See "-COVID-19" for additional information.
The following table shows our weighted average program size and weighted average savings rates for the periods presented. Weighted average program size and weighted average savings rate declined in 2021 and weighted average program size declined in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 implications described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We would expect these limitations and restrictions to end once the impacts of the pandemic subside and therefore for our program size to return to pre-2020 levels in the future. However, due to the lag in the reconciliation of BPCI-A episodes, and the fact that program size is a weighted average that includes multiple prior
periods, increases in healthcare utilization will not immediately result in a corresponding increase in our weighted average program size.
(1) Weighted Average Program Size represents the weighted average program size for performance obligation periods included in a calendar quarter or calendar year. We manage episodes in six-month blocks, which we refer to as performance measurement periods. In each performance measurement period, we reconcile those episodes of care that concluded during such performance measurement period. We recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period, which we refer to as performance obligation periods. Accordingly, our weighted average program size during a given calendar quarter or calendar year reflects the results of multiple overlapping performance obligation periods. We define program size for a performance obligation period as (x) the number of episodes we managed during the relevant performance measurement period multiplied by (y) the baseline price of each episode, which represents the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. We define weighted average program size as the sum of the following for each performance obligation period included in a calendar quarter or calendar year: (x) the program size for the relevant performance obligation period, (y) divided by 13, which represents the approximately 13-month performance obligation period required to complete performance obligations under our episodes programs, and (z) multiplied by the number of months of the relevant performance obligation period included in the calendar quarter or calendar year.
(2) Weighted Average Savings Rate represents the weighted average savings rate generated during performance obligation periods included in a calendar quarter or calendar year. The gross savings for each performance obligation period (i.e., the 13-month period over which we recognize revenue attributable to episodes that concluded during a six-month performance measurement period) is equal to the gross amount of savings generated under the episode programs we manage during the performance measurement period to which such performance obligation period relates. The gross savings for a performance measurement period is defined as (x) the sum of the baseline episode prices of each such episode less (y) the total actual cost of each episode that concluded during such performance measurement period, which baseline prices represent the benchmark price set by the relevant program prior to any discounts. The weighted average savings rate is (i) the sum, for each performance obligation period included in a calendar quarter or calendar year, of (A) the gross savings for each such performance obligation period, divided by (B) 13, and multiplied by (C) the number of months of such performance obligation period included in such calendar quarter or calendar year, divided by (ii) the weighted average program size for such calendar quarter or calendar year. For the above purposes, the gross amount of savings is calculated prior to the deduction of our administrative fees and amounts shared with health plans and provider partners. For example, for BPCI-A, CMS receives a 3% discount, which is included in the gross amount of savings calculated for each performance measurement period.
Changes to the BPCI program
Revenue generated by our BPCI-A solutions represented approximately 14% of our total revenue and over 90% of our Episodes of Care Services segment revenue in 2021, and approximately 25% of our total revenue and 90% of our Episodes of Care Services segment revenue in 2020. Our revenue and profitability are affected by changes to the BPCI-A program. Under our BPCI-A contracts, we earn an administrative fee, which is based on the size of the relevant provider’s program, and also share in the savings or losses generated in conjunction with our
provider partners as compared to BPCI-A’s benchmark episode price for a particular episode. Significant changes to the BPCI-A program can lead to a decline in the program size and/or savings rates we are able to achieve in conjunction with our provider partners under the program.
In August 2021, CMS announced changes to BPCI-A for 2022. These changes included an adjustment to the baseline period during which clinical episode prices are calculated, such that prices beginning in 2021 will be calculated on the basis of historical experience that includes the first two years of the BPCI-A program and the beginning of the COVID-19 impacted period. As a result, benchmark episode prices could be lower than in prior years because BPCI-A care redesign and savings measures will be reflected in a portion of the benchmark period.
An additional change CMS made to the BPCI-A program beginning in 2021 and continuing through the program’s expiration at the end of 2023 was the application of an additional, retrospective trend adjustment to clinical episode target prices, which CMS applies during CMS’s reconciliations of the BPCI-A program. The application of a retrospective trend adjustment has negatively impacted our BPCI-A business in several ways. First, the trend adjustment applied by CMS during reconciliation can retrospectively decrease target prices (and therefore reduce savings rates), and such trend adjustment may not accurately reflect trends in spend (i.e., changes in episode costs) and may not properly account for changes in spend related to the COVID-19 pandemic (i.e., impacts to episodes that do not contain a COVID-19 diagnosis and are not excluded from the program). As a result, our BPCI-A savings rates may be reduced by the retrospective trend adjustment. Second, because the trend adjustment is calculated each period and applied retrospectively during each CMS reconciliation, it reduces our ability to reliably and accurately project BPCI-A program results and record revenue associated with projected savings. Third, because it is calculated and applied retrospectively, the impact of the trend adjustment cannot be known and taken into account when we are helping healthcare providers to identify and manage clinical episodes while they are in progress. Fourth, dissatisfaction with this change has caused or contributed to healthcare providers’ decision to no longer participate in the BPCI-A program for 2022 and 2023, and will likely cause other healthcare providers to decide to drop out of the BPCI-A program in the future.
In addition, CMS announced changes to the pricing methodology by which benchmark episode prices will be calculated. CMS also made changes to the patient case mix methodology, which should mitigate some of the pricing effects previously reported. The impact of these changes and other changes is not yet known, as we receive reconciliations from CMS on a semi-annual basis. The initial impact of these changes should be included in the reconciliation expected in the fourth quarter of 2022. Lastly, in 2022, CMS is excluding from the BPCI-A program all episodes where the relevant individual is diagnosed with COVID-19 during the episode.
Additionally, CMS recently announced a change to the period in which they will pay funds related to expirations. This change will result in delayed payment for one period, which will have a temporary adverse impact on our cash flows, as the cash expected to be received in early 2022 following the recent receipt of our semi-annual reconciliation in the fourth quarter of 2021 will be lower as a result of this change.
Finally, the BPCI-A program is scheduled to expire in 2023 and it is not clear in what form, if any, CMS will renew the program. In October 2021, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (“CMMI”) indicated at an Alliance for Health Policy briefing that they are actively engaged in exploring bundled payments that go beyond post-acute care to move up-stream to engage specialists in managing patients to avoid and/or reduce acute events. We believe this focus dovetails with our non-BPCI-A episodes of care, where we can support not only procedure-based bundles, but also conditions such as maternity, diabetes, and substance abuse. However, if CMS does not renew the program, or makes significant changes in any successor program, it may have a negative impact on the number of episodes we are able to manage, our savings rate and, consequently, our revenue, profitability and cash flows in future periods.
COVID-19
Our operations in our Home & Community Services segment were significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 as we temporarily paused IHEs in March 2020 and shortly thereafter expanded our business model to perform vIHEs in order to make up for some of the lost IHE volume. We resumed in-person visits beginning in July 2020. Despite the availability of vIHEs, many of our customers had postponed IHEs to the second half of 2020. Overall, we saw significant incremental in-person IHE volume in the second half of 2020, particularly in the fourth quarter, related to this catch-up and additionally as certain customers increased the overall volumes they placed with us. In order to meet this volume growth, we onboarded additional providers into our network which resulted in proportionally higher expenses.
In 2021, the vast majority of our evaluations were in-person IHEs, although we continued to perform vIHEs. Overall, IHE volume in 2021 was strong and increased 33% compared to 2020. Late in the fourth quarter of 2021 and into early 2022, there were once again COVID-19 surges across the country, particularly related to Omicron and other variants. While this did impact provider availability temporarily, we have not yet experienced a significant decline in IHE volume or significant shift in mix from IHEs to vIHEs as a result of the latest COVID-19 surges.
Our Episodes of Care Services segment has also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. At certain times during the pandemic, governmental authorities recommended, and in certain cases required, that elective, specialty and other procedures and appointments, including certain acute and post-acute care services, be suspended or canceled to avoid non-essential patient exposure to medical environments and potential infection with the COVID-19 virus. In addition, the temporary suspension or cancellation of services was put in place to focus limited resources and personnel capacity toward the prevention of, and care for patients with, COVID-19. This resulted in fewer elective procedures and a general reduction in individuals seeking medical care starting at the end of the first quarter of 2020, which contributed to a substantially lower number of episodes being managed in 2020 and 2021.
In addition, in the third quarter of 2020 and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, CMS announced that healthcare providers could either (i) continue in the BPCI-A program with no change or (ii) as an exception to previous program rules, healthcare providers could choose between the following two options for 2020:
•eliminate upside and downside risk by excluding all episodes from reconciliation; or
•exclude from reconciliation those episodes with a COVID-19 diagnosis during the episode.
Healthcare providers made their elections by September 25, 2020. The results of those elections reduced the total number of episodes we managed during 2020 and 2021, and therefore, reduced program size. Subsequently, CMS announced that all episodes in 2021 and 2022 with a COVID-19 diagnosis would be automatically excluded from reconciliation regardless of whether the COVID-19 diagnosis had any meaningful impact on the outcome of the episode itself, which further reduced program size for all of 2021. The Omicron COVID-19 variant spread rapidly and widely at the end of 2021 and during early 2022, resulting in high COVID-19 infection rates, which further reduced our program size. Further COVID-19 waves may continue to impact our program size going forward.
Initially, the reduction in the number of episodes managed was offset by a higher savings rate achieved due to a combination of improved performance by some of our partners as well as certain partners that were underperforming choosing to exclude some or all of their episodes from reconciliation in 2020. However, beginning with the reconciliation results received from CMS during the second quarter of 2021, we saw a negative impact on
our savings rate as a result of COVID-19. This result was driven primarily by the following factors:
•Under-diagnosis of co-morbidities as a result of COVID-19: CMS adjusts the final target price of each episode of care managed to take into consideration the higher expected cost of treating patients that have co-morbidities, like diabetes or other chronic conditions, that can lead to complications and result in higher costs of treatment. Co-morbidities must be diagnosed prior to an episode being initiated. Typically, co-morbidities are diagnosed at annual physicals or routine visits to the doctor's office. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, many individuals have foregone in-person annual physicals and other routine appointments, resulting in a reduced diagnosis rate for co-morbidities. As a result, we believe co-morbidities were under-diagnosed, which led to higher actual costs of treatment without an attendant patient mix adjustment by CMS and therefore reduced our savings rate.
•Use of higher cost next site of care facilities as a result of COVID-19: During the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, the availability of skilled nursing facilities as a next site of care option upon hospital discharge was extremely limited due to COVID-19 outbreaks and staffing shortages. As a result, patients were more frequently discharged to inpatient rehabilitation facilities, which are higher cost and led to a decrease in the savings rate. Although the availability of skilled nursing facilities has improved, patients continue to be discharged to inpatient rehabilitation facilities and other high-cost next sites of care, which reduces our savings rate.
Due to the passage of time between when we perform our services, the receipt of a reconciliation of results from CMS and the subsequent cash settlement by CMS, these factors did not have an immediate impact on our revenues in 2020. We began to see the effects of these factors beginning in the second quarter of 2021 and throughout 2021, and we expect to continue to see these effects for the near term. In addition, these factors did not have an impact on the cash we received from CMS during 2020 as payments we received related to pre-COVID-19 performance. The cash received from CMS in the first quarter of 2021 reflected the initial impact of COVID-19 as described more fully above, and the cash receipt received in the third quarter of 2021 was also negatively impacted by COVID-19, as will the cash receipt related to the reconciliation we received in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Because our administrative fee is calculated as a percentage of program size and we receive a portion of the savings achieved in management of an episode, the decrease in episodes and related reduction in overall program size have had, and we expect will continue to have, a negative effect on our revenue. Some of these measures and challenges will likely continue for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and will harm the results of operations, liquidity and financial condition of our provider partners and our business. Lastly, our representatives may be prohibited from entering hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and other post-acute facilities as a result of the pandemic, which affects our ability to manage post-acute care and could have a material impact on the savings rate being generated by the program.
We continue to monitor trends related to COVID-19, including the recent surge in the Omicron variant and other variants, the ongoing federal vaccine rollout, changes in CDC recommendations and their impact on results of operations and financial condition on both of our segments.
Investment in growth and technology
We continue to invest in sustaining significant growth, expanding our suite of solutions and being able to support a larger customer base over time. Achievement of our growth strategy will require additional investments and result in higher expenses and higher cash outflows being incurred, particularly in developing new solutions, as well as in technology and human resources, as we aim to achieve this growth without diluting or decreasing the level and quality of services we provide. Developing new solutions can be time- and resource-intensive, and even once we launch a new solution, it can take a significant amount of time to contract with customers, provide them with our
suite of technology and data analytics tools and have them actually begin generating revenue. This may increase our costs for one or more periods before we begin generating revenue from new solutions. In addition to developing new solutions, we are making significant investments in developing our existing solutions and increasing capacity. We will continue to invest in our technology platform and human resources to empower our providers and our customers to further improve results and optimize efficiencies. However, our investments may be more capital intensive or take longer to develop than we expect and may not result in operational efficiencies.
In the first quarter of 2022, we announced our plans to open a technology center in Ireland to expand our access to skilled technology resources in support of our growth strategy. Expanding internationally will result in additional infrastructure costs as well as increased risks. See “-Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks related to our limited operating history, financial position and future growth-We may be subject to risks that arise from operating internationally.”
Cost of being a public company
Our operating costs have increased in absolute terms as we develop, manage and train management level and other employees to comply with ongoing public company requirements and incur other expenses, including costs related to our public reporting obligations, which includes increased professional fees for accounting, legal, compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley Act, proxy statements and stockholder meetings, equity plan administration, stock exchange fees and transfer agent fees. In addition, we are party to the Tax Receivable Agreement with the TRA Parties and are required to make certain cash payments to them in accordance with the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Tax Receivable Agreement.”
Effects of the reorganization on our corporate structure
Signify Health was formed for the purpose of the IPO, which was effective in February 2021, and had no activities of its own prior to such date. We are a holding company and our sole material asset is a controlling ownership and profits interest in Cure TopCo. All of our business is conducted through Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliates, and the financial results of Cure TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries are included in our consolidated financial statements for periods subsequent to the Reorganization Transactions.
Cure TopCo is currently taxed as a partnership for federal income tax purposes and, as a result, its members, including after the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO, Signify Health, pay taxes with respect to their allocable share of its net taxable income. We expect that redemptions and exchanges of non-voting common units of Cure TopCo (the “LLC Units”) will result in increases in the tax basis in our share of the tangible and intangible assets of Cure TopCo that otherwise would not have been available. These increases in tax basis may reduce the amount of tax that we would otherwise be required to pay in the future. The Tax Receivable Agreement requires us to pay to the TRA Parties 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize from these tax basis increases and other tax attributes discussed herein. Furthermore, payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement will give rise to additional tax benefits and therefore additional payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
Our revenue is generated from contracts with our customers within our two operating segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services, under contracts that contain various fee structures. Through our Home & Community Services segment, we offer IHEs, performed either within the patient’s home, virtually or at a
healthcare provider facility, primarily to Medicare Advantage health plans (and to some extent Medicaid). Additionally, we offer certain diagnostic screening and other ancillary services as well as services to address healthcare concerns related to SDOH. Through our Episodes of Care Services segment, we primarily provide services designed to improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare delivery by developing and managing episodic payment programs in partnership with healthcare providers, primarily under the BPCI-A program with CMS.
In our Home & Community Services segment, we primarily generate revenue through IHEs. Revenue is recognized when the IHEs are submitted to our customers on a daily basis. Submission to the customer occurs after the IHEs are completed and coded, a process which may take one to several days after completion of the evaluation. We are paid a flat fee for each completed IHE regardless of the member’s location or the outcome of an IHE. We earn a separate fee for any additional diagnostic screenings the health plan elects to provide for the relevant member. Revenue is recognized when the additional screening occurs.
We have entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. Revenue generated under the underlying customer contracts includes an estimated reduction in the transaction price for IHEs associated with the initial grant date fair value of the outstanding customer EARs. The total grant date fair value of the outstanding EAR agreements was $51.8 million and is being recorded against revenue over their respective performance periods, both of which end in December 2022. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights Agreements.”
In our Episodes of Care Services segment, we primarily generate revenue through episodes of care under the BPCI-A program. We participate as a “convener participant” under the BPCI-A program. As a convener participant, we hold a contract directly with CMS and are responsible for developing and monitoring a BPCI-A episode of care program in partnership with healthcare providers. We enter into back-to-back contracts with provider partners interested in participating in BPCI-A episode of care programs through which we assist with compliance with CMS rules and program requirements and provide a suite of analytic, technology and post-acute management services. Under the BPCI-A program, we recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. We are generally paid an administrative fee, which is paid out of savings, and also share in the savings or losses generated by our provider partners as compared to BPCI-A’s benchmark episode price for a particular episode. The transaction price is 100% variable, and therefore we estimate the amount which we expect to be entitled to receive for each episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period. In making this estimate, we consider inputs such as the overall program size, which is defined by the historic cost and the frequency of occurrence of defined episodes of care. Additionally, we estimate rates for shared savings or losses by using data sources such as historical trend analysis together with indicative data of the current volume of episodes. Although our estimates are based on the information available to us at each reporting date, several factors may cause actual revenue earned to differ from the estimates recorded in each period. These include, among others, limited historical experience, as the current BPCI-A program only commenced in the fourth quarter of 2018 and has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic since early 2020, and other limitations of the program beyond our control. See “-Critical accounting policies-Revenue recognition.”
Operating expenses
Operating expenses are composed of:
•Service expense. Service expense represents direct costs associated with generating revenue. These costs include fees paid to providers for performing IHEs, provider travel expenses and the total cost of payroll, related benefits and other personnel expenses for employees in roles that serve to provide direct revenue generating services to customers. Additionally, service expense also includes costs related to the use of certain professional service firms, member engagement expenses, coding expenses and certain other direct costs.
•Selling, general and administrative expense (“SG&A”). SG&A includes the total cost of payroll, related benefits and other personnel expense for employees who do not have a direct role associated with revenue generation. SG&A includes all general operating costs including, but not limited to, rent and occupancy costs, telecommunications costs, information technology infrastructure and operations costs, software licensing costs, advertising and marketing expenses, recruiting expenses, costs associated with developing new service offerings and expenses related to the use of certain subcontractors and professional services firms. SG&A includes significant legal, accounting and other expenses associated with being a public company, including, among others, costs associated with our compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulatory requirements.
•Transaction-related expenses. Transaction-related expenses primarily consist of expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions and other corporate development such as mergers and acquisitions activity that did not proceed, strategic investments and similar activities, including consulting expenses, compensation expenses and other integration-type expenses. Additionally, expenses associated with the IPO are included in transaction-related expenses.
•Asset impairment. Asset impairment includes charges resulting from the impairment of long-lived assets when it is determined that the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset.
•Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation expense includes depreciation of property and equipment, including leasehold improvements, computer equipment, furniture and fixtures and software. Amortization expense includes amortization of capitalized internal-use software and software development costs, customer relationships and acquired software.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net is composed of:
•Interest expense. Interest expense consists of accrued interest and related payments on outstanding long-term debt and revolving credit facilities, as well as the amortization of debt issuance costs.
•Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt consists of certain fees paid and write-offs of unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discount in connection with the June 2021 refinancing of our long-term debt.
•Other (income) expense, net. Other (income) expense, net consists of (1) changes in fair value of the customer EARs as measured at the end of each period, (2) adjustments to liabilities under our Tax Receivable Agreement and (3) interest and dividends on cash and cash equivalents.
Income tax expense
Our business was historically operated through Cure TopCo, a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, which is generally not subject to U.S. federal or certain state income taxes. In connection with the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO, we acquired LLC Units in Cure TopCo. Accordingly, we are now subject to U.S. federal and state income tax with respect to our allocable share of the income of Cure TopCo.
Loss attributable to the pre-Reorganization period
Loss attributable to the pre-Reorganization period relates to the loss incurred for the periods that preceded the Reorganization Transactions on February 12, 2021, including the period from January 1, 2021 through February 12, 2021.
Income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interest
Income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interest for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the portion of net loss post-Reorganization Transactions allocable to the Continuing pre-IPO holders in Cure TopCo. Non-controlling interest does not apply to the year ended December 31, 2020, as that was prior to the Reorganization Transactions.
Noncontrolling interest
In connection with the Reorganization Transactions, we were appointed as the sole managing member of Cure TopCo pursuant to the Amended LLC Agreement. Because we manage and operate the business and control the strategic decisions and day-to-day operations of Cure TopCo and also have a substantial financial interest in Cure TopCo, we consolidate the financial results of Cure TopCo, and a portion of our net income (loss) is allocated to the noncontrolling interest to reflect the entitlement of the Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members to a portion of Cure TopCo’s net income (loss). As of December 31, 2021, we hold approximately 75.1% of Cure TopCo’s outstanding LLC Units and the remaining LLC Units of Cure TopCo are held by the Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members.
Results of operations
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. A discussion of the results by each of our two operating segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services, follows the discussion of our consolidated results. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part III, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented:
Revenue
Our total revenue was $773.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $162.8 million, or 26.7%, from $610.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by a $202.5 million increase in revenue from our Home & Community Services segment, partially offset by a $39.7 million decrease in revenue from our Episodes of Care Services segment. See “-Segment results” below.
Operating expenses
Our total operating expenses were $729.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $136.8 million, or 23.1%, from $593.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by the following:
•Service expense - Our total service expense was $393.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $86.8 million, or 28.3%, from $306.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by expenses related to our network of providers, which increased by $46.2 million, driven by the higher IHE volume and a return to a more traditional mix of in-person IHEs compared to vIHEs. In 2020, as a result of COVID-19, a higher proportion of evaluations were performed as vIHE, which have a lower cost per evaluation. Compensation-related expenses increased by $26.5
million primarily driven by additional headcount and higher incentive pay to support growth in both segments. Additionally, the following expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by the overall higher IHE volume: an increase of $9.5 million in the costs of providing other ancillary services, including certain laboratory and testing fees; an increase of approximately $4.1 million in member outreach and other related expenses; and an increase of $0.3 million in other variable costs. The impact of COVID-19 resulted in an increase of approximately $0.2 million in expenses, including costs related to COVID-19 tests for our providers and incremental costs for personal protective equipment used by our providers while conducting IHEs during the pandemic.
•Selling, general and administrative expense - Our total SG&A expense was $244.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $36.5 million, or 17.5%, from $208.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by compensation-related expenses, which increased by $22.7 million due to additional headcount to support the overall growth in our business and a related increase in incentive compensation. Other costs also increased, including an increase of $11.2 million in professional and consulting fees, primarily related to increased costs associated with being a public company as well as higher legal expenses, an increase of $4.5 million in information technology-related expenses, including infrastructure and software costs, and an increase of $1.1 million in employee travel and entertainment expenses as COVID-19 imposed travel restrictions eased. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $2.2 million in other variable costs, $0.6 million in remeasurement of contingent consideration, and a $0.2 million decrease in facilities-related expenses, including rent expense under our operating leases.
•Transaction-related expenses - Our total transaction-related expenses were $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $5.3 million, or 34.9%, from $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the transaction-related expenses consisted primarily of consulting and other professional services expenses, as well as compensation expenses, incurred in connection with our IPO and general corporate development activities, including potential acquisitions that did not proceed. In 2020, the transaction-related expenses related to our combination with Remedy Partners at the end of 2019 and integration of Remedy Partners, expenses incurred in connection with general corporate development activities, including potential acquisitions that did not proceed, as well as costs incurred in connection with our IPO. These transaction-related expenses consisted primarily of consulting, compensation and integration-type expenses.
•Asset impairment - Our total asset impairment was $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $10.4 million from $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the asset impairment related to a technology intangible asset acquired through the PatientBlox acquisition, which was considered impaired due to a delay in the launch of a new episodes product utilizing such technology. The asset impairment in 2020 resulted from the discontinued use of certain software assets.
•Depreciation and amortization - Our total depreciation and amortization expense was $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $8.4 million, or 13.6%, from $62.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily driven by a net increase in amortization expense of $7.5 million, primarily due to additional capital expenditures related to internally-developed software over the past year, partially offset by certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized in 2020. Additionally, there was an increase in depreciation expense of $0.9 million, primarily driven by additional capital expenditures over the past year.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net was $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $1.7 million from $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by a $4.0 million adjustment to our liability under the TRA (the “TRA liability”) and a $1.9 million decrease in the remeasurement of the fair value of the outstanding customer EAR liabilities, partially offset by the loss on extinguishment of debt in 2021 of $5.0 million in connection with the June 2021 refinancing of our outstanding long-term debt. Interest expense also decreased by $0.5 million primarily driven by the lower outstanding principal balance and lower interest rates following our June 2021 refinancing, as well as an increase of $0.3 million in interest income on excess cash balances held throughout the year.
Income tax (benefit) expense
Income tax expense was $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $3.3 million from $0.9 million in income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the Reorganization Transactions, we are now subject to corporate income taxes on our share of the total net income (loss). Prior to the Reorganization Transactions, we were not subject to corporate income taxes, as Cure TopCo is a partnership for U.S. tax purposes. The effective tax rate for 2021 was 30.2%, which is higher than the statutory federal and state income tax rate of approximately 25% primarily due to unrealizable net operating losses which require a valuation allowance and the impact of the non-controlling interest partially offset by a tax benefit associated with stock option exercises.
Segment results
We evaluate the performance of each of our two operating segments based on segment revenue and segment adjusted EBITDA. Service expense for each segment is based on direct expenses associated with the revenue generating activities of each segment. We allocate SG&A expenses to each segment primarily based on the relative proportion of direct employees.
The following table summarizes our segment revenue, segment adjusted EBITDA and the percentage of total consolidated revenue and consolidated adjusted EBITDA, respectively, for the periods presented:
Home & Community Services revenue was $653.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $202.5 million, or 44.9%, from $450.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by Evaluations revenue, which increased by $204.3 million. The higher Evaluations revenue was driven by increased IHE volume and a reduction in the proportion of IHEs conducted as vIHEs, which are performed at a lower price per evaluation compared to in-person IHEs. Evaluations revenue included a reduction associated with the decline in value of the outstanding customer EARs of $19.7 million and $12.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Other revenue decreased by $1.8 million, primarily due to a decrease in standalone sales of our social determinants of health product.
Episodes of Care Services revenue was $120.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $39.7 million, or 24.8%, from $160.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease of $38.0 million in Episodes revenue due to the adverse effects of COVID-19 on program size and savings rate, including lower healthcare utilization, the exclusion of episodes of care with a COVID-19 diagnosis and the impact of the patient case mix adjustment and inpatient rehabilitation center utilization on savings rate described in “-COVID-19” above. We recognized approximately $9.2 million of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $22.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing changes in estimates of variable consideration upon receipt and analysis of reconciliations from CMS in the second and fourth quarters, primarily as a result of the improved savings rate and changes in program size compared to our estimates. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded approximately $9.2 million of revenue related to changes in estimates based on new information received during the third quarter of 2020, primarily related to the impact of COVID-19 on program size and related CMS-imposed changes offered to providers that had an overall beneficial impact on savings rates, primarily due to the optional exclusion of under-performing bundles. Other revenue decreased by $1.7 million in 2021, primarily driven by a decrease in our complex care management services product offering.
Home & Community Services Adjusted EBITDA was $195.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $98.9 million, or 102.8%, from $96.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in revenue described above partially offset by higher operating expenses as a result of the variable costs associated with increased volume and the investments to support our growth and technology.
Episodes of Care Services Adjusted EBITDA was a loss of $24.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $52.6 million from positive Adjusted EBITDA of $28.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by the lower revenue described above and higher operating expenses as a result of investments to support our future growth and technology.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth unaudited statement of operations data for each of the quarters presented. We have prepared the quarterly statement of operations data on a basis consistent with the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, the financial information reflects all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, which we consider necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
Liquidity and capital resources
Liquidity describes our ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital needs to meet operating expenses, debt service, acquisitions and other commitments and contractual obligations. We consider liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund our operating and investing activities.
Our primary sources of liquidity are proceeds from our IPO, our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our Credit Agreement, including borrowing capacity under our Revolving Facility (as defined below). We received net proceeds of $609.7 million in connection with the IPO. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $678.5 million. Our total indebtedness was $349.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
In June 2021, we refinanced our previously existing credit facility and entered into a new credit agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with a secured lender syndicate, which, among other things, reduced our total debt outstanding by approximately $61.4 million, lowered the interest rate, increased our borrowing capacity under the
Revolving Facility and extended the maturity. The 2021 Credit Agreement includes a term loan of $350.0 million (the “2021 Term Loan”) and a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) with a $185.0 million borrowing capacity. See “-Indebtedness” below. As of December 31, 2021, we had available borrowing capacity under the Revolving Facility of $172.8 million, as the borrowing capacity is reduced by outstanding letters of credit of $12.2 million.
Our principal liquidity needs are working capital and general corporate expenses, debt service, capital expenditures, obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, income taxes, acquisitions and other investments to help achieve our growth strategy. Our capital expenditures for property and equipment to support growth in the business were $6.7 million and $13.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The higher capital expenditures in 2020 were driven by an expansion at our Dallas office location to support our growth.
Our liquidity may fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to our agreements with CMS under the BPCI-A program. Cash receipts generated under these contracts, which represents the majority of revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment, are subject to a semiannual reconciliation cycle, which occurs in the second and fourth quarters of each year. We typically receive cash receipts under these contracts in the quarter subsequent to the receipt of the reconciliation, or during the first and third quarters of each year, which can cause our liquidity position to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. See “-Factors affecting our results of operations-Seasonality.”
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led to a deviation from the historical seasonality trend we generally experience in our Home & Community Services segment, whereby the fourth quarter IHE volume and revenue are generally lower than the other quarters. As a result, and due to the shift to vIHEs during our temporary suspension of IHEs in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our liquidity trends were negatively impacted during certain periods in 2020. During 2021, the vast majority of our evaluations were performed on an in-person basis, although due to a surge in variants at the end of 2021 and as an ongoing product offering, we continued to perform vIHEs. The phasing of the overall IHE volume in 2021 was more in line with historical trends in the Home & Community Services segment, albeit at higher absolute volumes, and therefore 2021 liquidity was more consistent with historical seasonality trends.
In our Episodes of Care Services segment, the lower number of episodes managed in 2020 and the lower than expected savings rate, primarily driven by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and CMS’ response to the pandemic, impacted the semi-annual reconciliation we received during the second quarter of 2021. We received the cash related to this reconciliation in the third quarter of 2021, which was a significantly lower amount than that received from the prior reconciliation. Recently, CMS announced a change to the period in which they will pay funds related to expirations. This change will result in a delayed payment for one period, which will have a temporary adverse impact on the cash expected to be received in early 2022 following the receipt of our semi-annual reconciliation during the fourth quarter of 2021. In addition, our program size and savings rate were also negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, and as a result, we expect to receive lower cash payments from CMS for reconciliations received in 2022 as compared to the reconciliations received prior to the pandemic. See “-COVID-19.”
On February 9, 2022, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (“the Merger Agreement”) with Caravan Health, Inc. (“Caravan”), pursuant to which, we acquired Caravan on March 1, 2022 for an initial purchase price of approximately $250.0 million, subject to certain customary adjustments. The initial purchase price comprises $190.0 million in cash and approximately $60.0 million in our Class A common stock. In addition to the initial purchase price, the transaction includes contingent additional payments of up to $50.0 million based on the future performance of Caravan. In connection and concurrently with entry into the Merger Agreement, we entered into support agreements with certain shareholders of Caravan, pursuant to which such shareholders agreed that, other than according to the terms of its respective support agreement, it will not, subject to certain limited exceptions, transfer, sell or otherwise dispose of any Caravan shares for a period of up to five years following closing of the merger, among other things.
In the first quarter of 2022, we announced we are developing a technology center in Ireland where we intend to employ software engineers and other employees to support our operations in the United States. This will be our first international expansion, which will require capital funding and expose us to currency risk. See “-Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks related to our limited operating history, financial position and future growth-We may be subject to risks that arise from operating internationally.”
We believe that our cash flow from operations, capacity under our Revolving Facility and available cash and cash equivalents on hand will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the issuance of additional equity, or a combination thereof. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control. See “-Item 1A. Risk factors.” Accordingly, we cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. If we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell or issue additional equity to finance such acquisitions, which could possibly result in additional expenses or dilution.
Indebtedness
On June 22, 2021, our subsidiaries, Cure Intermediate 3, LLC, as “Holdings,” and Signify Health, LLC, as “Borrower,” entered into a credit agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with Barclays Bank PLC as administrative agent and collateral agent (the “Administrative Agent”), the guarantors party thereto from time to time and the lenders party thereto from time to time, consisting of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million (the “2021 Term Loan”) and a revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $185.0 million (the “Revolving Facility”). The obligations under the 2021 Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of Holdings, the Borrower and its wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries (subject to customary exceptions and exclusions), including a pledge of the equity of each of its subsidiaries. The 2021 Credit Agreement replaced all previously outstanding long-term indebtedness.
The 2021 Term Loan amortizes at 1.00% per annum in quarterly installments of 0.25% commencing with the first payment in December 2021, and will mature on June 22, 2028. The Revolving Facility matures on June 22, 2026.
The 2021 Term Loan bears interest at a rate of the base rate plus 2.25% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 3.25% for eurocurrency rate loans, provided that upon and any time after the public corporate credit rating of the Borrower is first rated “B+” or higher by Standards and Poors’ Rating Agency (“S&P”) following June 22, 2021, the applicable rate with respect to the 2021 Terms Loan shall be permanently reduced by 0.25% for both
eurocurrency rate loans and for base rate loans. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility initially bore interest at a rate of the base rate plus 1.75% for base rate loans or the eurocurrency rate plus 2.75% for eurocurrency rate loans and letter of credit fees and, undrawn commitment fees equal to 0.25%.
Since the delivery of financial statements for the first full quarter after June 22, 2021, the interest rate for borrowings under the Revolving Facility is based on the consolidated first lien net leverage ratio pricing grids below. In addition, upon and any time after the public corporate credit rating of the Borrower is first rated B+ or higher by S&P subsequent to June 22, 2021, the applicable rate with respect to the Revolving Facility and letter of credit fees shall be permanently reduced by 0.25% at each pricing level in the pricing grids below.
In addition, the 2021 Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability of the Borrower and its restricted subsidiaries to make certain payments, incur additional debt, engage in certain asset sales, mergers, acquisitions or similar transactions, create liens on assets, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, change its business, make investments and may limit or restrict the Borrower’s ability to make dividends or other distributions to us. In addition, the 2021 Credit Agreement contains a springing financial covenant requiring the Borrower to maintain its Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) at or below 4.50:1.00 as of the last day of any fiscal quarter in which the principal amount of all revolving loans and letters of credit (other than undrawn letters of credit) exceed 35% of the revolving credit commitments at such time.
Comparative cash flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $129.9 million in 2021, an increase of $86.4 million, compared to $43.5 million in 2020.
Net income was $9.9 million in 2021, as compared to a net loss of $14.5 million in 2020. The increase in net income was primarily due to growth in Home & Community Services revenue partially offset by a decline in Episodes of Care Services revenue, primarily driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as an increase in operating expenses to support the future growth in the overall business. Non-cash items were $122.4 million in 2021 as compared to $99.2 million in 2020. The increase in non-cash items included in net income was primarily driven by the impairment of the PatientBlox technology intangible asset due to the delay in the launch of a new episodes product utilizing the technology and the loss on extinguishment of debt partially offset by a deferred tax benefit and adjustments to the Tax Receivable Agreement liability.
Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a cash decrease of $0.5 million in 2021, as compared to a cash decrease of $39.4 million in 2020. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a net reduction in accounts receivable of $53.4 million in 2021 compared to a net increase in accounts receivable of $102.5 million in 2020. The reduction in accounts receivable in 2021 was primarily driven by collections in the Episodes of Care Services segment together with the impact of COVID-19 leading to a reduction in program size which resulted in an $83.2 million decrease to accounts receivable for our Episodes of Care Services segment as of December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. This was partially offset by a $29.8 million increase in accounts receivable for our Home & Community Services segment of as of December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of the increase in in-person IHE volumes in 2021. The net impact of changes in contract assets and liabilities during 2021 was a $29.8 million reduction in cash for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a $13.6 million cash increase for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net contract assets in 2021 was primarily driven by a delay in cash collections as a result of a change implemented by CMS related to timing of payments for expired episodes under the BPCI-A program and a change to the estimate of variable consideration in our Episodes of Care Services segment revenue in 2021 based on additional information that became available to us. An increase in operating expenses as a result of the investments to support our growth and technology has further impacted our working capital needs.
Accounts receivable, contract assets and contract liabilities fluctuate from period to period as a result of periodically slower client collections and the results of the semi-annual reconciliations in our Episodes of Care Services segment.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $34.0 million in 2021, a decrease of $15.8 million, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $49.8 million in 2020. Capital expenditures for property and equipment were $6.7 million in 2021 compared to $13.9 million in 2020. The $7.2 million decrease in capital expenditures for property and equipment was primarily driven by investments in certain facilities in 2020 and other requirements to support the future growth in the business. Capital expenditures for internal-use software development were $21.9 million in 2021 compared to $20.2 million in 2020. The $1.7 million increase in capital expenditures for internal-use software development was primarily driven by additional investments in our technology platforms to support future growth. During 2021, we released $0.4 million in restricted cash to the sellers of PatientBlox, in accordance with the purchase agreement related to the PatientBlox acquisition that was completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. Investing activities also included a $5.0 million equity investment in Medalogix, Inc. in 2021 and a $1.0 million
equity investment in CenterHealth in 2020. Investing activities in 2020 also included the initial cash consideration related to the acquisition of PatientBlox in the amount of $14.7 million and the purchase of a long-term equity investment for $1.0 million.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $511.3 million in 2021, an increase of $478.2 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $33.1 million in 2020. The primary source of cash from financing activities in 2021 was proceeds of $604.5 million related to our IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and other issuance-related costs. Additionally, we received $5.9 million in proceeds related to the issuance of common stock in connection with the exercise of stock options and purchase of shares under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). These cash inflows in 2021 were partially offset by the net reduction in long-term debt of $61.4 million in connection with the June 2021 refinancing as well as scheduled principal payments on long-term debt of $2.0 million. Additionally, we paid $13.1 million related to the completion of the first milestone associated with the 2020 PatientBlox acquisition, $13.0 million in tax distributions to the non-controlling interest members of Cure TopCo and approximately $9.2 million in debt issuance costs in connection with the June 2021 refinancing.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $33.1 million in 2020. The primary source of cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was proceeds of $140.0 million from the issuance of the 2020 Incremental Term Loans. Additionally, we received approximately $1.0 million in net income tax refunds on behalf of New Remedy Corp. and $2.9 million in proceeds related to the issuance of common stock under stock plans. These sources of cash in 2020 were partially offset by the repurchase of CureTopCo and Cure Aggregator member units for $56.9 million, payment of contingent consideration of $38.2 million related to a 2017 acquisition, tax distributions to members of Cure Aggregator and Cure TopCo of $8.2 million, payment of debt issuance costs of $5.1 million and scheduled principal payments on long-term debt under our then outstanding credit agreement of $2.8 million.
Dividend Policy
Assuming Cure TopCo makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, Tax Receivable Agreement payments and expenses (any such portion, an “excess distribution”) will be made at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors may change our dividend policy at any time. See “Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
We are a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement with the TRA Parties, under which we generally are required to pay to the TRA Parties 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) certain favorable tax attributes we acquired from the Blocker Companies in the Mergers (including net operating losses, the Blocker Companies’ allocable share of existing tax basis and refunds of taxes attributable to pre-Merger tax periods), (ii) increases in our allocable share of existing tax basis and tax basis adjustments that may result from (x) future redemptions or exchanges of LLC Units by Continuing Pre-IPO LLC Members for cash or Class A common stock, (y) the IPO Contribution and (z) certain payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (iii) deductions in respect of interest and certain compensatory payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. These payment obligations are our obligations and not obligations of Cure TopCo. Our obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement also apply with respect to any person who is issued LLC Units in
the future and who becomes a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement. We do not anticipate making payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement until after the 2021 tax return has been finalized.
Customer Equity Appreciation Rights Agreements
In each of December 2019 and September 2020, we entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. Pursuant to the agreements, certain revenue targets are established for the customer to meet in the next three years. If they meet those targets, they retain the EAR. If they do not meet such targets, they forfeit all or a portion of the EAR. Each EAR agreement allows the customer to participate in the future growth in the fair market value of our equity and can only be settled in cash (or, under certain circumstances, in whole or in part with a replacement agreement containing substantially similar economic terms as the original EAR agreement) upon a change-in-control of us, other liquidity event, or upon approval of our Board of Directors with the consent of New Mountain Capital subject to certain terms and conditions. Each EAR will expire 20 years from the date of grant, if not previously settled.
Pursuant to the terms of the EAR agreements, the value of the EARs will be calculated as an amount equal to the non-forfeited portion of a defined percentage (3.5% in the case of the December 2019 EAR and 4.5% in the case of the September 2020 EAR) of the excess of (i) the aggregate fair market value of the Reference Equity (as defined below) as of the applicable date of determination over (ii) a base threshold equity value defined in each agreement. Pursuant to the terms of each agreement, the “Reference Equity” is the Class A common stock of the Company and the aggregate fair market value of the Reference Equity will be determined by reference to the volume-weighted average trading price of the Company’s Class A common stock (assuming all of the holders of LLC Units redeemed or exchanged their LLC Units for a corresponding number of newly issued shares of Class A common stock) over a period of 30 calendar days. In addition, following the IPO, the base threshold equity value set forth in each agreement was increased by the aggregate offering price of the IPO.
On December 31, 2021, we entered into an amendment of the December 2019 EAR and the September 2020 EAR (collectively, the “EAR Amendments”). The EAR Amendments provide, among other things, that the customer may exercise any unexercised, vested and non-forfeited portion of each EAR upon the sale of our Class A common stock by New Mountain Capital, our sponsor, subject to certain terms and conditions. These terms and conditions include, among others, that the customer has met its revenue targets under each EAR for 2022 and that New Mountain Capital has sold our Class A common stock above a certain threshold as set forth in each amendment. We have the option to settle any portion of the EARs so exercised in cash or in Class A common stock, provided that the aggregate amount of any cash payments do not exceed $25.0 million in any calendar quarter (with any amounts exceeding $25.0 million to be paid in the following quarter or quarters).
We and our customer also agreed to extend our existing commercial arrangements through the middle of 2026 and established targets for the minimum number of IHEs to be performed on behalf of the customer each year (the “Volume Targets”). The EAR Amendments did not result in any incremental expense as the fair value at the time of modification did not exceed the fair value of the original December 2019 EAR and September 2020 EAR immediately prior to the modification. Accordingly, we will continue to recognize the original grant date fair value of the 2019 EAR and 2020 EAR awards as a reduction to revenue.
We also entered into a letter agreement (the “EAR Letter Agreement”) with the customer that provides that, in the event of a change in control of the Company or certain other corporate transactions, and subject to achievement of the Volume Targets, if the aggregate amount paid under the EARs prior to and in connection with such event (the “Aggregate EAR Value”) is less than $118.5 million, then the customer will be paid the difference between $118.5 million and the Aggregate EAR Value. The EAR Letter Agreement is a separate equity-linked instrument. The EAR Letter Agreement was determined to be a separate equity instrument, independent from the original EARs, as
amended. The grant date fair value is determined based on an option pricing model. Similar to the original EARs, we will record the initial grant date fair value as a reduction to revenue over the performance period. Estimated changes in fair market value will be recorded each accounting period based on management’s current assumptions related to the underlying valuation approaches as other (income) expense, net on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The grant date fair value of the EAR Letter Agreement was estimated to be $76.2 million and will be recorded as a reduction of revenue through June 30, 2026, coinciding with the service period. The EAR Letter Agreement was executed on December 31, 2021 and, therefore, there was no material impact on our results of operations in 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, cash settlement of the EARs was expected to be a minimum of $118.5 million but was not considered probable, due to the change in control and liquidity provisions of each EAR. The grant date fair value of the December 2019 EAR was estimated to be $15.2 million and is being recorded as a reduction of revenue through December 31, 2022, coinciding with the three-year performance period. The grant date fair value of the September 2020 EAR was estimated to be $36.6 million and is being recorded as a reduction of revenue through December 31, 2022, coinciding with the 2.5-year performance period. As of December 31, 2021, the total estimated fair market value of the EARs, as amended, was approximately $76.6 million.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered substitutes for GAAP measures, including net income or loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, you should not consider these non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for net income or loss or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization and certain items of income and expense, including asset impairment, other (income) expense, net, transaction-related expenses, equity-based compensation, remeasurement of contingent consideration, SEU expense and non-recurring expenses. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure to investors to assess our operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to ongoing business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of the performance of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess the performance of our business. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure to investors to assess our operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to ongoing business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of the performance of our business. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful to investors in measuring the profitability of our operations on a consolidated level.
Our use of the terms Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may vary from the use of similar terms by other companies in our industry and accordingly may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have important limitations as analytical tools. For example, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
•do not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may have to be replaced in the future;
•do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our core operations;
•do not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt; and
•do not reflect equity-based compensation expense and other non-cash charges; and exclude certain tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $46.3 million, or 37.0%, to $171.2 million in 2021 from $124.9 million in 2020.
We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful to investors in measuring the profitability of our operations on a consolidated basis. Adjusted EBITDA Margin increased by approximately 160 basis points to 22.1% in 2021 from 20.5% in 2020.
The following table shows a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(a) Asset impairment in 2021 was related to a technology intangible asset acquired through the PatientBlox acquisition, which was considered impaired as a result of a delay in the launch of a new episodes product utilizing such technology. The asset impairment in 2020 resulted from the discontinued use of certain software assets.
(b) Represents other non-operating (income) expense that consists primarily of the quarterly remeasurement of fair value of the outstanding customer EARs and adjustments to the TRA liability as well as interest and dividends earned on cash and cash equivalents.
(c) Represents transaction-related expenses that consist primarily of expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions and other corporate development activities, such as mergers and acquisitions activity that did not proceed, strategic investments and similar activities. Expenses incurred in connection with our IPO, which cannot be netted against proceeds, are also included in transaction-related expenses.
(d) Represents expense related to equity incentive awards, including incentive units, stock options and RSUs, granted to certain employees, officers and non-employee directors as long-term incentive compensation. We recognize the related expense for these awards ratably over the vesting period or as achievement of performance criteria become probable.
(e) Represents the reduction of revenue related to the grant date fair value of the customer EARs granted pursuant to the customer EAR agreements we entered into in December 2019 and September 2020, as amended.
(f) Represents remeasurement of contingent consideration in 2021 related to potential payments due upon completion of certain milestone events in connection with our acquisition of PatientBlox. In 2020, represents the remeasurement of contingent consideration due to the selling shareholders of Censeo Health, a business acquired in 2017, pending the resolution of an Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) tax matter. The matter was resolved in 2020.
(g) Represents compensation expense related to awards of synthetic equity units (“SEUs”) subject to time-based vesting. A limited number of synthetic equity units were granted in 2020 and 2021 at the time of the IPO; no future grants of SEUs will be made. Compensation expense related to these awards is tied to the 30-trading day average price of our Class A common stock, and therefore is subject to volatility and may fluctuate from period to period until settlement occurs.
(h) Represents certain gains and expenses incurred that are not expected to recur, including those associated with the closure of certain facilities and the early termination of certain contracts as well as one-time expenses associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our material cash requirements include non-cancelable purchase commitments, lease obligations, debt and debt service, payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and settlement of the outstanding customer EARs, among others. See Note 11 Long-Term Debt and Note 18 Commitments and Contingencies to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K , and “-Indebtedness” and “-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights Agreements” for further details. In addition, as of December 31, 2021 we have approximately $33.1 million in non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of software, goods and services, of which $23.5 million is due within the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $338.4 million in outstanding debt under our 2021 Credit Agreement, including $3.5 million due within the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, cash settlement related to the customer EARs is expected to be a minimum of $118.5 million. However, timing of payment is not known due to the change in control and liquidity provisions of the EARs and therefore was not considered probable.
The Tax Receivable Agreement became effective in connection with the Reorganization Transactions in February 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the estimated liability under the Tax Receivable Agreement was $56.3 million, and is expected to increase as LLC units are exchanged for shares of Class A common stock in the future. We anticipate making payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement during the first half of 2023 following the finalization of the 2021 corporate tax return with payments being spread over at least a 15 year period.
We are obligated as a lessee under certain non-cancellable operating leases for several office and other facility locations, with expected total cash commitments over the remaining lease terms of $64.4 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $10.2 million is due within the next 12 months.
In February 2021, in connection with the IPO, the outstanding synthetic equity units were converted to synthetic common units and are eligible for a cash payment upon each vesting date based on the preceding 30-trading day average stock price of our Class A common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to make payments to the employee holders of the synthetic equity units of approximately $1.4 million over the next 3 years based on the 30-day average price of our Class A common stock at December 31, 2021.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
Except for operating leases and certain letters of credit entered into in the normal course of business, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical accounting policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on our historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results experienced may vary materially and adversely from our estimates. Revisions to estimates are recognized prospectively. We believe the following critical accounting policies could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates or judgments. See Note 2 Significant Accounting Policies to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue as the control of promised services is transferred to our customers and we generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for these services. The measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make certain judgments and estimates.
We apply the five-step model to recognize revenue from customer contracts. The five-step model requires us to (i) identify the contract with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration to the extent that it is probable that a significant future reversal will not occur, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the respective performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligation.
The unit of measure for revenue recognition is a performance obligation, which is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct or series of distinct goods or services to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
Our customer contracts have either (1) a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and is, therefore, not distinct; (2) a series of distinct performance obligations; or (3) multiple performance obligations, most commonly due to the contract covering multiple service offerings. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the contract’s transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on the basis of the relative standalone selling price of each distinct service in the contract.
Home & Community Services
In our Home & Community Services segment, revenue is recognized when the IHEs are submitted to our customers on a daily basis. Submission to the customer occurs after the IHEs are completed and coded, a process which may take one to several days after completion of the evaluation. The pricing for the IHEs is generally based on a fixed transaction fee, which is directly linked to the usage of the service by the customer during a distinct service period. Customers are invoiced for evaluations performed each month and remit payment accordingly. The IHEs are recognized as a single performance obligation which qualify for point-in-time revenue recognition since the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided daily as we perform.
The transaction price for certain of our IHEs is reduced by the grant date fair value of outstanding customer EARs. See “-Critical accounting policies-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights.”
The remaining sources of revenue in our Home & Community Services segment, which relate to ancillary diagnostic and evaluative services we provide, are recognized over time as the performance obligations are satisfied and are primarily based on a fixed fee. Therefore, they do not require estimates and assumptions by management. See Note 6 Revenue Recognition to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding our revenue recognition policies.
Episodes of Care Services
The episodes solutions we provide in our Episodes of Care Services segment are an integrated set of services which represent a single performance obligation in the form of a series of distinct services. This performance obligation is satisfied over time as the various services are delivered. We primarily offer these services to customers under the BPCI-A program.
Under the BPCI-A program, we recognize the revenue attributable to episodes reconciled during each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period that commences in the second or fourth quarter of each year, depending on the relevant contract with our provider partners. The 13-month performance obligation period begins at the start of the relevant episodes of care and extends through the receipt or generation of the semiannual reconciliation for the relevant performance measurement period, as well as the provision and explanation of statements of performance to each of our customers. The transaction price is 100% variable and therefore we estimate an amount in which we expect to be entitled to receive for each six-month episode performance measurement period over a 13-month performance obligation period.
For each partner agreement, the fees are generally twofold, an administrative fee, which is based on a stated percentage of program size and is paid out of savings, and a defined share of program savings or losses, if any. In order to estimate this variable consideration, management estimates the expected program size as well as the expected savings rate for each six-month period of episodes of care. The estimate is performed both at the onset of each performance measurement period based on information available at the time and at the end of each reporting period. In making the estimate, we consider inputs such as the overall program size which is defined by the historic
cost multiplied by the frequency of occurrence of defined episodes of care. Additionally, we estimate savings rates by using data sources such as historical trend analysis together with indicative data of the current volume of episodes.
We adjust our estimates at the end of each six-month performance measurement period, generally in the second and fourth quarter each year, and may further adjust at the end of each reporting period to the extent new information indicates a change is needed. We apply a constraint to the variable consideration estimate in circumstances where we believe the claims data received is incomplete or inconsistent, so as not to have the estimates result in a significant revenue reversal in future periods. Although our estimates are based on the information available to us at each reporting date, several factors may cause actual revenue earned to differ from the estimates recorded each period. These include, among others, CMS-imposed restrictions on the definition of episodes and benchmark prices, healthcare provider participation, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and other limitations of the program beyond our control.
Within our Episodes of Care Services segment, we also generate revenue through our non-BPCI-A Episodes of Care program. Similar to the BCPI-A program, revenues under our non-BPCI-A Episodes of Care program are also driven by estimates of program size and savings rate, subject to similar constraints as described above. Completed episodes are retrospectively reconciled following semi-annual performance periods.
The remaining sources of revenue in our Episodes of Care Services segment are recognized over time when, or as, the performance obligations are satisfied and are primarily based on a fixed fee or per member per month fee. Therefore, they do not require significant estimates and assumptions by management. See Note 6 Revenue Recognition to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding revenue recognition policies.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
We continuously monitor collections and payments from our customers. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts based on the best facts available to us. We consider historical realization data, accounts receivable aging trends and other operational trends to estimate the collectability of receivables. After all reasonable attempts are made to collect a receivable, the receivable is written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts. As of December 31, 2021, we had an allowance for doubtful accounts of $7.9 million, which represented 3.7% of total accounts receivable, net. We continue to assess our receivable portfolio and collections in light of the current economic environment and its impact on our estimation of the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Equity-based compensation
We recognize equity-based compensation for all equity-based awards granted to employees based on the grant date fair value of the award. The resulting compensation expense is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
Following our IPO in February 2021, equity awards have been issued to certain employees and our Board of Directors in the form of RSUs and/or stock options. RSUs are subject to time-based vesting and vest either on the one-year anniversary of the grant date or ratably over four years. The grant date fair value of RSUs is based on the closing stock price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant and is recognized as equity-based compensation expense over the vesting period. Stock options are subject to time-based vesting and vest ratably over three or four years. The grant date fair value of stock options is measured using a Black-Scholes model and is recognized as equity-based compensation expense over the vesting period.
Inputs to the Black-Scholes model include the closing stock price of our Class A common stock on date of grant, as well as assumptions for expected term, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. The expected term of the option represents the period the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method for estimating the expected term of the options since we have limited historical experience to estimate expected term behavior. Since our Class A common shares were not publicly traded until February 2021 and were rarely traded privately, at the time of each grant, there has been insufficient volatility data available. Accordingly, we calculate expected volatility using comparable peer companies with publicly traded shares over a term similar to the expected term of the options issued. We do not intend to pay dividends on our common shares, therefore, the dividend yield percentage is zero. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected life of our stock options.
We used the weighted average assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock options granted for the periods presented as follows. No stock options were granted during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equity-based compensation prior to the IPO included awards that were profits interest units for federal income tax purposes. The profits interest units had time-based and performance-based vesting criteria. Awards with time-based vesting generally vest over time, with a portion of the awards vesting on the grant date anniversary and other awards vesting on December 31 of each year. In connection with the IPO, the profits interest units were reclassified into common units and remain subject to the same time-based and performance-based vesting criteria as per the terms of the original awards.
The grant date fair value of the profits interests was measured using a Monte Carlo option pricing model and is being recognized for awards subject to time-based vesting as equity-based compensation expense over the requisite service period. For those awards with performance-based vesting, the total cash on cash return of the private equity owners as defined in the award agreement must exceed certain multiples set forth in the award agreement in order to vest, and is also generally dependent upon the participant’s continued employment. The criteria associated with the performance-vesting criteria has not been probable to date. As such, we have not recorded any equity-based compensation expense related to the equity-based awards that are subject to performance-based vesting criteria.
The total equity value of Cure TopCo at the time of grant represented a key input for determining the fair value of the underlying common units. Prior to the IPO, a discount for lack of marketability was applied to the per unit fair value to reflect increased risk arising from the inability to readily sell our common units.
In order to estimate the fair value of our common units prior to the IPO, we used a combination of the market approach and the income approach. We used a combination of these standard valuation techniques rather than picking just one overall approach, as we believe that the market approach on its own provides a less reliable evaluation of the fair value than an income approach because such an approach relies solely on data and trends of companies in similar market segments with similar characteristics. By contrast, the income approach incorporates management’s best estimates of future performance based on both company and industry-specific factors and incorporates management’s long-term strategy for positioning and operating the business.
For the market approach, we utilized the guideline company method by selecting certain companies that we considered to be the most comparable to us in terms of size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment, among others. We then used these guideline companies to develop relevant market multiples and ratios. The market multiples and ratios were applied to our financial projections based on assumptions at the time of the valuation in order to estimate our total enterprise value. Since there is not an active market for our common units, a discount for lack of marketability was then applied to the resulting value.
For the income approach, we performed discounted cash flow analyses utilizing projected cash flows, which were discounted to the present value in order to arrive at an enterprise value. The key assumptions used in the income approach include management’s financial projections which are based on highly subjective assumptions as of the date of valuation, a discount rate, and a long-term growth rate.
The Monte Carlo simulation also requires additional inputs to estimate the grant date fair value of an award, including an assumption for expected volatility, expected dividend yield, risk-free rate and an expected life. Since we were historically privately held, we calculated expected volatility using comparable peer companies with publicly traded shares over a term similar to the expected term of the underlying award. At the time of grant, we had no intention to pay dividends on our common units, and therefore, the dividend yield percentage was zero. The risk-free interest rate was based on the U.S. Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected life of the profits interests.
Profits interest awards granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 included the following weighted average assumptions (annualized percentages):
In addition, Remedy Partners historically maintained an equity incentive plan whereby certain employees and directors were granted stock options. In November 2019, at the conclusion of the Remedy Partners Acquisition, outstanding Remedy Partners stock options were converted to stock options in New Remedy Corp. No additional stock option grants were made following the Remedy Partners Acquisition until the 2021 LTIP was adopted in connection with our IPO. In connection with the IPO, these former stock options in New Remedy Corp. were converted into stock options in Signify Health, Inc. The conversion of the outstanding stock options did not result in any incremental expense as the number of stock options outstanding and the exercise price were both adjusted on a proportionate basis, and therefore, the fair value of the new award did not exceed the fair value of the previous award immediately prior to the modification. The outstanding stock options remain subject to their original vesting schedules and contractual terms. Accordingly, we continue to recognize the original grant date fair value of these converted stock options. The original grant date fair value of the outstanding stock options was estimated using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which required the input of subjective assumptions, including estimated share price, volatility over the expected term of the awards, expected term, risk free interest rate and expected dividends, as described above. Expected volatility, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rate were all calculated in similar ways for the Remedy Partners stock options as described above for the valuation of the profits interests. The expected term of the stock options represents the period the stock options were expected to be outstanding. We used the simplified method for estimating the expected term of the stock options. We continue to record equity-based compensation expense related to the converted Remedy Partners stock options that remain outstanding over the remaining vesting periods, to the extent the former Remedy Partners employees who received the stock option grants remain our employees.
Customer Equity Appreciation Rights
In December 2019 and September 2020, we entered into EAR agreements with one of our customers. On December 31, 2021, we entered into amendments of the 2019 and 2020 EAR agreements, as well as the EAR Letter Agreement. See “-Liquidity and capital resources-Customer Equity Appreciation Rights agreements.”
The initial grant date fair values of the EARs are each estimated in a similar manner, subject to the same management assumptions, as described for equity-based compensation as the EARs are a form of equity-based award. However, since the EARs are granted to a customer, they are also subject to accounting guidance for revenue recognition. Accordingly, their initial grant date fair values are recorded as a reduction to the transaction price over the service period for the associated customer’s IHE services. Forfeitures, if any, as a result of annual purchase commitments not being met, will be recognized as revenue in the period the forfeiture occurs.
As the awards could be settled in cash, they are classified as noncurrent liabilities with estimated changes in fair market value recorded each accounting period based on current management assumptions related to the valuation approaches described for equity-based compensation above. These changes in fair market value are recorded in other expense (income), net on the consolidated statement of operations.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize the fair value of all assets acquired, liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, and establishes the acquisition date as the fair value measurement point. Accordingly, we recognize assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations, including contingent assets and liabilities and noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, based on fair value estimates as of the date of acquisition.
Discounted cash flow models are typically used in these valuations if quoted market prices are not available, and the models require the use of significant estimates and assumptions including, but not limited to (1) estimating future revenue, expenses and cash flows expected to be collected; and (2) developing appropriate discount rates, long-term growth rates and probability rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but we recognize that the assumptions are inherently uncertain.
We recognize and measure goodwill, if any, as of the acquisition date, as the excess of the fair value of the consideration paid over the fair value of the identified net assets acquired. The primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies with our existing operations, ability to grow in the market, and estimates of market share at the date of purchase. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting units based on expected revenues or expected cash flows. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives.
Acquisition-related contingent consideration is initially measured and recorded at its estimated fair value as an element of consideration paid in connection with an acquisition. Subsequent adjustments are recognized in SG&A expense in the consolidated statements of operations. We determine the fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration, and any subsequent changes in fair value using a discounted probability-weighted approach. This approach takes into consideration certain Level 3 unobservable inputs. These unobservable inputs include probability assessments of expected future cash flows over the period in which the obligation is expected to be settled and applies a discount factor that captures the uncertainties associated with the obligation. Acquisition-related contingent consideration as of December 31, 2020 was $15.2 million, related to the acquisition of PatientBlox in 2020, to be paid upon the completion of certain milestones. We made payment of $15.0 million related to the completion of the first milestone in May 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we determined the second milestone is unlikely of being achieved and therefore the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration liability was reduced to zero.
Recoverability of goodwill, intangible assets, and other long-lived assets subject to amortization
Goodwill is an asset which represents the future economic benefits which arise from the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of acquired net assets in a business combination, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually, or more frequently whenever there are triggering events or changes in circumstances which indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable and an impairment loss may have been incurred. As of December 31, 2021, we had goodwill of approximately $597.1 million, which represented 28.1% of our consolidated total assets. As of December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of approximately $596.7 million, which represented 39.2% of our consolidated total assets.
We assess goodwill for impairment at least annually, during the fourth quarter, and more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. Impairment testing for goodwill is performed at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available, and management regularly reviews the operating results of that
component. Our reporting units are the same as our reportable segments, Home & Community Services and Episodes of Care Services.
We perform an assessment of goodwill utilizing either a qualitative or quantitative impairment test. The qualitative impairment test assesses several factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If management concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative fair value test is performed.
In a quantitative impairment test, management assesses goodwill by comparing the carrying amount of each reporting unit to its fair value. We estimate the fair value of each of our reporting units using either an income approach, a market valuation approach, a transaction valuation approach or a blended approach.
If the fair value exceeds the carrying value of a reporting unit, goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill is considered impaired and we would recognize an impairment loss equal to the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
We perform discounted cash flow analyses which utilize projected cash flows as well as a residual value, which is discounted to the present value in order to arrive at a reporting unit fair value. The determination of whether or not goodwill has become impaired involves a significant level of judgment in the assumptions and estimates underlying the approach used to determine the value of our reporting units. Actual results could differ from management’s estimates, and such differences could be material to our consolidated financial position and results of operations. See “Item 1A. Risk factors.”
Given the significant cushion between the fair value and carrying value in the prior year, we performed a qualitative assessment in 2021 for our Home & Community Services reporting unit and concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying value amount. We performed a quantitative assessment for our Episodes of Care Services reporting unit in 2021, estimating the fair value using a combination of the income and market approaches, and concluded the estimated fair value was greater than the carrying value by approximately 12.5%. The income approach utilizes the present value of cash flows to estimate fair value. The future cash flows for our Episodes of Care Services reporting unit were projected based on our estimates, at the time of the assessment, of future revenues, operating income and other factors (such as working capital and capital expenditures). Under the market approach, we estimated a fair value based on comparable companies' market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization and factored in a control premium.
It is possible unfavorable changes in one or more of the key assumptions in the future could result in the fair value of the reporting unit being less than its carrying value, resulting in a potential goodwill impairment. Potential changes that could have an unfavorable impact on the fair value of our Episodes of Care Services reporting unit include changes in (1) growth assumptions, particularly related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, (2) growth assumptions related to new product lines that do not materialize over time, (3) the long-term construct of the BPCI-A program or any successor program or (4) the weighted average cost of capital determined from relevant market comparisons.
We review the carrying value of other long-lived assets or groups of assets, including property and equipment, internally developed software costs and other intangible assets, to be used in operations whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable.
Intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization include customer relationships and acquired and capitalized software. Acquired intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and are amortized on a basis consistent with the timing and pattern of expected cash flows used to value the intangible asset, generally on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life. Capitalized software is recorded for certain costs incurred for the development of internal-use software. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected economic life of the software.
We assess the recoverability of an asset or group of assets by determining whether the carrying value of the asset or group of assets exceeds the sum of the projected undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets over the remaining economic life of the asset or the primary asset in the group of assets. If such testing indicates the carrying value of the asset or group of assets is not recoverable, we estimate the fair value of the asset or group of assets using various valuation methodologies, including discounted cash flow models and quoted market values, as necessary. If the fair value of those assets or groups of assets is less than carrying value, we record an impairment loss equal to the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value.
We recorded an asset impairment of $11.2 million related to a technology intangible asset acquired through the PatientBlox acquisition for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of the delay in the launch of a new episodes product utilizing the underlying technology. We recorded an asset impairment of $0.8 million related to certain capitalized software during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the discontinued use of certain software.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Below is a description of certain recent accounting pronouncements that may have an impact on our financial statements. See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
In June 2018, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (“ASU 2018-07”) which expanded the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. ASU 2018-07 was effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We elected to early adopt this new guidance for interim periods in 2020 with no significant impact to our financial statements
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-08, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Codification Improvements-Share-Based Consideration Payable to a Customer (“ASU 2019-08”) which requires that an entity measure and classify share-based payment awards granted to a customer by applying the guidance in Topic 718. The amount recorded as a reduction of the transaction price is required to be measured on the basis of the grant-date fair value of the share-based payment award in accordance with Topic 718. The grant date is the date at which a grantor (supplier) and a grantee (customer) reach a mutual understanding of the key terms and conditions of a share-based payment award. ASU 2019-08 was effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We elected to early adopt this new guidance for interim periods in 2020 as it relates to the customer EARs. The initial grant date fair value of the EAR agreements is being recorded as a reduction of the transaction price.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) which requires lessees to recognize leases on the balance sheet by recording a right-of-use asset and lease liability. This guidance is effective for
nonpublic entities for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. We will adopt this new guidance as of January 1, 2022 and will apply the transition option, whereby prior comparative periods will not be retrospectively presented in the consolidated financial statements. We will elect the package of practical expedients not to reassess prior conclusions related to contracts containing leases, lease classification and initial direct costs and the lessee practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components for all asset classes. We will make a policy election to not recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for short-term leases for all asset classes. We continue to evaluate other practical expedients available under the guidance. We expect that the adoption of ASC 842 will materially impact our consolidated balance sheet and will not have a material impact on our results of operations. Based on our current agreements, we estimate that upon the adoption of ASC 842 on January 1, 2022, we will record a right-of-use asset of approximately $20 - $30 million and corresponding operating lease liability of approximately $30 - $40 million, based on the present value of the remaining minimum rental payments associated with our outstanding leases. The difference between the right-of-use asset and the corresponding lease liability is due to the balance of deferred rent and lease incentives at transition. As our current leases do not provide an implicit rate, nor is one readily available, we will use the incremental borrowing rate based on information available at January 1, 2022 to determine the present value of the future minimum rental payments.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”) which introduced the current expected credit losses methodology for estimating allowances for credit losses. ASU 2016-13 applies to all financial instruments carried at amortized cost and off-balance-sheet credit exposures not accounted for as insurance, including loan commitments, standby letters of credit, and financial guarantees. The new accounting standard does not apply to trading assets, loans held for sale, financial assets for which the fair value option has been elected, or loans and receivables between entities under common control. ASU 2016-13 is effective for nonpublic entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of this new guidance on our financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805) Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers (“ASU 2021-08”) which requires that an entity (acquirer) recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance with Topic 606. ASU 2021-08 is effective for public entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years, and should be applied prospectively to business combinations occurring on or after the effective date of the amendments. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of this new guidance on our financial statements.
In November 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832) Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance (“ASU 2021-10”) which requires annual disclosures that increase the transparency of transactions with a government accounted for by applying a grant or contribution accounting model, including (1) the types of transactions, (2) the accounting for those transactions, and (3) the effect of those transactions on an entity’s financial statements. ASU 2021-10 is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 31, 2021. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact of this new guidance on our financial statements.
Emerging growth company status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act of 2012. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of our fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-
affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by FASB or the SEC either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We intend to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies.
We also intend to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our proxy statement and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.