ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company recently incorporated as a Delaware corporation whose business purpose is to effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our initial business combination. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us.
On February 15, 2022, we consummated our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 10,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one share of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and one-half of one redeemable public warrant of the Company, with each whole pubic warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment as provided in our registration statement on Form S-1, initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 6, 2022, as later amended (File No. 333-262042). The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $100,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO and in a second closing on February 28, 2022, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 6,000,000 private placement warrants to the Sponsor and certain initial stockholders, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $6,000,000.
The net proceeds from the IPO, together with certain of the proceeds from the private sale of the private placement warrants, $102,000,000 in the aggregate, were placed in a U.S.-based trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
None of the funds held in trust will be released from the trust account, other than interest income to pay any tax obligations until the earlier of (i) our consummation of our initial business combination, and then only in connection with those shares of common stock that such stockholder properly elected to redeem, subject to the limitations described herein, (ii) the redemption of our public shares if we are unable to consummate our initial business combination within 18 months of the closing of the IPO, or (iii) if we seek to amend our certificate of incorporation to affect the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem all public shares if we cannot complete an initial business combination within 15 months, or up to 21 months if an extension is properly effected, after the closing of the IPO, and such amendment is duly approved.
While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry or geographic region, we intend to focus on direct-to-consumer media, technology, emerging digital enterprise sectors focused businesses that have an aggregate enterprise value of approximately $550 million to $1.2 billion and would benefit from access to public markets and the operational and strategic expertise of our management team and board of directors. We will seek to capitalize on the significant experience of our management team in consummating an initial business combination with the ultimate goal of pursuing attractive returns for our stockholders.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $1,170 in cash and a working capital deficiency of $296,918. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering. Following this the initial public offering, we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after the initial public offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our financial statements. After the initial public offering, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates. We expect our expenses to increase substantially after the closing of the initial public offering.
For the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $1,202, which consists of formation and operational costs of $801 as well as other expenses of $401.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $1,170 in cash and a working capital deficiency of $296,918.
For the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $380, which was attributable to cash used to fund the net loss of $1,202, partially offset by $822 of cash provided by changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities. For the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $1,550, which was primarily attributable to proceeds of $60,000 from the issuance of founder shares to our sponsor and the issuance of notes payable to an executive officer, partially offset by the payment of offering costs of $58,450.
On February 15, 2022, we consummated our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 10,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one share of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and one-half of one redeemable public warrant of the Company, with each whole pubic warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment as provided in our registration statement on Form S-1, initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 6, 2022, as later amended (File No. 333-262042). The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $100,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO and in a second closing on February 28, 2022, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 6,000,000 private placement warrants to the Sponsor and certain initial stockholders, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $6,000,000.
The net proceeds from the IPO, together with certain of the proceeds from the private sale of the private placement warrants, $102,000,000 in the aggregate, were placed in a U.S.-based trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of the offering, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the offering held outside of the trust account or from interest earned on the funds held in our trust account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the trust account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to consummate an initial business combination will be successful.
As a result of our IPO and private placement offering, we believe that our current cash on hand held outside of the trust account is sufficient to meet our operating and capital requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date these financial statements are issued. Our operating needs include funds to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into private placement-equivalent warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such working capital loans by our sponsor or its affiliates, or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $500,000 for legal, accounting, $400,000 for director and office liability insurance premiums, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations; $150,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $75,000 for Nasdaq continued listing fees; $240,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support; and approximately $35,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves (including taxes net of anticipated interest income).
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed initial business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following this offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of this offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures must be in conformity with U.S. GAAP. These accounting principles require us to make estimates and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the periods presented. We believe that the estimates and judgments upon which it relies are reasonably based upon information available to us at the time that it makes these estimates and judgments. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial results will be affected. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates and judgments and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below.
The following is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies or estimates. Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our financial statements included at the end of this Annual Report.
Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares (including shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified within temporary equity. Changes in redemption value are reflected in additional paid in capital or, in the absence of additional capital, in accumulated deficit. At all other times, shares are classified within shareholders’ equity.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company recognizes changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method views the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Offering Costs
The Company’s accounting for offering costs complies with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A-“Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting and other cash expenses incurred through the closing of the Initial Public Offering that are directly related to the Initial Public Offering. In addition, the fair value of shares of Class B common stock that were issued to investors in the private placement were determined to be offering costs, which is described in Note 4. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments on a relative fair value basis compared to total proceeds received.
Warrants and Overallotment Liability
The Company evaluates the Public Warrants, Private Warrants and overallotment option as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the instrument and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the instrument is freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meets the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the instrument meets all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instrument is indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. Pursuant to such evaluation, both Public and Private Warrants are classified in stockholders’ equity and the overallotment option is classified as a current liability and, accordingly, was measured at fair value upon issuance and will be remeasured at each balance sheet date thereafter, with changes in the estimated fair value recognized through earnings.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2022. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement.