Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the information presented in our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectation, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Please also see the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Forward-Looking Statements.” A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been reported previously in our final prospectus dated July 14, 2021 (File No. 333-257320) filed with the SEC on July 15, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) of the Securities Act (the “Prospectus”), under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
Sight Sciences’ mission is to transform ophthalmology and optometry through the development and commercialization of proprietary devices that target the underlying causes of the world’s most prevalent eye diseases. We are passionate about improving patients’ lives. Our objective is to develop and market products for use in new treatment paradigms and to create an interventional mindset in eyecare whereby our products may be used in procedures which supplant conventional outdated approaches. Our business philosophy is grounded in the following principles:
•comprehensively understand disease physiology,
•develop products that are intended to restore natural physiological functionality to diseased eyes;
•develop and market products that achieve superior effectiveness versus current treatment paradigms while minimizing complications or side effects,
•provide intuitive, patient friendly solutions to ophthalmologists and optometrists; and
•deliver compelling economic value to all stakeholders, including patients, providers and third-party payors such as Medicare and commercial insurers
Our initial product development has focused on the treatment of two of the world’s most prevalent and underserved eye diseases, glaucoma and dry eye disease. We have commercialized products in each of our two reportable segments. Our Surgical Glaucoma segment consists of sales of the OMNI Surgical System, or OMNI, and also included sales of VISCO360 and TRAB360, OMNI’s predicate devices, until they were discontinued in the first quarter of 2019. Our Dry Eye segment includes sales of the TearCare System, or TearCare, and related components and accessories. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 95% and 5% of our revenues were derived from our Surgical Glaucoma and Dry Eye segments, respectively. Both systems are primarily sold through a highly-involved direct sales model that offers intensive education, training and customer service. We believe this philosophy and model not only enables us to differentiate our products and our overall company from competitors, but also to expand our addressable market by educating ECPs, patients and other stakeholders on our products and evolving treatment paradigms. Outside of the U.S., we have historically sold OMNI primarily through a network of distributors, although we began employing a small direct sales force outside of the United States in April 2021.
We commercially launched OMNI and TearCare in February 2018 and April 2019, respectively. In May 2020, we introduced our next generation OMNI Surgical System that incorporated extensive feedback from our physician users and that we believe improved upon the first-generation device. We sell OMNI to facilities where ophthalmic surgeons perform outpatient procedures, mainly ASCs and HOPDs, which are typically reimbursed by Medicare or private payors for procedures using our products. We sell TearCare to optometrist and ophthalmologist practices. Currently, there is no meaningful reimbursement coverage by Medicare or private payors for MGD procedures, including TearCare, and patients typically pay out-of-pocket for TearCare. We are continuing our controlled commercial launch and are focused upon our comprehensive, clinical data-driven long-term market development plan that aims to improve awareness and patient access to TearCare. As of December 31, 2021, we employed over 100 people to execute our commercial strategy in direct sales, marketing, training and professional services. The overall success of our approach to eyecare to date is evidenced by the over 85,000 estimated uses of OMNI and its direct predicates in over 1,200 hospitals and ASCs in the U.S. and Europe, and over 15,000 estimated uses of TearCare in over 550 eyecare facilities in the U.S. through December 31, 2021.
We currently operate no manufacturing facilities and instead contract with third parties for our production requirements. We believe our suppliers will be able to meet our current and anticipated manufacturing needs across all our products. We plan to continue to utilize third party contract manufacturers for our products and any related components.
Our gross margin in our Surgical Glaucoma segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 86.1% and 72.8%, respectively. Beginning with the production of finished goods inventory in Q1 2021, we shifted our primary production of OMNI from a U.S.-based third-party contract manufacturer, to a lower cost, higher volume contract manufacturer in Asia. We are in the process of supplementing this OMNI production capacity with a U.S.-based contract manufacturer. These cost optimization initiatives contributed to the increase in gross margins in our Surgical Glaucoma segment in 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The TearCare System includes the SmartHub component, which is typically only sold in initial purchase orders, and single-use SmartLids which are sold as part of initial purchase orders and through repeat orders as the ECP performs procedures over time. In an effort to build a meaningful TearCare installed base and encourage product trial and adoption by ECPs, our pricing strategy for SmartHubs has not focused on gross profit maximization. As the installed base of TearCare customers grows, we believe SmartLids, which currently generate higher gross margins than SmartHubs, will increase as a proportion of total Dry Eye segment revenues and gross profit. Given the earlier stage of TearCare’s commercial development and our pricing strategy with respect to SmartHubs, we expect our Dry Eye segment’s gross margins to be lower than our Surgical Glaucoma segment’s gross margins for the near and medium-term. Our gross margin for our Dry Eye segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 13.1% and (30.5%), respectively.
We believe in the importance of continued strategic investment in initiatives that: further demonstrate our products’ clinical effectiveness and safety to potential customers, patients, payors and regulators; enhance our commercial capabilities, including resources dedicated to sales, marketing and education; ensure the broadest possible patient access to the treatment alternatives that our products are cleared to offer; enhance and improve upon our existing product technologies; and allow us to innovate new products, devices or drugs, in glaucoma and DED or in new eye disease areas. As a result, we intend to continue to invest in clinical studies, sales and marketing, education initiatives, market access, and product development. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur net losses for at least the next several fiscal years. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of the Nasdaq Stock Market, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. As a result of these and other factors, we may require and seek additional debt and equity financing to fund our operations and planned growth.
To date, our primary sources of capital has been private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock, debt financing agreements, the sale of common stock in our IPO, and revenue from the sale of our products. In July 2021, we completed our IPO, including the underwriters full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, selling 11,500,000 shares of our common stock at $24.00 per share. Upon completion of our IPO, we received net proceeds of $252.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs. As of December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding term loan balance of $35.0 million (excluding debt discount and amortized debt issuance costs). As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $260.7 million and an accumulated deficit of $153.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenue of $49.0 million, with a gross margin of 82.4%. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $63.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated revenue of $27.6 million, with a gross margin of 66.7%. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $34.7 million. For all periods presented, substantially all of our revenue was generated from customers in the U.S.
Impact of COVID-19
The global COVID-19 pandemic impacted and is expected to continue to impact demand for our products, which are used in procedures and therapies that are considered elective. Although some of these governmental restrictions have since been lifted or scaled back, recent and future surges of COVID-19 may result in restrictions being re-implemented in response to efforts to reduce the spread of COVID-19. As elective eyecare procedures in many facilities that utilize our products were temporarily suspended by governmental authorities, many patients avoided visiting ECPs, and, even in areas that allowed elective procedures, ECPs and healthcare facilities in general substantially reduced or in some cases halted, the scheduling and performance of such procedures. The decrease in demand for our products due to COVID-19 most significantly impacted our revenues in the latter part of the first quarter and the first half of the second quarter of 2020. Beginning in June 2020, we began to see an increase in the number of procedures using our products. In the first quarter of
2021, our customers experienced a significant number of procedure cancellations which we believe were largely driven by patients postponing in-office treatments until their COVID-19 vaccinations were completed (as opposed to any restrictions imposed on elective procedures), thus adversely impacting our revenues. As vaccine availability and the vaccinated population increases across the U.S., the recovery of our end markets resumed in the second quarter of 2021. Our normal business operations were again disrupted by resurgence of the Delta variant in the third quarter of 2021 and emergence of the Omicron variant in the fourth quarter of 2021 and into early 2022.
We are continuing to closely monitor the global COVID-19 pandemic. In order to operate in a safe manner, we are following the health and safety guidelines of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and local and state public health departments where we operate. The majority of our employees at our headquarters have been asked to work from home, with only limited access given to employees to work in the office when necessary. For roles that require employees to be on-site, such as our R&D and manufacturing technical staff, we are providing protective equipment, practicing social distancing, and enforcing mask wearing and we have increased sanitization standards. In addition, we have created a business continuity plan and incident management team to respond quickly and effectively to COVID-19 related issues in order to offer customers uninterrupted products, services and support while safeguarding the best interests of employees, suppliers and stakeholders. The ultimate impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the status of health and safety actions taken to contain its spread and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or we, may direct, any resurgence of COVID-19 that may occur and how quickly and to what extent economic and operating conditions normalize within the markets in which we operate. The global COVID-19 pandemic could disrupt the operations of our third-party manufacturers and other suppliers. Although we have not experienced material disruptions in our supply chain to date, we cannot predict how long the pandemic and measures intended to contain the spread of COVID-19 will continue and what effect COVID-19 and the associated containment measures will have on our suppliers and vendors, in particular for any of our suppliers and vendors that may not qualify as essential businesses and suffer more significant disruptions to their business operations. We are working closely with our manufacturing partners and suppliers to help ensure we are able to source key components and maintain appropriate inventory levels to meet customer demand.
Factors Affecting our Business and Results of Operations
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted and that will continue to impact our business and results of operations. These factors include, but are limited to:
Product Development
We believe our product development approach is a key differentiator of our team and our company. We are focused on continuous innovation and design and utilize input from our network of expert employees (including several ophthalmologists on staff), advisors and customers to rapidly iterate our pre-and post-commercial product designs with the aim of better satisfying the needs of our customers and their patients, and increasing adoption and utilization of our solutions. Once our products are launched, our customer feedback loop helps us further develop our products. This is particularly evident in the evolution of our OMNI Surgical System, which originated from the combined functionality of two internally developed, commercial predicate devices, each of which had their own multiple commercial iterations. We further refined ergonomics and functionality in our next generation OMNI Surgical System, which we launched in May 2020. Our future growth is dependent on our ability to continue innovating and applying our expertise of disease physiology to improve existing products and develop new products.
Market Education and Training on the Benefit of our Products vis-à-vis Existing Treatment Alternatives
One of the key drivers of our success is educating ophthalmologists, optometrists, patients, and third-party payors about the clinical and safety benefits of our products and of the benefits of more proactive, interventional approach to treating glaucoma and DED. We believe the required market education and development is best accomplished through a differentiated, highly involved commercial approach. As such, we devote significant resources to onboarding our sales professionals and to continuously augmenting their knowledge and capabilities. Our sales professionals provide ECPs with the necessary education, training and support to adopt and continue to use our products. We believe that increasing acceptance and usage of our products will require continued investment in our sales force and education efforts to ensure ECPs, patients and third-party payors learn more about our products and appreciate our benefits to their target patient populations.
Maximizing Product Usage by Customers
Demand for our products will be highly dependent on our ability to develop their potential addressable markets and maximize the breadth of patients our products can serve. OMNI is indicated for canaloplasty followed by trabeculotomy to reduce IOP in adult patients with POAG in the U.S. and with OAG, in the EU. We believe that OMNI is the only device that is authorized by the FDA as an ab interno procedure to: reduce IOP in adult patients with POAG across the spectrum of disease severity; be used in Mild-to-Moderate Combination Cataract or Standalone procedures; access 360 degrees of the diseased conventional outflow pathway through a single clear corneal incision; and facilitate two consecutive procedures, canaloplasty and trabeculotomy, to comprehensively treat all three primary points of resistance in the conventional outflow pathway in a single operating room visit. Our ability to establish OMNI as the standard of care for all POAG patients by continuing to grow its adoption and utilization in Combination Cataract procedures and by pioneering the development of the market for interventional standalone procedures will have a substantial impact on our future growth.
TearCare is a unique open-eye heating and expression device designed to melt and remove meibomian gland obstructions. We believe TearCare has a compelling physiological profile to address obstruction from meibomian gland disease, or MGD, which is the primary cause of evaporative DED, a disease characterized by low quality tears that evaporate prematurely. The current DED treatment market primarily consists of an abundance of OTC and prescription eyedrops that seek to lubricate the ocular surface, alleviate inflammation and/or increase tear production. However, OTC and prescription eyedrops are incapable of clearing obstructions in the meibomian glands and do not address MGD’s eyelid-borne physiology and poor tear quality. MGD is associated with 86% of DED cases and is a leading root cause of evaporative DED, which is characterized by low quality tears that evaporate prematurely. Clinical studies have demonstrated that treating MGD by liquefying and removing clogged meibum is the most effective method to eliminate obstructions and restore the lipid layer of tear film, thereby preventing premature evaporation of tears. TearCare was designed to be administered during the course of a routine office visit to an ECP, which makes it convenient for patients, and allows providers to maintain procedural throughput in their practices. Our ability to improve patient access and market education on TearCare and the benefits of proactive MGD treatment will be key drivers of TearCare’s future growth.
Operational excellence and cost efficiency
We aim to achieve operating and financial milestones with optimal capital efficiency, and focus on our market value relative to invested capital as a key measurement of our performance. To date, we have raised $402.4 million in net proceeds from equity and debt financings, including $252.2 million from our IPO. With a portion of these net proceeds (our December 31, 2021 cash and equivalents was $260.7 million), we believe we have developed and commercially launched two clinically differentiated products, funded multiple completed and ongoing clinical trials, and built our management team and company infrastructure to support the continued growth of our business. We believe that this level of operational and commercial progress relative to our total capital investment to date compares favorably to medical technology peers. We seek to design products that can achieve attractive long-term gross margins. For example, we generated significantly higher gross margins in our Surgical Glaucoma segment in 2021 than prior years, which was a key financial objective we targeted for the year.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
We currently derive the majority of our U.S. revenue from the sale of OMNI to ASCs and HOPDs and TearCare to ophthalmology and optometry practices. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the revenues from our Surgical Glaucoma segment, including OMNI and its predicate devices, accounted for over 90% of our total revenues. Substantially all of our revenues for 2021 and 2020 were generated from sales within the U.S. Our OMNI customers place orders based on their expected procedure volume and reorder as needed, typically on a biweekly, monthly or bimonthly basis. Our TearCare customers typically purchase a TearCare System which consists of one or more SmartHubs, multiple single-use SmartLids and other accessories. After utilizing their initial inventory, customers will reorder SmartLids as needed. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The growth in our revenue is driven by the demand for elective surgery and treatment utilizing our products. Such demand is often lower during summer months because of ECP vacations and in winter months in certain parts of the world because of fewer business or surgery days due to holidays and adverse weather conditions.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Our products are produced by third-party manufacturers. Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of amounts paid for our products to third-party manufacturers, and our manufacturing overhead costs, which consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, and reserves for excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventory. Cost of goods sold also includes depreciation expenses for production equipment which we provide to our third-party manufacturers and certain direct costs, such as shipping and handling costs.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including differences in segment gross margins, changes in average selling prices, product sales mix, production and ordering volumes, manufacturing costs, product yields, and headcount. In the near term, we expect our gross margins to increase as we transition production of OMNI to lower-cost manufacturers and as we expect Surgical Glaucoma revenues will grow as a percentage of our overall revenue mix. In general, we expect our gross margins to increase over the long-term to the extent our production and ordering volumes increase and to the extent we spread the fixed portion of our overhead costs over a larger number of units produced. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing know-how and capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our suppliers’ manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs and increase our gross margins. Our gross margins could fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we transition to new suppliers, introduce new products and adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical studies to develop and support our products, including clinical trial design, clinical trial site initiation and study costs, internal and external costs associated with our regulatory compliance and quality assurance functions, medical affairs, cost of products used for clinical trials and other costs associated with products and technologies - either new or enhancements of existing platforms - that are in development. These expenses also include personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, supplies, consulting, prototyping, testing, materials, travel expenses, depreciation expenses for equipment and an allocation of IT and facility overhead expenses. Our R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue may vary over time depending on the level and timing of new product development efforts, as well as clinical development, clinical trial and other related activities. We expect our R&D expenses to increase for the next several years as we continue to invest in our active clinical trial program, develop new products and improve our existing products.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation related to selling, marketing and corporate functions, allocation of IT and facility overhead expenses, bad debt expense, finance, legal and human resource costs. Other SG&A expenses include training, travel expenses, promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees (including external legal, audit, consulting and tax fees), insurance costs, and general corporate expenses. We expect SG&A expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth in revenue and due to additional legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses associated with being a public company.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs associated with our outstanding loan.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our balances of cash and cash equivalents.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability during each reporting period. The redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants were exercised during 2021 and the final fair value of the warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity. We will no longer record any related periodic fair value adjustments.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue. Revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $49.0 million, an increase of $21.3 million, or 77.1%, from our revenue in 2020. Surgical Glaucoma and Dry Eye sales contributed $46.5 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The overall increase in revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in the number of OMNI units sold as a result of growth in the number of facilities ordering OMNI and an increase in unit utilization per ordering facility, which resulted in a $20.5 million increase in Surgical Glaucoma revenues.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit. The $0.6 million decrease in cost of goods sold from 2020 to 2021 was attributable to a $1.0 million decrease in the reserve for obsolete inventory from a 2020 write-down of legacy OMNI inventory, as well as manufacturing efficiencies. As we transitioned primary OMNI manufacturing to Asia in early 2021, we were able to lower our production cost per unit. This lower production cost per unit also assisted in allowing the Company to lower cost of goods sold while driving sales growth.
Our total gross profit increased $21.9 million from $18.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $40.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. Our total gross margin increased from 66.7% to 82.4% between 2020 and 2021 primarily due to higher sales volume as well as lower production cost associated with shifting production to lower cost contract manufacturers. Gross margin in our Surgical Glaucoma segment increased from 72.8% in 2020 to 86.1% in 2021, and in our Dry Eye segment gross margin increased from (30.5)% in 2020 to 13.1% in 2021. Our Dry Eye segment had a lower gross margin than our Surgical Glaucoma segment because TearCare is earlier in its commercial cycle than
OMNI and SmartHub equipment is priced to encourage new user adoption rather than to maximize gross profit for its one-time, upfront purchase by ECPs.
Research and Development Expenses. The $6.8 million increase in research and development expenses from 2020 to 2021 was primarily attributable to costs related to the development of our next generation OMNI Surgical System, an increase of $1.3 million in contract manufacturing for Dry Eye product development, $0.6 million in clinical studies, $0.5 million in patent related legal expenses, and an increase of $2.0 million in personnel expenses primarily as a result of increased headcount. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we initiate and execute additional clinical trials over the coming years, develop new products and improve our existing products.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. The $34.4 million increase in SG&A expenses from 2020 to 2021 was primarily due to our continued commercial investment and scaling of operations and corporate headcount to support our growth, which resulted in an increase of $20.0 million in personnel expenses, including higher stock-based compensation ($4.6 million increase from 2020 to 2021) and commissions during the current year. In addition, legal, accounting, and consulting costs increased $5.2 million from 2020 to 2021 due, in part, to incurred fees associated with the IPO in July 2021.
Interest Expense. The $2.0 million increase in interest expense from 2020 to 2021 was attributable to the executed debt financing in November 2020.
Other Expense, Net. The $6.9 million increase in other expense from 2020 to 2021 was primarily due to fair value adjustments on the preferred stock warrants during the current year.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $52.5 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $63.0 million. The primary add-backs to net cashed used in operating activities was the $6.9 million change in fair value of redeemable convertible warrants, issued in November 2020 as part of the debt refinancing, and $5.1 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increased stock-based compensation expense coincided with the Company increasing stock awards in advance of and associated with the public offering in July 2021. The $7.6 million increase in our operating assets consisted of a $3.7 million increase in accounts receivable, a $1.3 million increase in our inventory, and a $3.0 million increase in our prepaid expenses, each to support the continued growth of our operations. In addition, the Company's operating liabilities increased by $3.4 million. This was primarily driven by a $1.2 million increase in accounts payable due to increase inventory purchasing activity and a $1.9 million increase in accrued compensation, from an increased employee headcount.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.2 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $34.7 million, which included a $2.2 million benefit from the proceeds from our Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, loan under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, and an increase in net operating assets of $0.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.0 million. The $0.7 million increase in our operating assets was primarily due to a $1.5 million increase in accounts receivable, a $1.7 million increase in our inventory, and a $0.7 million increase in our prepaid expenses, each to support the continued growth of our operations, partially offset by a $1.9 million increase in accrued compensation and $2.0 million in accrued and other liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of a $1.4 million provision for excess and obsolete inventories, primarily related to the write-down of legacy first generation OMNI inventory due to the launch of our next generation of OMNI Surgical System in 2020, $0.5 million related to stock- based compensation, $0.6 million of right of use asset amortization related to
office lease, $0.6 million of accretion of debt discount and amortization of debt issuance costs and $0.6 million in depreciation and amortization.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities.
Net cash used in investing activities in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.8 and $1.0 million, consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $252.5 million primarily relates to proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of related offering costs, of $252.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $73.4 million primarily relates to proceeds from issuance of debt of $20.3 million and proceeds of $53.4 million from the issuance of our Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock and Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock, partially offset by the related offering costs of $0.3 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, our primary sources of capital have been private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock, debt financing agreements, the sale of common stock in our IPO, and revenue from the sale of our products. Since our inception, we have raised an aggregate of approximately $402.4 million in net proceeds from sales of our redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock and borrowed $32.9 million of net proceeds under our term loans.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $260.7 million, an accumulated deficit of $153.0 million and $35.0 million outstanding under our term loan agreement (before debt discount). Based on our current planned operations, we expect our cash and cash equivalents and additional borrowings available under the 2020 Term Loan and the 2020 Revolver will enable us to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
MidCap Loan Agreements
In January 2019, we entered into loan and security agreements, or the 2019 MidCap Credit Facility, with MidCap Financial Services, or the Lender, which provided for a term loan facility, or the 2019 Term Loan, and a revolving line of credit, or the 2019 Revolver. In November 2020, we entered into an amended and restated loan and security agreement, or the 2020 MidCap Credit Facility, with the Lender, which replaced the 2019 MidCap Credit Facility, and provided for a term loan facility, or the 2020 Term Loan, and a revolving line of credit, or the 2020 Revolver. Together with the 2019 Term Loan and 2019 Revolver, the 2020 Term Loan and 2020 Revolver are referred to as the MidCap Loan Agreements. The 2020 MidCap Credit Facility includes a maximum of $40.0 million credit facility consisting of a senior secured term loan of up to $35.0 million and a $5.0 million revolver.
Our obligations under the 2020 MidCap Credit Facility are guaranteed by us and our future subsidiaries, subject to exceptions for certain foreign subsidiaries. Our obligations under the agreements are secured by substantially all of our assets, including our material intellectual property. Additionally, we are subject to customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that limit or restrict the ability of us to, among other things, incur indebtedness, grant liens, merge or consolidate, make investments, dispose of assets, make acquisitions, pay dividends or make distributions, repurchase stock and enter into certain transactions with affiliates, in each case subject to certain exceptions. The 2020 MidCap Credit Facility agreements also have financial covenants that relate to minimum trailing revenue targets, which began in November 2020, and are tested on a monthly basis. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants.
The MidCap Loan Agreements each contain events of default that include, among others, non-payment of principal, interest or fees, breach of covenants, inaccuracy of representations and warranties, cross-defaults and bankruptcy and insolvency events.
2020 Term Loan
The 2020 Term Loan agreement amended the maturity date to November 1, 2025 and adjusted the stated floating interest rate to reserve-adjusted LIBOR, plus 7.00%. Outstanding principal amounts of Tranche One Loans and Tranche Two Loans borrowed under the 2019 Term Loan were designated as Tranche One Loans and Tranche Two Loans under the 2020 Term Loan. The Tranche Three Loan commitment amount was increased to $21.0 million and the full amount was drawn in November 2020. Principal payments under the 2020 Term Loan are scheduled to begin in December 2022. However, if certain conditions are met, the initiation of principal payments can be delayed to either December 2023 or December 2024. In addition, the final payment fee was amended to 6.0%. We are subject to certain financial and non-financial covenants.
We incurred $0.7 million of issuance costs in conjunction with the 2020 Term Loan which were netted against the borrowed funds in the balance sheet and are being accreted using the effective interest method as interest expense over the contractual period of five years.
In conjunction with the funding of the 2020 Term Loan, we issued a 10-year warrant to the Lender to purchase 300,000 shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock at an exercise price of $21.8779 per share, or the 2020 MidCap Warrant, with the estimated fair value of $1.8 million. The 2020 MidCap Warrants were recorded at the fair value as a debt discount and as a warrant liability. The debt discount is being accreted using the effective interest method as interest expense over the contractual period of four years for the 2020 Term Loan.
2020 Revolver
The maturity date of the 2020 Revolver was amended to November 1, 2025 and the stated floating interest rate was adjusted to reserve-adjusted LIBOR plus 4.50%. As of December 31, 2021, $5.0 million was available to be drawn under the 2020 Revolver which remains undrawn upon. Other key terms of the 2020 Revolver remained substantially unchanged compared to those of 2019 Revolver.
2019 Term Loan
In November 2020, the 2019 Term Loan was amended and restated pursuant to the 2020 Term Loan. The 2019 Term Loan had a four-year term and a stated floating interest rate which equated to reserve- adjusted LIBOR, plus 6.75%. Under certain circumstances, the floating interest rate could have been based on the prime rate instead of LIBOR. The 2019 Term Loan was split into three tranches as follows: (i) the Tranche One Loans provided for $12.0 million in term loans, (ii) the Tranche Two Loans provided for up to $2.0 million in term loans, and (iii) the Tranche Three Loans provided for up to $6.0 million in term loans. We borrowed $14.0 million under the Tranche One Loans and Tranche Two Loans. Although the conditions necessary to draw the Tranche Three Loans had been met as of December 31, 2019, we did not draw the Tranche Three Term Loans.
We incurred $1.5 million of issuance costs in conjunction with the 2019 Term Loan which were netted against the borrowed funds in the balance sheet and were being accreted using the effective interest method as interest expense over the contractual period of four years.
In conjunction with the funding of Tranche One Loans and Tranche Two Loans under the 2019 Term Loan, we issued a 10-year warrant to the Lender to purchase 29,514 shares of our Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock, or the 2019 MidCap Warrants, at an exercise price of $9.4868 per share. The estimated fair value of the 2019 MidCap Warrants was $0.2 million. The 2019 MidCap Warrants were recorded at the fair value as a debt discount and as a warrant liability.
The 2019 Term Loan granted us the right to voluntarily prepay the borrowings in full, with a prepayment premium beginning at 3.0% in the first year from tranche funding and declining to 2.0% in the second year from tranche funding, to 1.0% in the third year from tranche funding thereafter. In addition, a final payment fee of 5% of the original Tranche One Loans and Tranche Two Loans amounts borrowed was payable at the end of the term or when the borrowings are repaid in full. The borrowings were collateralized by a security interest in substantially all of our assets.
2019 Revolver
In November 2020, the 2019 Revolver was amended and restated pursuant to the 2020 Revolver. The 2019 Revolver had a four-year term and had a stated floating interest rate which equated to reserve- adjusted LIBOR, plus 4.25%. Under certain circumstances, the floating interest rate could have been based on the prime rate instead of LIBOR. An unused line fee of 0.5% was payad aable monthly based on the average unused balance and a collateral management fee of 0.5% was payable monthly based on the outstanding balance of the 2019 Revolver. We could have requested to increase the 2019 Revolver commitment amount to $10.0 million under the terms of the agreement.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In May 2020, we received a loan of $2.2 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, under the CARES Act. The Small Business Administration required that PPP loans only be used for eligible payroll costs, business mortgage interest payments, rent or utilities. Per SBA guidelines, we would be eligible to apply for loan forgiveness if we used the loan proceeds for acceptable expenses during the 8-week period after disbursement. The PPP loan was forgiven in June 2021. The Company has elected to recognize this government grant income as a reduction of the related expenses.
In connection with the PPP loan, we executed a promissory note in favor of Bank of America. Because the SBA confirmed full and complete forgiveness of the unpaid balance of the PPP loan and reimbursed Bank of America for the total outstanding balance, principal and interest, our obligations under the PPP loan are deemed fully satisfied and paid in full.
Lease Agreements
Our corporate headquarters are located in Menlo Park, California, where we lease approximately 10,823 square feet of office, research and development, engineering and laboratory space which was originally pursuant to a sublease agreement which was effective as of September 17, 2019 and expired on July 31, 2021. Effective August 1, 2021, we remain in the same space under a new lease agreement with the direct landlord to that space which will extend through August 31, 2024. We also lease approximately 2,040 square feet of office space, which is primarily used by our commercial leadership team, in Southlake, Texas, pursuant to a lease that commenced on April 30, 2019 and expires on May 15, 2024.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 relates entirely to the sale of our products within the Surgical Glaucoma and Dry Eye segments. These sales are primarily to hospitals, medical centers, and ECPs throughout the United States through sales representatives and distributors.
Our revenue arrangements consist of a single performance obligation. We recognize revenue at the point in time when control of the promised goods transfers to our customers. Revenue is measured at the amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for the transfer of goods. The amount of revenue that is recognized is based on the transaction price, which represented the invoiced amounts and includes estimates of variable consideration, such as discounted, where applicable. We do not offer right of return, except in the case where item is defective as manufactured, and the company does not typically provide customers with a right to a refund. The amount of variable consideration included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the
amount of the cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur in a future period. Payment terms, typically 30 days, are offered to our customers and do not include a significant financing component. We extend credit to our customers based upon their financial condition and credit history and generally require no collateral. We do not have any contract balances related to product sales.
Shipping and handling costs incurred for the delivery of goods to customers are included in cost of goods sold. In cases where we bill shipping and handling cost to customers, we classify those amounts in net revenue. As a practical expedient, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts, such as sales commissions, as an expense when incurred since the amortization period of the asset we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. Sales commissions are recorded within selling, general, and administrative expenses in the statements of operations
Inventory
Inventory represents finished goods purchased from a third-party manufacturer and is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using actual costs on a first-in, first-out basis for all inventory. Net realizable value is determined as the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. We regularly review inventory quantities in consideration of actual loss experiences, projected future demand, and remaining shelf life to record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory when appropriate. The shelf life of our Surgical Glaucoma inventory averages approximately 24 months while the shelf life of our Dry Eye inventory varies depending on the component of TearCare, as SmartHubs have no expiration date while SmartLids have a shelf life of 24 months. Our policy is to write down inventory that has become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its expected lower of cost or net realizable value, and inventory in excess of expected requirements. The estimate of excess quantities is judgmental and primarily dependent on our estimates of future demand for the particular product.
Stock-Based Compensation and Fair Value of Common Stock
We maintain an equity incentive plan that permits the grant of share-based awards, such as stock options and restricted stock units (RSUs), to employees and directors. We recognize equity-based compensation expense for awards of equity instruments based on the grant date fair value of those awards. We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards made to employees and directors based on the estimated fair values as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, net of estimated forfeitures.
The fair value of restricted stock unit ("RSU") awards is determined based on the number of units granted and the closing price of the Company's common stock as of the grant date. The model requires us to make a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield. We expense the fair value of our equity-based compensation awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is the period in which the related services are received.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrants
Our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants were classified as liabilities as the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock was considered contingently redeemable and we were obligated to transfer assets to the holders upon occurrence of a deemed liquidation event. The warrants were recorded at fair value upon issuance and subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date, with changes in fair value recognized as other expense in the statements of operations. The warrant liability was recorded as other noncurrent liabilities in the balance sheets. We continued to adjust the warrant liability for changes in fair value until the conversion of redeemable convertible preferred stock into common stock. At the time of conversion, the liability associated with the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants was converted into warrants to purchase common stock and reclassified to additional paid-in capital. As a result, the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was settled and is no longer subject to remeasurement.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II, Item 8 for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment.