ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains trend analysis, estimates and other forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, as amended. These forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements containing the words “anticipates,” “believes,” “continues,” “could,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “plans,” “seeks,” “should,” “will,” and other words of similar import or the negative of those terms or expressions. Such forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, estimates and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or industry results, to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those set forth in such forward-looking statements as a result of, but not limited to, the “Risk Factors” described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should read the following discussion and analysis along with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes attached to those statements included elsewhere in this report.
In addition, the section of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage genomic medicine company committed to translating ground-breaking science into medicines that transform the lives of patients and families afflicted with serious diseases. We plan to deliver on this mission through development of our clinical and preclinical product candidates leveraging our novel science and our in-house manufacturing capabilities.
Our current clinical-stage product candidates are:
•Isaralgagene civaparvovec, also known as ST-920, our wholly-owned gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of Fabry disease, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 STAAR clinical study, and we have initiated plans for a Phase 3 clinical trial;
•SAR445136, our zinc finger nuclease, or ZF nuclease, gene-edited cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of sickle cell disease, or SCD, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 PRECIZN-1 clinical study. We are developing SAR445136 with our collaborator Sanofi S.A., or Sanofi, through June 28, 2022, at which time SAR445136 will become a product candidate wholly-owned by Sangamo;
•TX200, our wholly-owned Chimeric Antigen Receptor, or CAR, engineered regulatory T cell, or CAR-Treg, cell therapy product candidate for the prevention of immune-mediated rejection in HLA-A2 mismatched kidney transplantation, is currently being evaluated in our Phase 1/2 STEADFAST clinical study; and
•Giroctocogene fitelparvovec, also known as SB-525, is a gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of moderately severe to severe hemophilia A and is the subject of the registrational Phase 3 AFFINE clinical trial. We are developing giroctocogene fitelparvovec with our collaborator Pfizer Inc., or Pfizer.
Our preclinical development is focused in two innovative priority areas: (i) CAR-Treg cell therapies for autoimmune disorders and (ii) genome engineering for neurological diseases. Indications for our preclinical programs include neurodevelopmental disorders, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD, tauopathies and neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, multiple sclerosis, or MS, and Huntington’s disease, some of which we are developing with our collaborators Biogen MA, Inc. and Biogen International GmbH, which we refer to together as Biogen, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Inc., or Novartis, Pfizer, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, or Takeda.
Our multiple collaborations with biopharmaceutical companies bring us important financial and strategic benefits and reinforce the potential of our research and development efforts and our ZF technology platform. They leverage our collaborators’ therapeutic and clinical expertise and commercial resources with the goal to bring our medicines more rapidly to patients. We believe these collaborations reflect the value of our ZF technology platform and will potentially expand the addressable markets of our product candidates. To date, we have received approximately $815.0 million in upfront licensing fees, milestone payments and proceeds from sales of our common stock to collaborators and have the right to earn up to $6.7 billion in future milestone payments from our collaborations, in addition to potential product royalties.
We believe that our in-house manufacturing capacity provides us a competitive advantage. We currently operate an adeno-associated virus, or AAV, manufacturing facility in our Brisbane, California headquarters and cell therapy manufacturing facilities in Brisbane, California and Valbonne, France. Our manufacturing strategy is to provide greater flexibility, quality and control by building a balanced and necessary capacity achieved through our in-house manufacturing and contract manufacturing organization, or CMO, partnerships, investing in manufacturing processes and analytics and developing a strong supply chain.
For additional information regarding our business, see “Business” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Business Highlights
Fabry Disease
•In February 2022, we presented updated preliminary clinical data from the Phase 1/2 STAAR study evaluating isaralgagene civaparvovec, or ST-920, our wholly-owned gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of Fabry disease at the 18th Annual WORLDSymposium. As of the November 9, 2021 cutoff date:
◦The four patients in Cohorts 1 and 2 all exhibited above normal α-Gal A activity, ranging from 3-fold to 15-fold above mean normal at last measurement.
◦The two patients in Cohort 1 maintained elevated α-Gal A activity for one year and are now in the long-term follow-up study.
◦The first patient in Cohort 3 exhibited α-Gal A activity within mean normal range by week 2.
◦Lyso-Gb3 levels remained significantly reduced in the patient who exhibited the highest baseline levels of this biomarker.
◦The gene therapy candidate continued to be generally well tolerated in the five treated patients.
•The sixth patient in the STAAR study, who is the second patient in Cohort 3, was dosed after the cutoff date. We expect to provide updated data in the second half of 2022.
•Based on the Phase 1/2 data, we have initiated Phase 3 planning.
Sickle Cell Disease
•In December 2021, we presented updated preliminary proof-of-concept clinical data from the Phase 1/2 PRECIZN-1 study of SAR445136, a ZF nuclease gene-edited cell therapy candidate in development with Sanofi, at the 63rd American Society for Hematology Annual Meeting and Exposition 2021, or ASH. As of the September 22, 2021 cutoff date:
◦No adverse events related to SAR445136 were reported.
◦All four treated patients experienced increases in total hemoglobin, fetal hemoglobin and percent F cells.
◦None of the patients required blood transfusions post engraftment.
•We expect that the next four patients treated in the study will be dosed with a product candidate manufactured using improved methods, which have been shown in internal experiments to increase long-term progenitor cells. We expect to complete dosing of these patients in the third quarter of 2022.
•We and Sanofi are collaborating on planning an orderly transition of Sanofi’s rights and obligations under the program to Sangamo on June 28, 2022, while we explore options to advance the program, including seeking a potential new partner.
Hemophilia A
•In December 2021, with our collaborator Pfizer, we presented updated follow-up data from the Phase 1/2 Alta study of giroctocogene fitelparvovec, an investigational gene therapy for patients with moderately severe to severe hemophilia A, at ASH. As of the October 1, 2021 cutoff date:
◦At 104 weeks, the five patients in the highest dose 3e13 vg/kg cohort had mean factor VIII (FVIII) activity of 25.4% via chromogenic clotting assay.
◦In this cohort, mean annualized bleeding rate was 0.0 in the first year post-infusion and was 1.4 throughout the total duration of follow-up. All bleeding events occurred after week 69 post-infusion. Two patients experienced bleeding events necessitating treatment with exogenous FVIII. No participants in the highest dose cohort had resumed prophylaxis.
◦Giroctocogene fitelparvovec continued to be generally well-tolerated.
•In February 2022, Pfizer announced that it hopes to obtain agreements from health authorities to resume the AFFINE trial of giroctocogene fitelparvovec and to begin to reopen trial sites in the first half of 2022. This trial was previously paused when some of the patients treated in this trial experienced FVIII activity greater than 150% following treatment. Pfizer has announced that it currently is in the process of submitting a protocol amendment to health authorities in the countries where this trial is being conducted and preparing responses to the U.S. FDA clinical hold. Over 50% of the patients have been enrolled in the Phase 3 AFFINE trial.
Renal Transplant Rejection
•In November 2021, the first patient was enrolled and is expected to be dosed soon in our Phase 1/2 STEADFAST study evaluating TX200, our wholly-owned autologous HLA-A2 CAR Treg cell therapy product candidate treating patients receiving an HLA-A2 mismatched kidney from a living donor. We expect the second patient in this study to be dosed by the middle of 2022. We continue to open study sites and screen patients.
Manufacturing
•In 2021, we completed and brought online our in-house cell therapy manufacturing facilities in our Brisbane, California headquarters and in our Valbonne, France facilities. We now have these facilities in addition to the in-house AAV manufacturing facilities we brought online in Brisbane in 2020.
Impacts of the Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic
We have experienced and continue to experience impacts from the ongoing and evolving COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations and could continue to experience these or potentially more severe impacts as the pandemic evolves in the United States, France, the United Kingdom and locations of our clinical studies and trials. We continue to conduct business operations pursuant to a modified operating plan that includes enhanced workplace safety protocols and modified working schedules. These protocols and modifications have slowed our productivity and disrupted our business to a moderate degree and are likely to continue doing so through the remainder 2022. For example, we have experienced periodic short-term disruptions to our onsite operations while addressing positive cases of COVID-19 by onsite workers and clinical trial patients, and our operations could experience longer term disruptions in the future in the event of a significant outbreak of COVID-19 among our onsite workers or clinical trial patients. Moreover, from time to time, we have been required to reorganize and prioritize our resources to mitigate moderate COVID-19 impacts arising from travel restrictions, density restrictions and supply constraints. If our programs encounter longer-term disruptions, it could impact our ability to support our biopharmaceutical partners as contemplated in our collaboration agreements and could result in adjustments to our timelines, although we do not believe that the short-term disruptions to date have resulted in any such impacts.
Additionally, our Phase 1/2 STAAR clinical study evaluating isaralgagene civaparvovec has experienced and continues to experience delays in its timeline due in part to COVID-19 impacts and the diversion of healthcare resources to fight the pandemic. For example, we estimate that the opening of the first clinical trial site in the United Kingdom for this study experienced a delay of approximately one year due to the significant prevalence of COVID-19 in the United Kingdom. Additionally, we have experienced delays in recruiting, enrolling and dosing patients for this study, due in part to the hesitation of patients to travel by plane to trial sites not within driving distance and to enter medical facilities during the pandemic and also due in part to trial sites prioritizing COVID-19 clinical care over research activities such as the STAAR study. The study has also experienced delays when certain patients have decided to take the COVID-19 vaccine or tested positive for COVID-19 prior to enrollment or dosing in the study. Moreover, we have experienced some short-term delays in sourcing the necessary raw materials to manufacture supplies for the STAAR study and in transporting clinical trial materials due to COVID-19 impacts. We estimate that these challenges have set back our STAAR study timelines by approximately three to six months. Clinical timelines for this study could be revised again if COVID-19 impacts to our recruitment, screening, enrollment and
dosing of patients and to our sourcing of raw materials for this study intensify because of vaccination delays, new COVID-19 variants or unexpected events.
In addition, our STEADFAST study evaluating TX200, our wholly-owned CAR-Treg cell therapy product candidate for the treatment of kidney transplant rejection, has experienced delays in its timeline due to COVID-19 impacts related to manufacturing and technology transfer challenges with our CMOs and due to patients and donors testing positive for COVID-19. We estimate that these challenges set back our clinical study timeline by approximately three months. While we have now enrolled the first patient in this study and expect to dose this patient soon, and expect to dose the second patient in this study by the middle of 2022, this timeline could be revised if COVID-19 impacts result in additional delays.
With respect to our partnered programs, the timelines for the studies and trials managed by our collaborators are also subject to potential delay in the future if these studies and trials experience similar challenges that we have experienced and continue to experience in our STAAR and STEADFAST studies.
Going forward, we will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our operations, research commitments and clinical trials and those of our collaborators, clinical trial sites and CMOs. The magnitude of these impacts will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government orders and restrictions, and how the pandemic limits the ability of us and our business partners to operate business in the ordinary course. Disruptions to these operations, and possibly more severe disruptions in the future that could arise due to the extension of government orders or new government orders applicable in the places we operate or our industry generally or to us and our facilities specifically, could impede our ability to conduct research in a timely manner, comply with our research obligations to our collaborators and advance the development of our therapeutic programs. These delays and disruptions could result in adverse material impacts to our business, operating results and financial condition.
We do not anticipate any material negative impact on our financial condition in 2022 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe we are well positioned financially in the near term to execute on our wholly-owned and partnered research and clinical programs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $464.7 million in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities. Although we believe we are well-capitalized currently, the effects of the evolving pandemic could result in disruption of global financial markets, impairing our ability to access capital, which could negatively affect our liquidity in the future. We do not currently anticipate any material impairments to the valuation of the financial assets or goodwill on our balance sheet as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not believe that the remote workplace arrangements we have implemented for our office-based employees have affected our financial reporting or control systems.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, operations and financial condition, either directly or indirectly, will depend on future developments that remain highly uncertain at the present time. These developments include the ultimate duration and severity of the pandemic, the impacts of new COVID-19 variants, travel restrictions, new public health restrictions in the United States, France, the United Kingdom and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness and timeliness of actions taken in the United States, France, the United Kingdom and other countries to contain and treat the disease, including the effectiveness and timing of vaccination programs. The surge of new variants of the virus, including the recent Omicron variant, has resulted and may in the future result in the return of prior orders and restrictions or new quarantine and shelter-in-place orders or other restrictions. As our understanding of events evolves and additional information becomes available, we may materially change our guidance relating to our revenues, expenses and timelines for manufacturing, clinical trials and research and development.
See the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on risks and uncertainties related to the evolving COVID-19 pandemic.
Certain Components of Results of Operations
Our revenues have consisted primarily of revenues from upfront licensing fees, reimbursements for research services, milestone achievements and research grant funding. We expect revenues to continue to fluctuate from period to period and there can be no assurance that new collaborations or partner reimbursements will continue beyond their initial terms or that we are able to meet the milestones specified in these agreements.
We have incurred net losses since inception and expect to incur losses for at least the next several years as we continue our research and development activities. To date, we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of equity securities and revenues from collaborations and research grants.
We expect to continue to devote substantial resources to research and development in the future and expect research and development expenses to increase in the next several years if we are successful in advancing our product candidates from research stage through clinical trials. Pursuant to the terms of our agreements with Biogen, Kite Pharma, Inc., or Kite, Novartis and Sanofi, certain expenses related to research and development activities will be reimbursed to us. The reimbursement funds
to be received from Biogen, Kite, Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi will be recognized as revenue as the related costs are incurred and collection is reasonably assured.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel related expenses for executive, finance and administrative personnel, stock-based compensation expenses, professional fees, allocated facilities expenses, patent prosecution expenses and other general corporate expenses. As we continue to advance our product candidates into and through the clinic, we expect the growth of our business to require increased general and administrative expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related disclosures have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following policies to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations because they require us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain.
We believe our critical accounting policies and estimates relating to revenue recognition and valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill and intangible assets are the most significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Organization, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues from research services generally as services are provided while revenues from non-refundable upfront fees are recognized over time either by measuring progress towards satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation using the input method (i.e., cumulative actual costs incurred relative to total estimated costs) or on a straight-line basis when a performance obligation is expected to be satisfied evenly over a period of time (when there is a stand-ready obligation).
The estimation of measure of progress is complex, involves significant judgment, and is affected by our estimates of the total costs required to complete the performance obligations including the total internal personnel costs and external costs to be incurred as well as, in certain cases, the estimated stand-ready obligation period. Changes in these estimates can have a material effect on our revenue recognition.
For a further description of our revenue recognition, see Note 4 - Major Customers, Partnerships and Strategic Alliances in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Valuation of Long-lived Assets including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value these assets below their carrying values. As of December 31, 2021, no impairment of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets was identified.
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any significant impairment charges during the years presented.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Total revenues consisted of revenues from collaboration agreements and research grants. We anticipate revenues over the next several years will be derived primarily from our collaboration agreements with Biogen, Novartis, Kite, and Pfizer as we continue to recognize upfront and milestone payments received under such agreements over time.
The decrease of $7.5 million in revenues in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily attributed to a decrease of $47.4 million of milestone fees and recognition of upfront license fees related to our giroctocogene fitelparvovec and C9ORF72 collaboration agreements with Pfizer driven by completion of activities under these collaborations in the fourth quarter of 2020, a decrease of $3.2 million in revenue related to our collaboration agreement with Kite, a decrease of $2.8 million in revenue from sublicense fees related to our agreement with Dow AgroSciences LLC, and a decrease of $2.2 million in revenue related to our collaboration agreement with Sanofi, primarily due to a change in estimate regarding project scope and related project costs.
These decreases were partially offset by increases of $32.7 million and $14.4 million related to the recognition of upfront license fee and research revenue under our collaboration agreements with Novartis and Biogen, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consisted primarily of compensation related expenses, including stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, preclinical and clinical studies, manufacturing clinical supply, contracted research, and allocated facilities and information technology expenses.
The increase of $50.2 million in research and development expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by a $22.2 million increase in preclinical, clinical and lab supply expenses due to the timing of our trials and increased activity primarily attributable to our Biogen and Novartis collaborations, an $18.9 million increase in compensation expense as a result of increased headcount to support our programs, clinical trials and manufacturing operations, and a $15.0 million increase in manufacturing and overhead costs as we ramped up our internal manufacturing operations. These increases were partially offset by a reduction of research and development expenses by $5.2 million related to dissolution of the repayment obligation of a grant from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, or CIRM, associated with the development of the ST-400 program, which was discontinued in the third quarter of 2021. Stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expenses was $19.5 million and $13.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The table below shows research and development expenses related to our clinical and preclinical programs. As shown in the table below, preclinical and research programs contributed $58.8 million of the increase in our research and development expenses primarily due to advancement of our technical platform and our wholly-owned preclinical programs, offset by a decrease of $8.6 million in our clinical programs in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily driven by completion of activities for our giroctocogene fitelparvovec and C9ORF72 programs with Pfizer.
(*) The amount is related to dissolution of the repayment obligation of the grant from CIRM associated with the ST-400 clinical program which was discontinued in 2021. See Note 4 - Major Customers, Partnerships and Strategic Alliances in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect to continue to devote substantial resources to research and development in the future and expect research and development expenses to increase in the next several years if we are successful in advancing our clinical programs and if we are able to progress our earlier stage product candidates into clinical trials.
The length of time required to complete our development programs and our development costs for those programs may be impacted by the scope and timing of enrollment in clinical trials for our product candidates, our decisions to pursue development programs in other therapeutic areas, and whether we pursue development of our product candidates with a partner or collaborator or independently. For example, our product candidates are being developed in multiple therapeutic areas, and we do not yet know how many of those therapeutic areas we will continue to pursue. Furthermore, the scope and number of clinical trials required to obtain regulatory approval for each pursued therapeutic area is subject to the input of the applicable regulatory authorities, and we have not yet sought such input for all potential therapeutic areas that we may elect to pursue, and even after having given such input, applicable regulatory authorities may subsequently require additional clinical studies prior to granting regulatory approval based on new data generated by us or other companies, or for other reasons outside of our control. As a condition to any regulatory approval, we may also be subject to post-marketing development commitments, including additional clinical trial requirements. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration of or complete costs associated with our development programs.
Our potential therapeutic products are subject to a lengthy and uncertain regulatory process that may not result in our receipt of any necessary regulatory approvals. Failure to receive the necessary regulatory approvals would prevent us from commercializing the product candidates affected. In addition, clinical trials of our product candidates may fail to demonstrate safety and efficacy, which could prevent or significantly delay regulatory approval. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. A discussion of the risks and uncertainties with respect to our research and development activities, including completing the development of our product candidates, and the consequences to our business, financial position and growth prospects can be found in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation related expenses including stock-based compensation for executive, legal, finance and administrative personnel, professional fees, allocated facilities and information technology expenses, and other general corporate expenses.
The decrease of $3.9 million in general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to a $3.5 million decrease in legal and professional fees. Stock-based compensation expense included in general and administrative expenses was $13.4 million and $12.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest and other income, net
The decrease of $3.4 million in interest and other income, net in 2021 compared to 2020 was due to a decrease of $3.5 million in interest income primarily due to lower portfolio yields as a result of a decrease in interest rates, and a decrease of $3.4 million as a result of fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, partially offset by a reversal of accrued interest amounting to $1.2 million related to the grant from CIRM upon cancellation of the repayment obligation, and an increase of $1.4 million in research tax credits earned by Sangamo France.
Income tax expense
Provision for income taxes was $0.3 million, $0.3 million, and zero for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax expense for 2021 was primarily due to an increase in the long-term liability associated with uncertain tax positions and foreign income taxes. The income tax expense for 2020 was primarily related to the increase in the long-term liability associated with uncertain tax positions, foreign income taxes and state income taxes. In both years, the expense was partially offset by a foreign deferred tax benefit.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $605.6 million and $253.9 million, respectively. The federal net operating loss generated before 2018 will begin to expire in 2022 and will keep expiring through 2037, if not utilized. Federal net operating losses generated from 2018 will carry forward indefinitely. If not utilized, the state net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2029. We also have federal and state research tax credit carryforwards of $28.2 million and $22.1 million, respectively. The federal research credits will begin to expire in 2022, while the state research credits have no expiration date. Utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards and research tax credit carryforwards may be subject to substantial annual limitations due to the ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code and similar state provisions. The annual limitation could result in the expiration of the net operating loss carryforwards and research tax credit carryforwards before use. Due to the carryforwards related to the net operating losses and research and development tax credits, we do not expect to pay any U.S. federal taxes related to income in the near future.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses, and we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of equity securities, payments from corporate collaborators and strategic partners and research grants.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $464.7 million compared to $692.0 million as of December 31, 2020. Our most significant use of capital was for employee compensation and external research and development expenses, such as manufacturing, clinical trials and preclinical activity related to our therapeutic programs. Our cash and investment balances are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including U.S. government-sponsored entity debt securities, commercial paper securities, money market funds, corporate debt securities, asset-backed securities and certificates of deposit. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy with a view toward capital preservation and liquidity.
In August 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement℠, or the sales agreement, with Jefferies LLC, providing for the sale of up to $150.0 million of our common stock from time to time in ‘at-the-market’ offerings under an existing shelf registration statement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 2,007,932 shares of our common stock under the sales agreement for net proceeds of approximately $27.1 million.
While we expect our rate of cash usage to increase in the future, in particular to support our product development endeavors, we currently believe that our available cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities and expected revenues from collaborations, strategic partnerships and research grants, will be adequate to fund our currently planned operations through at least the next 12 months from the date the Consolidated Financial Statements are issued. We may elect to raise additional capital through additional collaborative agreements or the sale of additional equity to fund our future needs beyond the next 12
months. During this period of uncertainty and volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to monitor our liquidity.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $233.3 million in 2021, primarily reflecting our net loss of $178.3 million, a decrease in deferred revenues of $84.2 million, a decrease in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities of $7.7 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7.2 million, a decrease for adjustment of CIRM award liability related to termination of the grant of $6.4 million, and a decrease in long-term portion of lease liabilities by $4.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by $53.4 million of non-cash expenses related to stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets, and net amortization of premium (discount) on marketable securities, and an increase in non-current liabilities by $1.2 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $169.9 million in 2020, primarily reflecting an increase in deferred revenues of $216.5 million due to cash received in connection with the Biogen collaboration agreement and the Novartis collaboration agreement, an increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities of $10.7 million, a decrease in accounts receivable of $31.7 million, and $39.1 million of non-cash expenses related to stock-based compensation, other changes in operating lease right-of-use assets, and depreciation and amortization. These increases were partially offset by our net loss of $121.1 million, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets by $10.4 million.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $248.2 million in 2021, mostly related to net maturities, sales and purchases of marketable securities, partially offset by $23.3 million purchases of property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities was $271.6 million in 2020, mostly related to net maturities and purchases of marketable securities, and purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $32.9 million in 2021, related to $27.9 million of proceeds from the at-the-market offering, net of offering expenses of $0.8 million, an increase of $5.6 million related to proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and an increase of $3.4 million related to proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan, offset by a decrease of $3.3 million for taxes paid related to net share settlement of equity awards. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $153.1 million, primarily reflecting the $145.4 million estimated fair value of the shares issued to Biogen offset by $2.9 million of associated issuance costs, and an increase of $11.3 million related to proceeds from the exercise of stock options and purchases under the employee stock purchase plan.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We anticipate continuing to incur operating losses for at least the next several years. Although we believe we are well capitalized currently, the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, impairing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. Future capital requirements beyond the next 12 months will be substantial, and we will need to raise substantial additional capital to fund the development, manufacturing and potential commercialization of our product candidates through equity or debt financing. In addition, as we focus our efforts on proprietary human therapeutics, we will need to seek FDA approvals of our product candidates, a process that could cost in excess of hundreds of millions of dollars per product. We regularly consider fund-raising opportunities and may decide, from time to time, to raise capital based on various factors, including market conditions and our plans of operation. Additional capital may not be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If adequate funds are not available, or if the terms of potential funding sources are unfavorable, our business and our ability to advance our product candidate pipeline would be harmed. Furthermore, any sales of additional equity securities, including sales pursuant to our at-the-market offering program, may result in dilution to our stockholders, and any debt financing may include covenants that restrict our business.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•the initiation, progress, timing and completion of clinical trials for our product candidates and potential product candidates;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals;
•the success of our collaboration agreements;
•delays that may be caused by changing regulatory requirements;
•the number of product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing and defending patent claims;
•the timing and terms of future in-licensing and out-licensing transactions;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution capabilities;
•the cost of procuring clinical and commercial supplies of our product candidates;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, including the costs associated with such acquisitions and investments; and
•the costs of potential disputes and litigation.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations and commercial commitments as follows (in thousands):
Operating leases consist of base rents for facilities we occupy in Brisbane, California; Richmond, California; and Valbonne, France.
License obligations includes an ongoing license maintenance fee associated with cancellable in-licensed patent agreements.
Manufacturing obligations include the following non-cancelable material contractual commitments under manufacturing-related supplier arrangements as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):