Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" contains forward-looking statements within the "safe harbor" provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, made or respecting by SPAR Group, Inc. ("SGRP") and its subsidiaries (together with SGRP, the "SPAR Group" or the "Company"). See FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS preceding Part I, above. There also are "forward-looking statements" contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
All forward-looking statements and other information attributable to the Company or persons acting on its behalf are expressly subject to and qualified by all of the Risks facing the Company, including the Risks and other information described in Item IA - Risk Factors, above, or elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The Company does not intend, assume any obligation, or promise to publicly update or revise any such forward-looking statement, Risk or information (in whole or in part), whether as a result of new information, new or worsening Risks or uncertainties, changed circumstances, future events, recognition or otherwise.
Overview
The business performed well and grew by 10.9% in 2021 to achieve the highest annual revenue in the company’s history. This is compared to a decline of 8.8% in 2020. Our 2021 International revenue increased 12.3% compared to a 14.7% decrease in 2020. Our 2021 Domestic revenue increased 8.9% compared to a 1.5% increase in 2020.
The 2021 performance was the result of our continuing focus on client success, developing new client relationships, expanding into new services, continuing to invest in and upgrade our software solution, SPARView, and aligning all of our global plans around a single, exciting vision. While we experienced disruption and uncertainty in a number of markets as a result of continued COVID-19 economic challenges, we stayed focused.
While our revenue increased year over year, our gross profit declined by 1% compared to 2020. This was the result of a combination of factors including: 1) incremental recruiting and labor expenses in the challenging U.S. market for the year; 2) an acceleration in the growth of our remodel business that includes resource travel expenses, which were also highly variable during the year due to pandemic challenges; and 3) continued operating efficiency pressure from large clients to cover more locations with the same resources.
As we experienced these gross profit pressures during the course of 2021, we initiated a number of robust gross profit improvement plans that we expect to materialize in 2022.
The most significant financial event for the business in 2021 was the Change of Control, Voting and Restricted Stock Agreement ("CIC Agreement"). While the execution of this agreement has a one-time negative effect on our 2021 financials, we believe reaching this agreement with the two (2) majority shareholders and resolving all outstanding claims and disputes while concurrently changing the Company’s By-Laws to improve independent board governance, were watershed events in the exciting future of the company.
The highlights of the comprehensive agreement follow. This summary combines both the key points of the agreement with the Significant Stockholders as well as the changes made to the Company By-Laws to improve independent governance of the board. Signing the agreement was conditional upon the changes to the By-Laws.
●
All current and potential future actions, claims and demands between the Majority Stockholders and the Company are resolved;
●
The Significant Stockholders and their affiliates during the five-year term of the agreement have agreed to give up their rights to the following; and
o
Act or attempt to act by written consent;
o
Submit or attempt to submit any stockholder proposals in advance of any annual or special stockholders meeting of the Corporation;
o
Call or attempt to call any special meetings of the Corporation’s stockholders;
o
Continue or commence or attempt to continue or commence any legal claims against the Company;
o
Change or attempt to change the size of the Board;
o
Appoint or remove or attempt to appoint or remove any director or officer of the Corporation, except as expressly permitted with in the agreement;
o
Amend or attempt to amend the Corporation’s Certificate of Incorporation or Amended and Restate By-Laws; and
o
Enter or attempt to enter into any agreement, arrangement or understanding with any other Person in an effort to take any of these actions.
●
The Corporation’s By-Laws were changed to increase the independence of the Board. The following summarizes these changes.
o
The Board size is fixed at 7;
o
A “Super Independent Director” is defined. “Super Independent Director” means a member of the Board who: (1) qualifies as an independent director under applicable laws and regulations; (2) is affirmatively determined to be an independent director by the Governance Committee of the Board; (3) excludes the Majority Stockholders, Spar Administrative Services, Inc. and Spar Business Services, Inc. and any of their respective Relatives, Family Members, or Affiliates; and (4) excludes any Person that is or was a present or past employee or advisor of any company with which any of the Majority Stockholders has been involved and any Person that is, or was in the past, related or affiliated in any way to any of the Majority Stockholders, including, without limitation, any Affiliates of Innovative Global Technologies, LLC or SP/R, Inc. Defined Benefit Pension Trust;
o
The Board must consist of at least three (3) Super Independent Directors plus the CEO at all times. If there are less than three (3) Super Independent Directors, than the least tenured non-Super Independent Director, other than the CEO, may not vote on Board topics. This ensures the Board always remains under independent governance;
o
The Chairman, Vice Chairman and all Committee Chairpersons must qualify as Super Independent; and
o
To establish a quorum, any Board meeting must have 70% of the Directors including the majority of Super Independent Directors.
For this agreement and By-Law changes to go into effect, two (2) of the Board members, James R. Brown, Sr. and Panagiotis Lazaertos, who are affiliated with the Majority Stockholders, retired from the Board and assumed other advisory roles with the Company under separate agreements. The terms of these agreements are specified in the Related Party section of this document.
Our 2021 net loss attributable to the Company of $1.8 million is due to the one-time financial impact from the CIC Agreement. See Note 10 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements - Related Party Transactions Domestic Related Party Services (including Change of Control, Voting and Restricted Stock Agreement), below. Our 2020 net income attributable to the Company was $3.4 million including an approximate $3 million deferred tax benefit. Excluding both impacts for 2021 and 2020, our net income would have shown year-over-year improvement despite a challenging year to normalize operations through the pandemic and to prepare for future growth. We are proud of this achievement and the focus of our teams in light of the broad economic market impact of the pandemic across the globe.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The Company’s critical accounting policies, including the assumptions and judgements underlying them, are disclosed in Note 2 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, below. These policies have been consistently applied in all material respects and address such matters as revenue recognition, doubtful accounts and credit risks, internal use software development costs, asset impairment recognition, consolidation of subsidiaries and other companies. While the estimates and judgements associated with the application of these policies may be affected by different assumptions or conditions, the Company believes the estimates and judgements associated with the reported amounts are appropriate under the circumstances.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s goodwill balance was $4.2 million and $3.8 million, respectively. The Company is required to test goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently, whenever events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill below its carrying amount. The Company annually tests goodwill impairment during the third quarter. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired in connection with our acquisitions. We continually assess whether any indicators of impairment exist, which requires a significant amount of judgment. Such indicators may include a sustained significant decline in our share price and market capitalization; a decline in our expected future cash flows; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; unanticipated competition; overall weaknesses in our industry; and slower growth rates. Adverse changes in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. The Company has the option to first assess qualitative factors such as current performance and overall economic conditions to determine whether or not it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If that option is chosen, then the Company would not be required to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test unless it is determined that, based on a qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If it is determined that it is more likely than not, or if the Company chooses not to perform a qualitative assessment, the Company then proceeds with the quantitative assessment. Under the quantitative test, if the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, then goodwill of the reporting unit is considered to not be impaired. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess, up to the value of the goodwill.
During each of the third quarters of 2021 and 2020, the Company completed its goodwill impairment testing by performing a quantitative assessment on the Resource Plus reporting unit using the income approach. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make estimates and assumptions related to future revenue, operating income and discount rates. Based on the results of this test, no impairment loss was recognized. There were no triggering events identified from the date of our assessment through December 31, 2021 that would require an update to our annual impairment test. For all other reporting units, the Company performed a qualitative assessment. Based on the results of the qualitative assessments, goodwill of the remaining reporting units is not considered to be impaired.
The Company evaluates the carrying value of long-lived assets, other than goodwill, for impairment by analyzing the operating performance and anticipated future cash flows for those assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of such assets may not be recoverable. The Company evaluates the need to adjust the carrying value of the underlying assets if the sum of the expected cash flows is less than the carrying value. The Company’s projections of future cash flows, the level of actual cash flows, the methods of estimation used for determining fair values and salvage values can impact impairment. Any changes in management’s judgments could result in greater or lesser annual depreciation and amortization expense or impairment charges in the future. Depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s services are provided to its clients under contracts or agreements. The Company bills its clients based upon service fee arrangements. Revenues under service fee arrangements are recognized when the service is performed. Customer deposits, which are considered advances on future work, are recorded as revenue in the period services are provided.
The Company records revenue from contracts with its customers through the execution of a Master Service Agreement (“MSA”) that are effectuated through individual Statements of Work (“SOW” and with the applicable MSA collectively a “Contract”). The MSAs generally define the financial, service, and communication obligations between the client and SPAR while the SOWs state the project objective, scope of work, time frame, rate and driver in which SPAR will be paid. Only when the MSA and SOW are combined as a Contract can all five (5) revenue standard criteria be met. The Company integrates a series of tasks promised within these Contracts into a bundle of services that represent the combined performance obligation of Merchandising Services. Such Merchandising Services are performed over the duration of the SOW. Most Merchandising Services are performed on a daily, weekly or monthly basis. Revenue from Merchandising Services are recognized as the services are performed based on a rate-per-driver basis (per hour, store visit or unit stocked) with services delivered as they are consumed.
All of the Company’s Contracts with customers have a duration of one (1) year or less, with over 90% being completed in less than 30 days, and revenue is recognized as services are performed. Given the nature of the Company’s business, how the Contracts are structured and how the Company is compensated, the Company has elected the right-to-invoice practical expedients method allowed under the revenue standard.
Doubtful Accounts and Credit Risks
The Company continually monitors the collectability of its accounts receivable based upon current client credit information and financial condition. Balances that are deemed to be uncollectible after the Company has attempted reasonable collection efforts are written off through a charge to the bad debt allowance and a credit to accounts receivable. Accounts receivable balances, net of any applicable reserves or allowances, are stated at the amount that management expects to collect from the outstanding balances. The Company provides for probable uncollectible amounts through a charge to earnings and a credit to bad debt allowance based in part on management’s assessment of the current status of individual accounts. Based on management’s assessment, the Company established an allowance for doubtful accounts of $564,000 and $563,000 at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Bad debt expense was $128,000 and $330,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Based on the Company’s 2021 estimated bad debt, if the estimate of bad debt changed by 10% the reserve would change by approximately $50,000.
Internal Use Software Development Costs
The Company capitalizes certain costs associated with its internally developed software. Specifically, the Company capitalizes the costs of materials and services incurred in developing or obtaining internal use software. These costs include (but are not limited to) the cost to purchase software, the cost to write program code, payroll and related benefits and travel expenses for those employees who are directly involved with and who devote time to the Company’s software development projects. Capitalized software development costs are amortized over three (3) years on a straight-line basis.
The Company capitalized approximately $1.2 million and $1.0 million of costs related to software developed for internal use in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and recognized approximately $1.2 million of amortization of capitalized software for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected financial data and such data as a percentage of net revenues for the years indicated (dollars in millions).
Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $255.7 million compared to $230.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25.2 million or 10.9%. The Domestic segment contributed an increase of $8.2 million and the International segment contributed an increase of $17.0 million year over year.
Domestic net revenues totaled $100.3 million and $92.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $8.2 million or 8.9% is primarily attributable to post-pandemic recovery and project growth.
International net revenues totaled $155.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $138.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $17.0 million or 12.3%. The increase in 2021 International net revenues was primarily driven by post-pandemic recovery from 2020. Every country with the exception of Mexico and India enjoyed higher revenue comparing to 2020. See Note 12 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements - Segment Information, below.
Cost of Revenues
The Company's cost of revenues consists of its in-store labor and field management wages, related benefits, travel and other direct labor-related expenses and was 81.4% of net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 80.4% of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Domestic cost of revenue as a percent of net revenue was 81.4% and 78.5% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cost was driven by pressure of higher labor costs and unfavorable mix of project work.
International cost of revenue as a percent of net revenue was 81.4% and 81.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The International cost of revenue percentage decrease of 0.2% percentage point was primarily due to margin improvements in Mexico, India, and Brazil.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses of the Company include its corporate overhead, project management, information technology, executive compensation, human resources, legal and accounting expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were approximately $41.3 million, or 16.1% of net revenue, and approximately $33.3 million, or 14.5% of net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, the Company recorded a one-time expense of $4.5 million relating to the CIC Agreement. See Note 10 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements - Related Party Transactions Domestic Related Party Services (including Change of Control, Voting and Restricted Stock Agreement), below. Excluding the one-time CIC Agreement expenses, year-over-year increase was 10.2%; the increases in costs is in an effort to normalize operations post-pandemic as well as preparing for future growth and remained flat as % of net revenue.
Domestic selling, general and administrative expenses totaled approximately $21.4 million including the one-time CIC Agreement expenses and $16.8 million excluding the one-time CIC Agreement expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year-over-year increase was driven by the 2021 bonus accrual and cost associated with new executives.
International selling, general and administrative expenses totaled approximately $19.9 million and $17.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year increase was driven by post-pandemic business recovery.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense totaled approximately $2.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Interest Expense
The Company's interest expense was $585,000 and $690,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Domestic segment’s interest expense was $624,000 and $651,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was a result of renegotiating lender financing terms.
The International segment had interest income of ($39,000) in 2021 versus interest expense of $40,000 in 2020. The International segment's 2021 net interest income was primarily due to expenses being offset by income generated from cash balance in banks.
Other Income and Expenses
Other income and expenses was a credit of $510,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus a credit of $242,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax
The income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2.1 million and $312,000, respectively. In 2021, our effective income tax rate varied from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily as a result of mix of income and impact of higher foreign tax rates, as well as the incremental tax expense associated with the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. The 2020 lower tax was driven by the release of $2.1 million of the valuation allowance related to Brazil.
Non-Controlling Interest
Net operating profits from the non-controlling interests, relating to the Company's 51% owned subsidiaries, resulted in a reduction of net income attributable to the Company of $3.8 million and $5.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net (Loss) Income Attributable to SPAR Group, Inc.
The Company reported a net loss attributable to the Company of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, or a loss of $0.08 per basic and diluted shares, compared to net income of $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or income of $0.16 per basic and diluted share, based on basic and diluted shares outstanding of 21.3 million for both basic and diluted shares at December 31, 2021, and 21.1 and 21.2 million at December 31, 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had pre-tax net income before taxes of $4.1 million and $9.3 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2.6 million and $8.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to significant increase in accounts receivable due to revenue growth.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $1.7 million and $1.6 million, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities was attributable to capitalization of internal use software.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $1.3 million compared to $131,000 in 2020. The year-over-year increase in net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was primarily due to increase in net borrowing on lines of credit.
The above activity and the impact of foreign exchange rate changes resulted in a decrease in cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021 of approximately $2.5 million.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had net working capital of $22.1 million, as compared to net working capital of $23.6 million at December 31, 2020. The Company's current ratio was 1.4 and 1.6 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Credit Facilities
The Company is a party to various domestic and international credit facilities. See Note 4 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements - Credit Facilities, below.
These various domestic and international credit facilities require compliance with their respective financial covenants. During 2021, the Company was in compliance with all other financial covenants, other than the credit facility with Fifth Third bank for Resource Plus of which the Company had no outstanding balance at December 31, 2021.
Management believes that based upon the continuation of the Company's existing credit facilities, projected results of operations, vendor payment requirements and other financing available to the Company (including amounts due to affiliates), sources of cash availability should be manageable and sufficient to support ongoing operations over the next year. However, delays in collection of receivables due from any of the Company's major clients, a significant reduction in business from such clients, or a negative economic downturn resulting from the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, could have a material adverse effect on the Company's business, cash resources and ongoing ability to fund operations.