ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Disclosure
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Report”) includes “forward-looking statements” which represent our expectations or beliefs concerning future events that involve risks and uncertainties, including the impact of geopolitical events, such as the war in the Ukraine, and its impact on wholesale product cost volatility, the price and supply of the products that we sell, our ability to purchase sufficient quantities of product to meet our customer’s needs, rapid increases in levels of inflation approaching 40-year highs, uncertain economic conditions, the consumption patterns of our customers, our ability to obtain satisfactory gross profit margins, the effect of weather conditions on our financial performance, our ability to obtain new customers and retain existing customers, our ability to make strategic acquisitions, the impact of litigation, natural gas conversions, the impact of the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic and future global health pandemics, on US and global economies, future union relations and the outcome of current and future union negotiations, the impact of current and future governmental regulations, including climate change, environmental, health, and safety regulations, the ability to attract and retain employees, customer credit worthiness, counterparty credit worthiness, marketing plans, cyber-attacks, increases in interest rates, global supply chain issues, labor shortages and new technology. All statements other than statements of historical facts included in this Report including, without limitation, the statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere herein, are forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, the words “believe,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “expect,” “seek,” “estimate,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, we can give no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct and actual results may differ materially from those projected as a result of certain risks and uncertainties. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those set forth in this Report under the headings “Risk Factors,” “Business Strategy” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis.” Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations (“Cautionary Statements”) are disclosed in this Report. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to the Company or persons acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the Cautionary Statements. Unless otherwise required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise after the date of this Report.
Liquid Product Price Volatility
Volatility, which is reflected in the wholesale price of liquid products, including home heating oil, propane and motor fuels, has a larger impact on our business when prices rise. Home heating oil consumers are sensitive to heating cost increases, and this often leads to customer conservation and increased gross customer losses. As a commodity, the price of home heating oil is generally impacted by many factors, including economic and geopolitical forces, and, most recently, the war in the Ukraine, and is closely linked to the price of diesel fuel. The volatility in the wholesale cost of diesel fuel as measured by the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”), for the fiscal years ending September 30, 2018, through 2022, on a quarterly basis, is illustrated in the following chart (price per gallon):
a)On November 30, 2022, the NYMEX ultra low sulfur diesel contract closed at $3.36 per gallon or $0.10 per gallon higher than the average of $3.26 in Fiscal 2022.
b)In fiscal 2022, the Company's spot purchases of home heating oil greatly exceeded the published NYMEX price due to our suppliers charging a premium over NYMEX for prompt delivery.
During the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2022, the wholesale price of home heating oil was extremely volatile and we experienced a significant increase in the cost of our product which adversely impacted our
liquidity. We believe these circumstances are attributable to supply and demand imbalances, exacerbated by the war in the Ukraine. The cost of home heating oil, as measured by the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”), was $2.36 per gallon on January 1, 2022, peaked at $5.14 on April 28, 2022 and closed at $3.37 on September 30, 2022. From time-to-time, the Company (as well as our competition) paid a premium over the NYMEX-published price for product purchased to ensure prompt delivery. The significant increase in product costs resulted in higher operating expenses, such as credit card fees, bad debt expense, and vehicle fuels, and also led to higher working capital requirements, including higher premiums and cash requirements for certain of our hedging instruments. Our seasonal working capital needs increased to fund these higher product costs and the cash required to finance our operating activities increased over $100 million. Further, our credit availability (as defined in our Credit Agreement) was reduced as the Company used a portion of its cash flow to finance these higher working capital needs and to satisfy margin requirements on our hedged inventory positions. The Company accessed $100 million of its seasonal working capital line which increased the revolving credit facility to a total of $400 million as of March 31, 2022 to finance its additional working capital needs, which resulted in an increase in interest expense. The Company believes that it may experience a slowing of collection of our accounts over the next few months as our customers respond to higher product prices, and customers may defer or curtail liquid product purchases in response to the higher product prices.
Since the end of fiscal 2022, we have paid up to $5.57 per gallon for home heating oil inclusive of a premium over the published NYMEX index charged by our suppliers for prompt deliveries. We cannot predict if the cost of our product will remain at these high levels nor can we predict the impact on future profit margins and customer attrition.
Impact of COVID 19 - A Global Pandemic on our Operations and Outlook
In December 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. The United States declared a national emergency concerning the outbreak, which adversely impacted global activity and contributed to significant declines and volatility in financial markets. Public health and governmental authorities nationally and in affected regions have taken and continue to take extraordinary and wide-ranging actions to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19, including restrictions on travel and business operations, quarantines, and orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations.
To date, we have not experienced any supply chain issues impacting our ability to deliver petroleum products to our customers as a result of COVID-19. However, we have experienced and may continue to see disruptions in the procurement of service and installation materials. Since March 2020, we have implemented various measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as permitting office personnel to work remotely. While these measures have not significantly impacted our ability to serve our customers to date, these measures may become strained or result in service delays.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and in order to protect the safety and health of our workforce and our customers, we have expanded certain employee benefit programs and have incurred additional operating costs such as sanitizing our facilities, providing personal protective equipment for our employees and providing IT infrastructure to allow many office, clerical, sales and customer service employees to work from home. During fiscal 2022 and 2021, the annual cost of these undertakings was approximately $2.0 million.
While it has not yet materially impacted our ability to serve our customers, the continued impact of the pandemic, including but not limited to, the increased desire of current and prospective employees to work from home has impacted our ability to fully staff our customer service, sales and other functions. In addition, we have experienced, and expect that we will continue to experience, an increase in wage rates to fill these positions and we might need to adjust the current wage rates of existing employees. We cannot predict how long this staffing issue will continue, but the shortage in conjunction with any kind of spike in customer activity could cause unacceptable delays in response times and increase customer losses.
As of September 30, 2022, we had accounts receivable of $138.3 million, of which $82.9 million was due from residential customers and $55.4 million due from commercial customers. Our ability to borrow from our bank group is based in part on the aging of these accounts receivable. If past due balances increase from historic levels, our future ability to borrow would be reduced.
The Company has taken advantage of certain tax and legislative actions which permitted the Company to defer certain calendar 2020 payroll tax withholdings to calendar 2021 and December 2022; approximately half of which were paid in fiscal 2021.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our business strategies and initiatives, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of COVID-19 and related restrictions on travel and general mobility, the price of petroleum products and the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. An extended period of global supply chain and economic disruption caused by COVID-19 and its variants could materially affect our business, results of operations, access to sources of liquidity and financial condition.
Execution of Sixth Amended and Restated Revolving Asset-based Credit Agreement
On July 6, 2022, the Company refinanced its credit facility agreement and entered into a new sixth amended and restated revolving credit facility agreement with a bank syndicate of ten participants that enables us to borrow up to $400 million ($550 million during the heating season of December through April of each year) on a revolving line of credit for working capital purposes (subject to certain borrowing base limitations and coverage ratios), provides for a $165 million five-year senior secured term loan, allows for the issuance of up to $25 million in letters of credit, and extends the maturity date of the previous agreement to July 6, 2027.
Proceeds from the new term loan were used to repay the $95.9 million outstanding balance of the term loan and $69.1 million of the revolving credit facility borrowings under the old credit facility. Availability as a result of the new credit agreement increased $69.1 million.
Under the Company’s sixth amended and restated credit agreement, in order to pay distributions and repurchase Common Units we must maintain availability of $60 million, 15% of the facility size of $400 million (assuming the non-seasonal aggregate commitment is not outstanding) on a historical pro forma and forward-looking basis, and a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.15 measured as of the date of repurchase or distribution.
With the increase in product costs, we expect that future borrowings under the credit agreement will increase. The increase in borrowings coupled with the recent increase in interest rates may lead to an increase in interest expense.
Income Taxes
Book versus Tax Deductions
The amount of cash flow generated in any given year depends upon a variety of factors including the amount of cash income taxes required, which will increase as depreciation and amortization decreases. The amount of depreciation and amortization that we deduct for book (i.e., financial reporting) purposes will differ from the amount that the Company can deduct for Federal tax purposes. The table below compares the estimated depreciation and amortization for book purposes to the amount that we expect to deduct for Federal tax purposes, based on currently owned assets. While we file our tax returns based on a calendar year, the amounts below are based on our September 30 fiscal year, and the tax amounts include any 100% bonus depreciation available for fixed assets purchased. However, this table does not include any forecast of future annual capital purchases.
Estimated Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Weather Hedge Contracts
Weather conditions have a significant impact on the demand for home heating oil and propane because certain customers depend on these products principally for space heating purposes. Actual weather conditions may vary substantially from year to year, significantly affecting the Company’s financial performance. To partially mitigate the adverse effect of warm weather on cash flow, we have used weather hedging contracts for a number of years with several providers.
Under these contracts, we are entitled to a payment if the total number of degree days within the hedge period is less than the applicable “Payment Thresholds,” or strikes. For fiscal 2022 and 2021, we entered into weather hedging contracts under which we are entitled to a payment capped at $12.5 million if degree days are less than the Payment Threshold and we are obligated to make an annual payment capped at $5.0 million if degree days exceed the Payment Threshold. The hedge period runs from November 1 through March 31, taken as a whole, for each respective fiscal year. For the fiscal 2022 and 2021, we recorded a $1.1 million benefit and a $3.4 million benefit, respectively. For fiscal 2023, the Company has entered into weather hedging contracts with similar arrangements.
Per Gallon Gross Profit Margins
We believe home heating oil and propane margins should be evaluated on a cents per gallon basis (before the effects of increases or decreases in the fair value of derivative instruments), as we believe that such per gallon margins are best at showing profit trends in the underlying business, without the impact of non-cash changes in the market value of hedges before the settlement of the underlying transaction.
A significant portion of our home heating oil volume is sold to individual customers under an arrangement pre-establishing a ceiling price or fixed price for home heating oil over a set period of time, generally twelve to twenty-four months (“price-protected” customers). When these price-protected customers agree to purchase home heating oil from us for the next heating season, we purchase option contracts, swaps and futures contracts for a substantial majority of the heating oil that we expect to sell to these customers. The amount of home heating oil volume that we hedge per price-protected customer is based upon the estimated fuel consumption per average customer per month. In the event that the actual usage exceeds the amount of the hedged volume on a monthly basis, we may be required to obtain additional volume at unfavorable costs. In addition, should actual usage in any month be less than the hedged volume, our hedging costs and losses could be greater, thus reducing expected margins.
Derivatives
FASB ASC 815-10-05 Derivatives and Hedging requires that derivative instruments be recorded at fair value and included in the consolidated balance sheet as assets or liabilities. To the extent our interest rate derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges are effective, as defined under this guidance, changes in fair value are recognized in other comprehensive income until the forecasted hedged item is recognized in earnings. We have elected not to designate our commodity derivative instruments as hedging instruments under this guidance and, as a result, the changes in fair value of the derivative instruments are recognized in our statement of operations. Therefore, we experience volatility in earnings as outstanding derivative instruments are marked to market and non-cash gains and losses are recorded prior to the sale of the commodity to the customer. The volatility in any given period related to unrealized non-cash gains or losses on derivative instruments can be significant to our overall results. However, we ultimately expect those gains and losses to be offset by the cost of product when purchased.
Customer Attrition
We measure net customer attrition on an ongoing basis for our full service residential and commercial home heating oil and propane customers. Net customer attrition is the difference between gross customer losses and customers added through marketing efforts. Customers added through acquisitions are not included in the calculation of gross customer gains. However, additional customers that are obtained through marketing efforts or lost at newly acquired businesses are included in these calculations from the point of closing going forward. Customer attrition percentage calculations include customers added through acquisitions in the denominators of the calculations on a weighted average basis from the closing date. Gross customer losses are the result of a number of factors, including price competition, move-outs, credit losses, conversions to natural gas and service disruptions. When a customer moves out of an existing home, we count the “move out” as a loss, and if we are successful in signing up the new homeowner, the “move in” is treated as a gain. The impact of certain geopolitical forces,
particularly the war in the Ukraine, on liquid product prices could increase future attrition due to higher losses from credit related issues.
Customer gains and losses of home heating oil and propane customers
Customer gains (attrition) as a percentage of home heating oil and propane customer base
For fiscal 2022, the Company lost 15,600 accounts (net), or 3.7%, of its home heating oil and propane customer base, compared to 17,000 accounts lost (net), or 3.9%, of its home heating oil and propane customer base, during fiscal 2021. Gross customer gains were 2,400 higher than the prior year’s comparable period, and gross customer losses were 1,000 accounts higher primarily due to product prices, customer credit cancellations and fuel conversions.
For fiscal 2021, the Company lost 17,000 accounts (net), or 3.9%, of its home heating oil and propane customer base, compared to 15,500 accounts lost (net), or 3.4%, of its home heating oil and propane customer base, during fiscal 2020. Gross customer gains were 7,300 less than the prior year’s comparable period, and gross customer losses were 5,800 accounts lower. The 1,500 account increase in net customer attrition was negatively impacted by the sale of certain propane assets in October 2020, which generated approximately 1,100 accounts (net) through September 30, 2020 as compared to approximately 100 accounts (net) in October 2020.
During fiscal 2022, we estimate that we lost (1.5%) of our home heating oil and propane accounts to natural gas conversions versus (1.1%) for fiscal 2021 and (1.1%) for fiscal 2020. Losses to natural gas in our footprint for the heating oil and propane industry could be greater or less than the Company’s estimates.
Acquisitions
The timing of acquisitions and the types of products sold by acquired companies impact year-over-year comparisons. During fiscal 2022, the Company acquired five heating oil dealers. During fiscal 2021 the Company acquired two propane and three heating oil dealers. The following tables detail the Company’s acquisition activity and the associated volume sold during the 12-month period prior to the date of acquisition.
Sale of Certain Assets
In October 2022 we sold certain assets, which included a customer list of approximately 6,500 customers, for $2.7 million. The following table details sales generated from the assets sold:
Protected Price Account Renewals
A substantial majority of the Company’s price-protected customers have agreements with us that are subject to annual renewal in the period between April and November of each fiscal year. If a significant number of these customers elect not to renew their price-protected agreements with us and do not continue as our customers under a variable price-plan, the Company’s near term profitability, liquidity and cash flow will be adversely impacted. As of November 30, 2022, the wholesale cost of home heating oil as measured by the New York Mercantile Exchange was $3.36 per gallon, approximately $1.30 per gallon higher than at November 30, 2021. Based on these recent prices, our price-protected customers will be offered renewal contracts at significantly higher prices than last year which, may adversely impact the acceptance rate of these renewals.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of the consolidated results of operations of the Company and its subsidiaries and should be read in conjunction with the historical financial and operating data and Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2022
Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021
Volume
For fiscal 2022, the retail volume of home heating oil and propane sold decreased by 9.8 million gallons, or 3.2%, to 296.1 million gallons, compared to 305.9 million gallons for fiscal 2021. For those locations where we had existing operations during both periods, which we sometimes refer to as the “base business” (i.e., excluding acquisitions), temperatures (measured on a heating degree day basis) for fiscal 2022 were 0.5% warmer than fiscal 2021 and 9.3% warmer than normal, as reported by NOAA. For fiscal 2022, net customer attrition for the base business was 3.7%. The impact of fuel conservation, along with any period-to-period differences in delivery scheduling, the timing of accounts added or lost during the fiscal years, equipment efficiency, and other volume variances not otherwise described, are included in the chart below under the heading “Other.” An analysis of the change in the retail volume of home heating oil and propane, which is based on management’s estimates, sampling, and other mathematical calculations and certain assumptions, is found below:
The following chart sets forth the percentage by volume of total home heating oil sold to residential variable-price customers, residential price-protected customers, and commercial/industrial/other customers for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021:
Volume of motor fuel and other petroleum products sold decreased by 4.0 million gallons, or 2.6%, to 150.1 million gallons for fiscal 2022, compared to 154.1 million gallons for fiscal 2021.
Product Sales
For fiscal 2022, product sales increased $494.0 million, or 41.0%, to $1,698.3 million, compared to $1,204.3 million in fiscal 2021, as an increase in selling prices more than offset a decline in total volume sold. The increase in selling prices was largely attributable to an increase in wholesale product cost of $1.1379 per gallon, or 69.4%.
Installations and Services Sales
For fiscal 2022, installation and service sales increased $15.5 million, or 5.3%, to $308.3 million, compared to $292.8 million for fiscal 2021, as economic activity increased as many COVID-19 restrictions were removed. During fiscal 2021, we ceased making non-emergency service calls, and we believe that some customers deferred the installation of new equipment.
Cost of Product
For fiscal 2022, cost of product increased $485.0 million, or 64.3%, to $1,239.6 million, compared to $754.6 million for fiscal 2021, as the impact of a $1.1379 per gallon, or 69.4%, increase in wholesale product cost more than offset a decrease in total volume sold.
Gross Profit-Product
The table below calculates our per gallon margins and reconciles product gross profit for home heating oil and propane and motor fuel and other petroleum products. We believe the change in home heating oil and propane margins should be evaluated before the effects of increases or decreases in the fair value of derivative instruments, as we believe that realized per gallon margins should not include the impact of non-cash changes in the market value of hedges before the settlement of the underlying transaction. On that basis, home heating oil and propane margins for fiscal 2022 increased by $0.0569 per gallon, or 4.3%, to $1.3935 per gallon, from $1.3366 per gallon during fiscal 2021. We cannot assume that the per gallon margins realized during fiscal 2022 are sustainable for future periods. Product sales and cost of product include home heating oil, propane, motor fuel, other petroleum products and liquidated damages billings.
For fiscal 2022, total product gross profit was $458.7 million, which was $9.0 million, or 2.0%, higher than fiscal 2021, as a decrease in home heating oil and propane volume ($13.1 million) was more than offset by the impact of an increase in home heating oil and propane margins ($16.8 million) and an increase in gross profit from other petroleum products ($5.3 million).
Cost of Installations and Services
Total installation costs for fiscal 2022 increased to $98.8 million, compared to $90.1 million for fiscal 2021, primarily due to increased installation revenues. Installation costs as a percentage of installation sales were 81.6% for fiscal 2022 and 81.5% for fiscal 2021. A return to a normal level of installation sales, as many COVID-19 restrictions were removed, drove the increase in installation activity. Gross profit from installations increased by $1.9 million.
Service expense increased by $9.2 million, or 5.3%, to $183.9 million for fiscal 2022, representing 98.2% of service sales, versus $174.7 million, or 95.9% of service sales, for fiscal 2021. Service expense rose as the Company resumed normal service work and activity that was curtailed during the fiscal 2021 due to COVID-19. A large proportion of our service expenses are incurred under fixed-fee prepaid service contract arrangements, therefore
trends in service expenses may not directly correlate to trends in the related revenues. Gross profit from service decreased $4.3 million.
We realized a combined gross profit from services and installations of $25.6 million for fiscal 2022 compared to a combined gross profit of $28.0 million for fiscal 2021, a $2.4 million decrease in profitability.
(Increase) Decrease in the Fair Value of Derivative Instruments
During fiscal 2022, the change in the fair value of derivative instruments resulted in a $17.3 million charge as an increase in the market value for unexpired hedges (a $4.9 million credit) was more than offset by a $22.2 million charge due to the expiration of certain hedged positions.
During fiscal 2021, the change in the fair value of derivative instruments resulted in a $36.1 million credit due to an increase in the market value for unexpired hedges (a $23.6 million credit) and a $12.5 million credit due to the expiration of certain hedged positions.
Delivery and Branch Expenses
For fiscal 2022, delivery and branch expenses increased $25.6 million, or 7.8%, to $353.5 million, compared to $327.9 million for fiscal 2021, reflecting an $18.5 million, or 5.6%, increase in expense within the base business, additional costs from acquisitions of $4.8 million and a $2.3 million lower benefit recorded from the Company’s weather hedges. In the base business, higher sales, that were driven by an increase product cost, resulted in $7.0 million of additional bad debts and credit card fees. Also, medical related expenses increased $2.5 million in the base business. Higher diesel and gasoline costs drove a $1.7 million increase in vehicle fuel costs. The remaining increase of expenses in the base business of $7.3 million, or 2.2% was due to wage, benefits and other expense increases. For fiscal 2022, we recorded a benefit of $1.1 million our weather hedge program that reduced delivery and branch expenses, versus a benefit of $3.4 million as for fiscal 2021 due to warmer temperatures during the weather hedge period of November 1st through March 31st.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
For fiscal 2022, depreciation and amortization expense decreased $0.9 million, or 2.6%, to $32.6 million, compared to $33.5 million for fiscal 2021, primarily due to lower amortization expense related to intangible assets that fully amortized in the prior fiscal year.
General and Administrative Expenses
For fiscal 2022, general and administrative expenses decreased $0.2 million, or 0.9%, to $24.9 million, compared to $25.1 million for fiscal 2021, as a $0.9 million increase in salaries and benefits expense was more than offset by a $1.1 million decrease in profit sharing expense. The Company accrues approximately 6.0% of Adjusted EBITDA as defined in its profit sharing plan for distribution to its employees. This amount is payable when the Company achieves Adjusted EBITDA of at least 70% of the amount budgeted. The dollar amount of the profit sharing pool adjusts accordingly based on Adjusted EBITDA levels achieved.
Finance Charge Income
For fiscal 2022, finance charge income increased by $1.6 million, or 55.5%, to $4.5 million compared to $2.9 million for fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher customer late payment charges.
Interest Expense, Net
For fiscal 2022, net interest expense increased by $2.7 million, or 34.0%, to $10.5 million compared to $7.8 million for fiscal 2021. The year-over-year change was driven by an increase in average borrowings of $86.3 million from $139.0 million for fiscal 2021 to $225.3 million for fiscal 2022, that more than offset a decrease in the weighted average interest rate from 4.0% for fiscal 2021 to 3.7% for fiscal 2022, due to a higher percentage of our average borrowings being under our revolving credit facility, which carries a lower effective interest rate than our term loan. To hedge against rising interest rates, the Company utilizes interest rate swaps. At September 30, 2022, $54.0 million, or 33%, of Star’s long-term debt was fixed.
Amortization of Debt Issuance Costs
For fiscal 2022, amortization of debt issuance costs was $1.0 million, essentially unchanged from fiscal 2021.
Income Tax Expense
For fiscal 2022, the Company’s income tax expense decreased by $20.0 million to $13.7 million, from $33.7 million for fiscal 2021, due primarily to a decrease in income before income taxes of $72.4 million that was partially offset by an increase in the effective income tax rate from 27.7% for the fiscal 2021 to 28.0% for fiscal 2022. The increase in the effective income tax rate was primarily due to state income taxes.
Net Income
For fiscal 2022, net income decreased $52.4 million, or 59.8%, to $35.3 million, primarily due to an unfavorable change in the fair value of derivative instruments of $53.4 million, and a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA of $17.2 million, that was partially offset by a decrease in the Company’s income tax expense of $20.0 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
For fiscal 2022, Adjusted EBITDA decreased by $17.2 million, or 13.5%, to $110.3 million compared to fiscal 2021, as the impact of a decline in home heating oil and propane volume of 9.8 million gallons and an increase in operating expenses more than offset an increase in home heating oil and propane per gallon margins of $0.0569, or 4.3%.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income (as an indicator of operating performance) or as an alternative to cash flow (as a measure of liquidity or ability to service debt obligations), but provide additional information for evaluating the Company’s ability to make the Minimum Quarterly Distribution.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are calculated as follows:
(a)EBITDA (Earnings from continuing operations before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization) and Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings from continuing operations before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, (increase) decrease in the fair value of derivatives, other income (loss), net, multiemployer pension plan withdrawal charge, gain or loss on debt redemption, goodwill impairment, and other non-cash and non-operating charges) are non-GAAP financial measures that are used as supplemental financial measures by management and external users of our financial statements, such as investors, commercial banks and research analysts, to assess:
•our compliance with certain financial covenants included in our debt agreements;
•our financial performance without regard to financing methods, capital structure, income taxes or historical cost basis;
•our operating performance and return on invested capital compared to those of other companies in the retail distribution of refined petroleum products, without regard to financing methods and capital structure;
•our ability to generate cash sufficient to pay interest on our indebtedness and to make distributions to our partners; and
•the viability of acquisitions and capital expenditure projects and the overall rates of return of alternative investment opportunities.
The method of calculating Adjusted EBITDA may not be consistent with that of other companies, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA both have limitations as analytical tools and so should not be viewed in isolation and should be viewed in conjunction with measurements that are computed in accordance with GAAP. Some of the limitations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our cash used for capital expenditures;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated or amortized often will have to be replaced and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the cash requirements for such replacements;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital requirements;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the cash necessary to make payments of interest or principal on our indebtedness; and
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the cash required to pay taxes.
Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021
Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2020
See Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations within the Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 for the fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2020 comparative discussion.
DISCUSSION OF CASH FLOWS
We use the indirect method to prepare our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Under this method, we reconcile net income to cash flows provided by operating activities by adjusting net income for those items that impact net income but do not result in actual cash receipts or payment during the period.
Operating Activities
Due to the seasonal nature of our business, cash is generally used in operations during the winter (our first and second fiscal quarters) as we require additional working capital to support the high volume of sales during this period, and cash is generally provided by operating activities during the spring and summer (our third and fourth quarters) when customer payments exceed the cost of deliveries.
During fiscal 2022, cash provided by operating activities decreased $35.0 million to $33.9 million, compared to $68.9 million provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021. Higher per gallon product costs drove an increase in receivables on a comparable basis (including accounts receivable, customer credit balance accounts and hedging settlement receivables) of $23.7 million. While accounts receivable were higher by $38.6 million, or 38.7%, during fiscal 2022 than fiscal 2021, days' sales outstanding remained fairly consistent with the prior year. The higher product cost also drove a $9.6 million increase in cash required to purchase liquid product inventory and contributed to a $4.0 million increase in net cash paid for certain hedge positions We also had a $8.8 million reduction in cash flows from operations. These cash flow changes were partially offset by a $5.1 million favorable change in accounts payable due to the pricing and timing of inventory purchases, $3.9 million less payroll tax payments ($7.8 million of fiscal 2020 payroll taxes deferred to fiscal 2021, partially offset by $3.9 million more in payroll taxes in the first fiscal quarter of 2022 versus the first fiscal quarter of 2021 as the result of deferring payment of certain payroll tax withholdings in first quarter of fiscal 2021 to the first quarter of fiscal 2023), and $2.1 million of other changes in working capital.
During fiscal 2021, cash provided by operating activities decreased $106.8 million to $68.9 million, compared to $175.7 million of cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020. The decrease was driven by a $61.3 million unfavorable change in accounts receivable (including customer credit balances) due primarily to higher sales in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 as compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, a $26.1 million unfavorable change in inventory due primarily to the higher cost of liquid product on hand as of September 30, 2021 as compared to September 30, 2020, a $11.5 million unfavorable change in payroll accruals due to timing, a $9.1 million unfavorable change in cash posted as collateral at derivative counterparties due to higher NYMEX ultra low sulfur diesel contract pricing as of September 30, 2021 as compared to September 30, 2020, $7.8 million of net payroll taxes deferred from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 as a result of certain tax and legislative actions, and a $2.7 million reduction in cash from operations that was partially offset by a $10.1 million favorable change in accounts payable due to the pricing and timing of inventory purchases, and $1.6 million of other changes in working capital.
Investing Activities
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 totaled $18.7 million, as we invested in our fleet and other equipment ($7.7 million), refurbished certain physical plants ($3.4 million), purchased a strategic property ($3.0 million), expanded our propane operations ($2.7 million) and invested in computer hardware and software ($1.9 million).
During fiscal 2022, we deposited $1.0 million, and invested another $0.8 million, into an irrevocable trust to secure certain liabilities for our captive insurance company. The cash deposited into the trust is shown on our balance sheet as captive insurance collateral and, correspondingly, reduced cash on our balance sheet. We believe that investments into the irrevocable trust will lower our letter of credit fees, increase interest income on invested cash balances, and provide us with certain tax advantages attributable to a captive insurance company.
During fiscal 2022, the Company acquired five heating oil dealers for approximately $15.6 million (using $13.1 million in cash and assuming $2.5 million of liabilities). The gross purchase price was allocated $7.3 million to intangible assets, $3.1 million to goodwill, $5.6 million to fixed assets, and reduced by $0.4 million in negative working capital.
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 totaled $15.1 million, as we invested in computer hardware and software ($3.2 million), refurbished certain physical plants ($2.8 million), expanded our propane operations ($2.3 million) and made additions to our fleet and other equipment ($6.8 million).
During fiscal 2021, we reinvested $1.1 million into an irrevocable trust to secure certain liabilities for our captive insurance company.
During fiscal 2021, the Company acquired two propane and three heating oil dealers for approximately $42.5 million (using $40.7 million in cash and assuming $1.8 million of liabilities). The gross purchase price was allocated $37.3 million to goodwill and intangible assets and $6.2 million to fixed assets, and reduced by $1.0 million in negative working capital.
On October 27, 2020, the Company sold certain propane assets for cash proceeds of $6.1 million.
Financing Activities
During fiscal 2022, we refinanced our five-year term loan and the revolving credit facility with the execution of the sixth amended and restated revolving credit facility agreement. The $165 million of proceeds from the new term loan were used to repay the $95.9 million outstanding balance of the term loan and $69.1 million of the $200.2 million of revolving credit facility borrowings under the old credit facility. We also paid an additional $2.5 million of debt issuance costs, repaid an additional net balance of $119.4 million under our revolving credit facility, repaid an additional $14.6 million of our term loan, repurchased 3.0 million Common Units for $30.8 million in connection with our unit repurchase plan, and paid distributions of $22.1 million to our Common Unit holders and $1.1 million to our General Partner unit holders (including $1.0 million of incentive distributions as provided in our Partnership Agreement).
During fiscal 2021, we repaid $13.0 million of our term loan, borrowed $75.2 million and subsequently repaid $66.5 million under our revolving credit facility, repurchased 4.3 million Common Units for $42.8 million primarily in connection with our unit repurchase plan, and paid distributions of $22.4 million to our Common Unit holders and $1.0 million to our General Partner unit holders (including $0.9 million of incentive distributions as provided in our Partnership Agreement).
FINANCING AND SOURCES OF LIQUIDITY
Liquidity and Capital Resources Comparatives
Our primary uses of liquidity are to provide funds for our working capital, capital expenditures, distributions on our units, acquisitions and unit repurchases. Our ability to provide funds for such uses depends on our future performance, which will be subject to prevailing economic, financial, geopolitical and business conditions, especially in light of the war in the Ukraine and the impact of COVID-19 and, weather, the ability to collect current and future accounts receivable, the ability to pass on the full impact of high product costs to customers, the effects of high net customer attrition, conservation, inflation and other factors. Our liquidity was impacted by the volatility in wholesale price of home heating oil and a significant increase in the cost of our product. The significant increase in product costs resulted in higher operating expenses for the year, such as credit card fees, bad debt expense, and vehicle fuels, and also led to higher hedging costs for certain of our hedging instruments. Our seasonal working capital needs increased to fund these higher product costs and the cash required to finance our operating activities increased over $100 million. Further, our credit availability (as defined in our Credit Agreement) was reduced as the Company used a portion of its cash flow to finance these higher working capital needs and to satisfy margin requirements on our hedged inventory positions. During fiscal 2022, the Company accessed $100 million of its seasonal working capital line, which increased the revolving credit facility to a total of $400 million to finance its additional working capital needs, which resulted in an increase in interest expense. The Company believes that it may experience a slowing of collection of our accounts receivable over the next few months as our customers respond to higher product prices.
Capital requirements, at least in the near term, are expected to be provided by cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand as of September 30, 2022 ($14.6 million) or a combination thereof. To the extent future capital requirements exceed cash on hand plus cash flows from operating activities, we anticipate that working capital will be financed by our revolving credit facility, as discussed below, and from subsequent seasonal reductions in inventory and accounts receivable. As of September 30, 2022, we had accounts receivable of $138.3 million of which $82.9 million is due from residential customers and $55.4 million is due from commercial customers. Our ability to borrow from our bank group is based in part on the aging of these accounts receivable. If these balances do not meet the eligibility tests as found in our sixth amended and restated credit agreement, our ability to borrow will be reduced and our anticipated cash flow from operating activities will also be reduced. As of September 30, 2022, we had $20.3 million borrowings under our revolving credit facility, $165.0 million
outstanding under our term loan, and $5.1 million in letters of credit outstanding. We did not have to provide collateral for our hedge positions with the bank group.
On July 6, 2022, the Company refinanced its credit facility agreement and entered into a new sixth amended and restated revolving credit facility agreement with a bank syndicate of ten participants. Under the terms of the sixth amended and restated credit agreement, we are required to maintain at all times Availability (borrowing base less amounts borrowed and letters of credit issued) of 12.5% of the maximum facility size and a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.1. We are also required to maintain a senior secured leverage ratio that cannot be more than 3.0 as of June 30th or September 30th, and no more than 5.5 as of December 31st or March 31st. As of September 30, 2022, Availability, as defined in the sixth amended and restated revolving credit facility agreement, was $189.4 million and we were in compliance with the fixed charge coverage ratio and senior secured leverage ratio.
Maintenance capital expenditures for fiscal 2023 are estimated to be approximately $10.6 million, excluding the capital requirements for leased fleet which we currently estimate to be $10.7 million. In addition, we plan to invest approximately $2.2 million in our propane operations. Distributions for fiscal 2023, at the current quarterly level of $0.1525 per unit, would result in aggregate payments of approximately $21.8 million to Common Unit holders, $1.2 million to our General Partner (including $1.1 million of incentive distribution as provided for in our Partnership Agreement) and $1.1 million to management pursuant to the management incentive compensation plan which provides for certain members of management to receive incentive distributions that would otherwise be payable to the General Partner. Under the terms of our sixth amended and restated revolving credit facility agreement, our term loan is repayable in quarterly payments of $4.1 million. We deposited $1.0 million in September 2022 for fiscal 2023 into our captive insurance company. Further, subject to any additional liquidity issues or concerns resulting from wholesale price volatility, we intend to continue to repurchase Common Units pursuant to our unit repurchase plan, as amended from time to time, and seek attractive acquisition opportunities within the Availability constraints of our revolving credit facility and funding resources.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no special purpose entities or off balance sheet debt.
Long-term contractual obligations, except for our long-term debt and New England Teamsters and Trucking Industry Pension Fund withdrawal obligations and operating leases liabilities, are not recorded in our consolidated balance sheet. Non-cancelable purchase obligations are obligations we incur during the normal course of business, based on projected needs. The Company had no capital lease obligations as of September 30, 2022.
The table below summarizes the payment schedule of our contractual obligations at September 30, 2022 (in thousands):
(a)Reflects payments due of debt existing as of September 30, 2022, considering the terms of our sixth amended and restated credit agreement. (See Note 13 - Long-Term Debt and Bank Facility Borrowings)
(b)Represents various operating leases for office space, trucks, vans and other equipment with third parties. Maturities of operating leases are presented undiscounted. (See Note 16 - Leases)
(c)Represents non-cancelable commitments as of September 30, 2022 for operations such as customer related invoice and statement processing, voice and data phone/computer services, real estate taxes on leased property and our undiscounted future payment obligations to the New England Teamsters and Trucking Industry Pension Fund.
(d)Reflects interest obligations on our term loan due July 2027 and the unused commitment fee on the revolving credit facility.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for discussion regarding the impact of accounting standards that were recently issued but not yet effective, on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policy and Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles requires management to establish accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company evaluates its policies and estimates on an on-going basis. A change in any of these critical accounting policies and estimates could have a material effect on the results of operations. The Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements may differ based upon different estimates and assumptions. The Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe the following are our critical accounting policies and estimates:
Critical Accounting Policy
Fair Values of Derivatives
FASB ASC 815-10-05, Derivatives and Hedging, requires that derivative instruments be recorded at fair value and included in the consolidated balance sheet as assets or liabilities. The Company has elected not to designate its commodity derivative instruments as hedging instruments under this guidance, and therefore the change in fair value of those derivative instruments are recognized in our statement of operations.
We have established the fair value of our derivative instruments using estimates determined by our counterparties and subsequently evaluated them internally using established index prices and other sources. These values are based upon, among other things, future prices, volatility, time-to-maturity value and credit risk. The estimate of fair value we report in our financial statements changes as these estimates are revised to reflect actual results, changes in market conditions, or other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Self-Insurance Liabilities
We currently self-insure a portion of workers’ compensation, auto, general liability and medical claims. We establish and periodically evaluate self-insurance liabilities based upon expectations as to what our ultimate liability may be for outstanding claims using developmental factors based upon historical claim experience, including frequency, severity, demographic factors and other actuarial assumptions, supplemented with the support of a qualified third-party actuary. As of September 30, 2022, we had approximately $79.9 million of self-insurance liabilities. The ultimate resolution of these claims could differ materially from the assumptions used to calculate the self-insurance liabilities, which could have a material adverse effect on results of operations.