Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We are currently seeking business opportunities in the area of fire suppression technologies. This may be in the form of licensing agreement(s), merger(s), acquisition(s), or business combination transactions after which the Company would cease to be a “shell” company.
Currently, the Company is in tentative discussions to enter into a licensing agreement with Sparx Technologies, LLC, a Wyoming Limited Liability Company, referred to herein as, “Sparx”, whereas Sparx would license various patented technology to the Company in exchange for some type of consideration, whether it be shares, cash, or some combination of the two. Such discussions by and between the Company and Sparx are in ongoing, and may not come to fruition. There is no guarantee that the Company and Sparx will enter into a business combination, an arrangement, or an agreement of any kind.
Sparx Technologies, LLC may be deemed to be a related party, as it is owned and controlled by our Chief Executive Officer and Director Cassandra DeNunzio.
We are an emerging growth company (EGC) that is exempt from certain financial disclosure and governance requirements for up to five years as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (the JOBS Act), that eases restrictions on the sale of securities; and increases the number of shareholders a company must have before becoming subject to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commissions (SEC’s) reporting and disclosure rules.
Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through a business combination or opportunity of some kind, whether it be via a licensing agreement, acquisition, merger, or material agreement with another entity, each of which would be intended to result in us ceasing to be a shell company.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(2) of the Jobs Act, that allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
We do not currently engage in any business activities that provide cash flows.
At this time, we are entirely reliant upon cash contributions made by our officer and directors to pay for any and all expenses.
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring costs related to:
(i) filing of Exchange Act reports (legal, accounting and auditing fees) in the amount of approximately $5,000; and
(ii) costs relating to consummating a business combination or opportunity of some type, which we cannot accurately forecast the cost of with any level of specificity.
- 5 -
We believe we will be able to meet the costs of filing Exchange Act reports during the next 12 months through use of funds to be loaned to us or invested in us by Jeffrey DeNunzio and Cassandra DeNunzio, our Directors.
There is no guarantee that such additional funds will be made available to us or on terms that are favorable to us. If we enter into a business combination, or agreement of some kind, with another company, we may require funding from our Directors and or we may need to discover alternate forms of funding from external sources. There is always the possibility that the Company is unable to secure additional funding to further its business agenda.
We have no cash on hand, negative working capital, a stockholder deficit, and have no source of revenues. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Going forward, we will be devoting our efforts to exploring business opportunities in the area of fire suppression technologies. As mentioned previously, this may be in the form of licensing agreement(s), merger(s), acquisition(s), or business combination transactions after which the Company would cease to be a “shell” company.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to develop additional sources of capital or by furthering our business agenda outlined above.
Liquidity
We have no known demands or commitments and are not aware of any events or uncertainties as of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 that will result in or that are reasonably likely to materially increase or decrease our current liquidity.
Capital Resources.
We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.