Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations describes the principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition, and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2021. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements, and the notes thereto set forth in Part I, Item 8 of this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
Shapeways is a leading digital manufacturer combining high quality, flexible, on-demand manufacturing with purpose-built proprietary software to offer customers an end-to-end digital manufacturing platform on which they can rapidly transform digital designs into physical products. Our manufacturing platform offers customers access to high quality manufacturing from start to finish through automation, innovation, and digitization. Our proprietary software, wide selection of materials and technologies, and global supply chain lower manufacturing barriers and accelerate delivery of manufactured parts from prototypes to finished end parts. We combine deep digital manufacturing know-how and software expertise to deliver high quality, flexible on-demand digital manufacturing to a range of customers, from project-focused engineers to large enterprises. Digital manufacturing is the complete digitization of the end-to-end manufacturing process that enables the transition of a digital file to a physical product.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on many factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including the following:
Commercial Launch of New Offerings
We plan to launch several new manufacturing technologies, materials, and finishes. Prior to commercialization, Shapeways must complete testing and manufacturing ramp-up either in house or through our network of third-party manufacturing partners. Any delays in the successful completion of these steps or the results of testing may impact our ability or the pace at which we will generate revenue from these offerings. Even if we successfully introduces these new offerings, there is no assurance that they will be accepted by the broader market.
In 2020, we launched our software under the brand “Powered by Shapeways” to a limited set of design customers, and launched the first phase of this offering under the brand Otto in the fourth quarter of 2021, to third-party manufacturers. This phase of the rollout involves activities such as creating awareness of the new offering and ensuring the software can interoperate with systems used by potential customers. We plan to roll out further phases of this software over the next two years. We believe that offering this software to other manufacturers will enable us to generate future revenue. However, we have not derived significant revenue from sales of its software to date, and may never be successful in doing so. We expect to further commercialize our software, which we expect will provide software customers with an end-to-end software for their manufacturing operations and to expand the manufacturing capabilities that they offer to their customers.
Adoption of Our Digital Manufacturing Solutions
We believe that the market is shifting toward digitization of manufacturing and approaching an inflection point in the overall adoption of digital manufacturing solutions. We believe that we are well-positioned
to take advantage of this market opportunity across an array of industries due to its platform that combines high-quality, flexible, on-demand manufacturing with purpose-built proprietary software. We expect that our results of operations, including revenue and gross margins, will fluctuate for the foreseeable future as businesses continue to shift away from traditional manufacturing processes towards digital manufacturing. The degree to which current and potential customers recognize the benefits of the digitization of manufacturing and the use our solutions in particular will affect our financial results.
Pricing, Product Cost and Margins
To date, the majority of our revenue has been generated by the manufacturing and sales of additively-manufactured end parts.
Software and manufacturing pricing may vary due to market-specific supply and demand dynamics, customer size, and other factors. Sales of certain products, such as software, have, or are expected to have, higher gross margins than others. As a result, our financial performance depends, in part, on the mix of offerings Shapeways sells during a given period. In addition, we are subject to price competition, and its ability to compete in key markets will depend on the success of its investments in its offerings, on cost improvements as well as on its ability to efficiently and reliably introduce cost-effective digital manufacturing solutions for our customers.
Continued Investment and Innovation
We believe that we are a leader in digital manufacturing solutions, offering high-quality, flexible, on-demand manufacturing coupled with purpose-built proprietary software. Our performance is significantly dependent on the investment we make in our software development efforts and in new digital manufacturing technologies. It is essential that we continually identify and respond to rapidly evolving customer requirements, develop and introduce innovative new offerings, enhance existing solutions and generate customer demand for our offerings. We believe that investment in our digital manufacturing solutions will contribute to long-term revenue growth, but may adversely affect near-term profitability.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The majority of our revenue results from the sales of products that we manufacture for customers, which is designated as “Direct Sales”. This revenue is recognized upon shipment of the manufactured product to the customer.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 23% and 25% of our revenue was designated as “Marketplace Sales”. This revenue is from our customers who sell their products that we manufacture for them through our e-commerce website. Sales through this channel are subject to our regular manufacturing fees and also a 3.5% fee on any price markup the customer includes on their product. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
We also expect to increase software revenue over time. Software revenue is recognized (i) upon implementation for implementation fees, (ii) ratably over the term of the agreement for licensing fees, and (iii) upon order processing for the revenue-sharing component of our arrangements. To date, we have not recognized a material amount of revenue from software since this product offering has been limited to only design partners as we developed the complete product offering. In October 2021, the Company publicly launched a limited version of the software to expand our customer base.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists of the cost to produce manufactured products and related services. Cost of revenue includes machine costs, material costs, rent costs, personnel costs, and other costs directly associated
with manufacturing operations in our factories as well as amounts paid to our third-party contract manufacturers and suppliers. Our cost of revenue also includes depreciation and amortization of equipment, cost of spare or replacement machine parts, machine service costs, shipping and handling costs, and some overhead costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars in the future.
We intend to further commercialize our software offering and if we generate material revenue from sales of our software offering, we will separately recognize the related cost of revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit and gross margin are, or may be, influenced by a number of factors, including:
•
Market conditions that may impact our pricing;
•
Product mix changes between established manufacturing product offerings and new manufacturing product offerings;
•
Mix changes between products we manufacture in house and through outsourced manufacturers;
•
Our cost structure, including rent, materials costs, machine costs, labor rates, and other manufacturing operations costs; and
•
Our level of investment in new technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for individuals working in our sales and marketing departments, third party consultants, marketing costs such as search engine marketing and search engine optimization and other advertising costs, as well as personnel-related expenses associated with our executive, finance and accounting, legal, human resources, and supply chain functions, as well as professional fees for legal, audit, accounting and other consulting service along with administrative costs of doing business which include, but are not limited to, rent, utilities, and insurance.
We expect our sales and marketing costs will increase on an absolute-dollar basis as we expand our headcount, initiate new marketing campaigns, and continue to roll out future phases of our software offering.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase on an absolute-dollar basis as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses necessary to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange and related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, as well as increased expenses for insurance (including director and officer insurance), investor relations, and other administrative and professional services. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs as we hire additional personnel and enhance our infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of the business.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related personnel expenses, consulting and contractor costs, and SaaS, data center, and other technology costs. We expect research and development costs will increase on an absolute dollar basis over time as we continue to invest in our software offering.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liability is a non-cash gain or loss impacted by the fair value of the Private Warrants assumed pursuant to the Merger.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with our term loan and our bridge loan. At the Closing of the Business Combination, the Company repaid and terminated the term loan in full. Immediately prior to the completion of the Business Combination, the bridge loan was converted into shares of common stock of Legacy Shapeways. Shapeways had no interest-bearing debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
We file consolidated income tax returns in the United States and in various state jurisdictions. Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Where applicable, we record a valuation allowance to reduce any deferred tax assets that it determines will not be realizable in the future.
Due to our cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. and state deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $33.6 million and $31.8 million, respectively, representing an increase of $1.8 million, or 6%. The increase in total revenue was primarily attributable to a 9% higher average price per product, partially offset by a 3% decrease in products shipped. We have continued to optimize our pricing algorithm and mix of technology offerings, resulting in this higher average price per product.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $17.7 million and $17.9 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $0.2 million, or 1%. The decrease in cost of revenue was driven primarily by a 2% increase in cost per item produced, partially offset by a 3% decrease in part production.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $17.6 million and $10.8 million, respectively, representing an increase of $6.8 million, or 63%. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses resulted from increases to personnel cost, office expense, audit and
other spending related to becoming a public company, stock-based compensation due to vesting acceleration of certain executives, marketing spend such as branding and search engine marketing to drive growth, and advertising.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $6.3 million and $5.6 million, respectively, representing an increase of $0.7 million, or 12%. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase in personnel.
Debt Forgiveness
Debt forgiveness for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.0 million, relating to our Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) loan. We had no debt forgiveness during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $0.4 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was a gain of $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had no change in fair value of warrant liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We received resolution of a tax assessment charge for 2019 in respect of our Dutch subsidiary, resulting in a refund during the year ended December 31, 2021. We had minimal income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We have provided a valuation allowance for all of its deferred tax assets as a result of our historical net losses in the jurisdictions in which we operate. We continue to assess our future taxable income by jurisdiction based on our recent historical operating results, the expected timing of reversal of temporary differences, various tax planning strategies that we may be able to enact in future periods, the impact of potential operating changes on our business and our forecast results from operations in future periods based on available information at the end of each reporting period. To the extent that we are able to reach the conclusion that deferred tax assets are realizable based on any combination of the above factors in a single, or multiple, taxing jurisdictions, a reversal of the related portion of our existing valuation allowances may occur.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
In addition to our results determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), we believe that Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use this non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that this non-GAAP financial information, when reviewed collectively with our GAAP results, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding debt forgiveness, interest expense, net of interest income, income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, change in fair value of warrant liabilities, and other non-operating gains and losses.
We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA provide an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends because we eliminate the effect of financing and capital expenditures and provides investors with a means to compare its financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses from operations in each of its annual reporting periods since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had $79.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $0.1 in restricted cash. Up until the Business Combination, we primarily obtained cash to fund its operations through preferred stock offerings and debt instruments.
Since inception through closing of the Business Combination, we have received cumulative net proceeds from the sale of our preferred and common stock of approximately $110 million to fund our operations.
In October 2018, we entered into a five-year, $5.0 million term loan. Interest was calculated using the Wall Street Journal Prime rate plus 25 basis points, payable monthly in arrears. We paid off this term loan in connection with the closing of the Business Combination.
In June 2019, we received a $5.0 million bridge loan from existing investors, which bore interest at 8% annually. The loan converted into our Series E Preferred Stock at a price per share equal to the Series E liquidation preference immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination.
In May 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $2.0 million under the PPP. The PPP, established as part of the CARES Act, provided for loans to qualifying businesses. The PPP loan has been forgiven in full, and we are evaluating whether to repay the loan. If repaid, we will reverse the previously recognized gain on debt forgiveness.
In September 2021, we consummated the Business Combination which provided gross proceeds resulting from the Merger and PIPE Investment of approximately $28.1 million and $75.0 million, respectively, for a total of approximately $86.8 million in net proceeds after transaction costs.
Our growth strategy includes exploring strategic partnerships. On March 26, 2021, we entered into a non-binding Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) with Desktop Metal, pursuant to which Desktop Metal agreed to invest $20.0 million in the PIPE Investment. Upon consummation of this investment, we became obligated to purchase $20.0 million of equipment, materials and services from Desktop Metal. In conjunction with these obligations, we and Desktop Metal agreed to develop a strategic partnership. As of December 31, 2021, we paid $4.5 million to Desktop Metal for equipment, materials and services received, and placed purchase orders for another $15.5 million of equipment, materials and services. We have no further obligations under the MOU.
We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs for the twelve months following the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements included within this Report. Our ability to transition to more profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of revenue adequate to support our evolving cost structure. We expect to continue to incur net losses in connection with its ongoing activities, particularly as we invest in hiring, growth-related operating expenditures, and capital expenditures in respect of new digital manufacturing technologies. Additionally, we may engage in future acquisitions. If events or circumstances occur such that we do not meet our operating plan as expected, we will be required to reduce corporate overhead or other operating expenses, which could have an adverse impact on our ability to achieve intended business objectives or obtain additional financing. We believe that we have the ability to enact cost savings measures to preserve capital if necessary. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in implementing our business objectives, however, we believe that external sources of funding will be available in such circumstances.
Cash Flow Summary for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth a summary of cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $8.1 million and $1.6 million, respectively. The increase of $6.5 million in cash used in operating activities was due to the decrease in net loss excluding non-cash expenses and gains of $4.2 million and the overall decrease in net operating assets and liabilities of $2.3 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4.0 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The increase of $3.9 million in cash used in investing activities was due to increased capital expenditures for property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $83.3 million and $0.7 million, respectively. The increase of $82.5 million in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the effect of the Merger (net of transaction costs) of $86.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by an increase in repayments of loans payable of $2.3 million and a decrease in proceeds from loans payable of $2.0 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
See Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report for further discussion of our commitments and contingencies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements and does not utilize any “structured debt,” “special purpose” or similar unconsolidated entities for liquidity or financing purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of judgment in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We periodically evaluate the judgments and estimates used for our critical accounting policies to ensure that such judgments and estimates are reasonable for our interim and year-end reporting requirements. These judgments and estimates are based on our historical experience (where available), current trends and information available from other sources, as appropriate. If different conditions result from those assumptions used in its judgments, the results could be materially different from our estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies requires significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from sale of products (both direct sales and marketplace sales) upon transfer of control, which is generally at the point of shipment.
Our software contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple software elements to the customer. Revenue from sale of software may be recognized over the life of the associated software contract or as services are performed, depending on the nature of the services being provided. Judgment is required to determine the separate performance obligations present in a given contract, which we have concluded are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. We use standalone selling price (“SSP”) to allocate revenue to each performance obligation. Significant judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation in a contract.
We provide a platform for shop owners to sell their products to customers through our marketplace website. We receive a 3.5% markup fee from the shop owner upon the sale of any products through the marketplace. We handle the financial transaction, manufacturing, distribution and customer service on behalf of the shop owners. We are responsible for billing the customer in this arrangement and transmitting the applicable fees to the shop owner. We assess whether we are responsible for providing the actual product or service as a principal, or for arranging for the product or service to be provided by the third party as an agent. Judgment is applied to determine whether we are the principal or the agent by evaluating whether we have control of the product
or service prior to it being transferred to the customer. The principal versus agent assessment is performed at the performance obligation level. Indicators that we consider include whether we have the primary responsibility for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified product or service to the customer and whether we have inventory risk prior to transferring the product or service to the customer. We have the responsibility to fulfill the promise to provide the specific good or service on behalf of the shop owners to the customer. In addition, we have inventory risk before the specific good or service is transferred to a customer. As such, we are deemed the principal and shall recognize revenue on a gross basis for the price we charge to the shop owner for each product or service.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have applied the fair value recognition provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718 Compensation-Stock Compensation to account for the stock-based compensation for employees and non-employees. We recognize compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees and non-employees based on estimated fair value of the award on the date of grant.
Prior to the Business Combination, the estimated fair value of our common shares has historically been determined by a third party appraisal. Subsequent to the Business Combination, we determine the fair value of the common stock based on the closing market price on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of options granted which requires the use of subjective assumptions that could materially impact the estimation of fair value and related compensation expense to be recognized. One of these assumptions includes the expected volatility of our stock price. Developing this assumption requires the use of judgment. We, both prior to and after the Merger, lacks historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of representative companies from the additive manufacturing industry. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment as we do not have sufficient historical stock option activity data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term of stock options granted to employees and non-employees. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid and do not expect to pay cash dividends. The risk-free interest rate used for each grant is an interpolated rate to match the term assumption based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve as of the valuation date.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB’s ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The fair value of the Private Warrants and Sponsor Warrants were estimated using a Binomial Lattice Model.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of Shapeways’ consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.