Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Shelter Acquisition Corporation I The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on December 11, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“business combination”). While we may pursue a business combination target in any stage of its corporate evolution or in any industry or sector, we currently intend to concentrate on identifying businesses that provide technologically innovative solutions to the real estate industry, broadly defined as “PropTech.”
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
On July 2, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class A common stock”), and one-half of one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”), each whole Public Warrant exercisable into one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $200,000,000.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Units, we consummated the sale of 6,250,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, to the Sponsor in a Private Placement generating gross proceeds of $6,250,000.
On July 14, 2021, we issued an additional 2,164,744 Units in connection with the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $21,647,440. Simultaneously with the closing of the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option, we sold an additional 432,949 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, to the Sponsor in the Private Placements generating gross proceeds of $432,949.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on July 2, 2021, and the partial exercise of the over-allotment option on July 14, 2021, a total of $221,647,440 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and pursuant to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, together with certain of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants in the Private Placements, was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 18 months from the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we have not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from December 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering and placed in the Trust Account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,936,302 which was comprised of general and administrative expenses of $918,124, franchise tax expense of $200,050, income from investments held in Trust Account of $7,353, other expense relating to fair value exceeding amount paid for warrants of $387,728, unrealized gain on change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $9,138,360, and offering costs allocated to warrants of $703,509.
For the period from December 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $970 which was comprised of general and administrative expenses of $970.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $905,106 in our operating bank account, and working capital of $396,726.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsor of $25,000, to cover certain offering costs, for the founder shares, the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $240,000. The promissory note from the Sponsor was paid in full upon closing of the Initial Public Offering. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placements, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placements not held in the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Going Concern
We have until January 2, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 2, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
We have agreed to pay the Sponsor or one or more of its affiliates, commencing on the effective date of the registration statement for our Initial Public Offering, a total of $20,000 per month for office space and administrative and support services. Upon completion of a Business Combination or liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the founder shares) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to the registration rights agreement requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to shares of Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities. In addition, these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act.
Underwriting Agreement
On July 2, 2021, we paid a fixed underwriting discount of $4,000,000, which was calculated as two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering. On July 14, 2021, the underwriters partially executed their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,164,744 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, and were paid a fixed underwriting discount of $432,949.
Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and over-allotment held in the Trust Account, or $7,757,660, upon the completion of our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of our 22,164,744 Class A common stock sold as part of the Units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Class A common stock has been classified outside of permanent equity.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risk. We evaluate all of our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value on the grant date and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period.
We account for the 17,765,321 warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option) and Private Placements as derivative liabilities in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815. Accordingly, the we classify the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of Private Placement Warrants are estimated using an internal valuation model. The valuation model utilizes inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. The 17,765,321 shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of our outstanding warrants were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. This guidance is effective as of January 1, 2022 (early adoption is permitted effective January 1, 2021). We are currently evaluating the effect the updated standard will have on our financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosure.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the principal executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.