ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations together with our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Forward Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Report.
Overview of the Company
Established in 2014 and headquartered in Denver, Colorado, Medicine Man Technologies, Inc., a cannabis consumer packaged goods company and retailer. The Company’s focus is on building the premier, vertically integrated cannabis company by taking operating system to other states where it can develop a differentiated leadership position. The Company is anchored by a high-performance culture that combines customer-centric thinking and data science to test, measure, and drive decisions and outcomes.
Results of Operations - Consolidated
The following table sets forth the Company’s selected consolidated financial results for the periods, and as of the dates, indicated. The (i) consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and (ii) consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 have been derived from and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes presented in Item 8 of this report.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and on a going-concern basis that contemplates continuity of operations and realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in ordinary course of business.
Revenue segments
The Company has consolidated financial statements across its operating businesses with operating segments of retail, wholesale and other.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $108,420,239 including (i) retail sales of $73,723,654 (ii) wholesale sales of $34,471,447 and (iii) other operating revenues of $225,138, compared to revenues of $24,000,852 including (i) retail sales of $3,858,613, (ii) wholesale of $18,647,780, and (iii) other operating revenues of $1,494,459 during the year ended December 31, 2020 representing an increase of $84,419,387 or 352%. This increase was due to increased sale of our products as well as growth through acquisition. In 2021, we acquired eight new retail dispensaries and one cultivation facility. Also, 2021 was the first full year of retail revenue from the six retail locations acquired in December 2020, which contributed to the revenue growth in our retail and wholesale segments. The decrease in other operating revenue in 2021 was largely due to decreased service offerings and consulting revenue and increased investment in our retail and wholesale segments.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of services for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $59,066,545 compared to cost of services of $17,226,486 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $41,840,059 or 243%. This increase was due to increased sales of our products as well as growth through acquisition. As the Company was able to realize operating leverage and synergies, the increase in cost of goods and services did not increase consistently with the revenue increase.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $38,944,528, compared to operating expenses of $29,677,305 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $9,267,223 or 31%. This increase was due to increased selling, general and administrative expenses, professional service fees, salaries, benefits and related employment costs and non-cash, stock-based compensation.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $8,506,128, compared to other income, net of $2,587,069 during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $5,919,059 or 229%. The increase in other expense, net was due to increase in interest payments due to various loans offset by the gain on derivative liability.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the factors discussed above, we generated net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $14,519,130, compared to net loss of $19,416,761 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operation by Segment
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues for retail were $73,723,654 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $69,865,041 or 1,811% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in retail revenues was primarily driven by acquisitions of dispensaries in Colorado.
Revenues for wholesale were $34,471,447 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $15,823,667 or 85% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in wholesale revenue was primarily driven by acquisition of cultivation facilities and increase in sales of products to the market.
Revenues for other were $225,138 for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1,233,907 or 85% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other revenue was primarily driven by the focus from consulting to retail and wholesale.
Drivers of Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company derives its revenue from three revenue streams: Retail which sells finished goods sourced internally and externally to the end consumer in retail stores; Wholesale which is the cultivation of flower and biomass sold internally and externally and the manufacturing of biomass into distillate for integration into externally developed products, such as edibles and internally developed products such as vapes and cartridges under the Purplebee’s brand; Other which includes other income and expenses, such as, licensing and consulting services, facility design services, facility management services, the Company’s Three A Light™ publication, and corporate operations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is revenue less cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold includes costs directly attributable to product sales and includes amounts paid for finished goods such as flower, edibles, and concentrates, as well as manufacturing and cultivation labor, packaging, supplies and overhead such as rent, utilities and other related costs. Cannabis costs are affected by market supply. Gross margin measures our gross profit as a percentage of revenue.
Total Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses other than the costs of goods sold consists of selling costs to support customer relations, marketing and branding activities. It also includes an investment in the corporate infrastructure required to support the Company’s ongoing business.
Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures and do not have standardized definitions under GAAP. The following information provides reconciliations for the supplemental non-GAAP financial measures, presented herein to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The Company has provided the non-GAAP financial measures, which are not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP, as supplemental information and in addition to the financial measures that are calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. These supplemental non-GAAP financial measures are presented because the Company believes it better explains the results of its core business. Management has evaluated the financial results both including and excluding the adjusted items and believe that the supplemental non-GAAP financial measures presented provide additional perspective and insight when analyzing the core operating performance of the business. These supplemental non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or as an alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with the GAAP financial measures presented.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had total current liabilities of $45,263,179 and $12,360,386, respectively. The increase in current liabilities is driven by the derivative liability associated with the Investor Notes as well as from general growth of the Company. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $106,400,216 and $1,231,235, respectively to meet its current obligations. The Company had working capital of $78,649,076 as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $85,012,097 as compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily driven by increase in cash from the Investor Notes issued on December 7, 2021.
The Company is an early-stage growth company, generating cash from revenues and capital raise. Cash is being reserved primarily for capital expenditures, facility improvements and strategic investment opportunities. The Company anticipates overall revenue to increase in 2022 due to acquisitions and adult-use becoming legalized in New Mexico on April 1, 2022. It is possible the Company will seek additional external financing to meet capital needs.
Cash Flows
Cashed used in Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
The Company’s cash provided by operating activities is driven by increase in sales from acquisitions. Our use of cash from investing activities is driven by acquisition of businesses and property, plant and equipment for existing entities. Our cash provided by financing activities is mainly from proceeds from our credit facility, the Investor Notes and the issuance of shares of Preferred Stock.
CONTRACTUAL CASH OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
The following table quantifies the Company’s future contractual obligation as of December 31, 2021:
(a) - This amount excludes $48,477,789 of unamortized debt discount and $8,289,743 of unamortized debt issuance costs. See Note 11 Debt
The Company anticipates using funds from operating activities and if needed, future capital raise to support contractual cash obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we were not party to any off-balance sheet arrangement that had or was reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, cash requirements or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company believes that of its significant accounting policies (see Note 2 to Financial Statements), the ones that may involve a higher degree of uncertainty, judgment and complexity are revenue recognition, stock based compensation, derivative instruments, income taxes, goodwill and commitments and contingencies are the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances
Our revenue recognition policy is significant because the amount and timing of revenue is a key component of our results of operations. Certain criteria are required to be met in order to recognize revenue. If these criteria are not met, then the associated revenue is deferred until is the criteria are met. A contract liability is recorded when consideration is received in advance of the delivery of goods or services. We identify revenue contracts upon acceptance from the customer when such contract represents a single performance obligation to sell our products.
We have three main revenue streams: (i) retail sales, (ii) wholesale sales, and (iii) other revenues from revenues from consulting, licensing, and other miscellaneous sources.
The Company’s retail and wholesale sales are recorded at the time that control of the products is transferred to customers. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. Based on the assessment of control indicators, our sales are generally recognized when products are delivered to customers.
The Company’s other revenue, typically from licensing and consulting services, is recognized when our obligations to our client are fulfilled which is determined when milestones in the contract are achieved. The Company’s revenue from seminar fees is related to one-day seminars and is recognized as earned upon the completion of the seminar. We also recognize expense reimbursement from clients as revenue for expenses incurred during certain jobs.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for share-based payments pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718, Stock Compensation and, accordingly, we record compensation expense for share-based awards based upon an assessment of the grant date fair value for stock and restricted stock awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Our stock compensation expense for stock options is recognized over the vesting period of the award or expensed immediately under ASC 718 when stock or options are awarded for previous or current service without further recourse.
Income Taxes
ASC 740, Income Taxes requires the use of the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the asset and liability method of ASC 740, the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Our deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the future economic benefit arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized. The goodwill arising from our acquisitions is attributable to the value of the potential expanded market opportunity with new customers. Intangible assets have either an identifiable or indefinite useful life. Intangible assets with identifiable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their economic or legal life, whichever is shorter. We amortizable intangible assets consist of licensing agreements, product licenses and registrations, and intellectual property or trade secrets. Their estimated useful lives range from 3 to 15 years.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived assets are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment testing unless circumstances dictate more frequent assessments. We perform an annual impairment assessment for goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than the carrying amount. Goodwill impairment testing is a two-step process performed at the reporting unit level. Step one compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by considering both the income approach and market approaches. The fair values calculated under the income approach and market approaches are weighted based on circumstances surrounding the reporting unit. Under the income approach, we determine fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit, which are discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. For the discount rate, we rely on the capital asset pricing model approach, which includes an assessment of the risk-free interest rate, the rate of return from publicly traded stocks, our risk relative to the overall market, our size and industry and other risks specific to us. Other significant assumptions used in the income approach include the terminal value, growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approaches use key multiples from guideline businesses that are comparable and are traded on a public market. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, then the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. Step two calculates the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible net assets of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as calculated in step one. In this step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the reporting unit’s assets and liabilities in a hypothetical purchase price allocation as if the reporting unit had been acquired on that date. If the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, strategic plans, and future market conditions, among others. There can be no assurance that our estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the goodwill impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Changes in assumptions and estimates could cause us to perform an impairment test prior to scheduled annual impairment tests.
We performed our annual fair value assessment on our subsidiaries with material goodwill and intangible asset amounts on their respective balance sheets at December 31, 2021, , and determined that no impairment exists.