Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a medical aesthetics company uniquely centered on becoming the leader of transformative treatments and technologies focused on progressing the art of plastic surgery. We were founded to provide greater choices to board-certified plastic surgeons and patients in need of medical aesthetics products. We have developed a broad portfolio of products with technologically differentiated characteristics, supported by independent laboratory testing and strong clinical trial outcomes. We sell our breast implants in the US. for augmentation procedures exclusively to board-certified and board-admissible plastic surgeons and tailor our customer service offerings to their specific needs, which we believe helps secure their loyalty and confidence. In 2020, we also began to sell our breast implants in Japan through a distributor partner. In March 2022 we received approval from Health Canada to sell our smooth round HSC and HSC+ breast implants in Canada and plan to commence commercial sales through a distribution partner. We sell our breast tissue expanders for reconstruction procedures predominantly to hospitals and surgery centers, and our BIOCORNEUM scar management products to plastic surgeons, dermatologists and other specialties.
As discussed in Recent developments below, we completed the sale of the miraDry business on June 10, 2021, and as a result the miraDry business met the criteria to be reported as discontinued operations. Therefore, we are reporting the historical results of miraDry, including the results of operations, cash flows, and related assets and liabilities, as discontinued operations for all periods presented herein through the date of the Sale. Unless otherwise noted, the audited consolidated financial statements have all been revised to reflect continuing operations only. Following the Sale, we have one operating segment in continuing operations named Plastic Surgery, formerly known as Breast Products.
Our Plastic Surgery segment focuses on sales of our breast implants, tissue expanders and scar management products. We currently sell our products in the U.S. through a direct sales organization, which as of December 31, 2021, consisted of 65 employees, including 8 sales managers.
Recent developments
Acquisition of certain assets from AuraGen Aesthetics, LLC
On December 31, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with AuraGen Aesthetics LLC (“AuraGen”) pursuant to which the Company purchased substantially all of the assets of AuraGen relating to its fat grafting technology, including the AuraGen 1-2-3 with AuraClens system. Refer to Note 3 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Sale of the miraDry Business
On June 10, 2021, we completed the sale of the miraDry business (the “Sale”) to miraDry Acquisition Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Buyer”), an entity affiliated with 1315 Capital II, LP, as a result of our strategic decision to focus investment on the core Plastic Surgery segment, formerly known as Breast Products.
Prior to entering into the Purchase Agreement, in April 2020, in part as a result of the impact of COVID-19, we re-focused our miraDry business to drive bioTip utilization to our existing installed base. On December 31, 2020, we eliminated our separate miraDry U.S. salesforce and transitioned miraDry sales responsibility into the Plastic Surgery Business Development team. Refer to Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Health Canada Approval
On March 23, 2022, we received approval from Health Canada to begin commercialization of its smooth round HSC and HSC+ silicone gel breast implants in Canada. Following this approval, we intend to begin commercialization in Canada with our distribution partner, Kai Aesthetics, Inc.
COVID-19 Pandemic
As an aesthetics company, surgical procedures involving our breast products are susceptible to local and national government restrictions, such as social distancing, vaccination requirements, “shelter in place” orders and business closures, due to the economic and logistical impacts these measures have on consumer demand as well as the practitioners’ ability to administer such procedures. The inability or limited ability to perform such non-emergency procedures significantly harmed our revenues since the second quarter of 2020 and continued to harm our revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021. While many states have lifted certain restrictions on non-emergency procedures, we will likely continue to experience future harm to our revenues while existing or new restrictions remain in place. It is not possible to accurately predict the length or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the spread of any variants, or the timing for a broad and sustained ability to perform non-emergency procedures involving the Company’s products. We continue to monitor and assess new information related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets.
Further, the spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our workforce practices, and we may take further actions that we determine are in the best interests of our employees or as required by governments. The continued spread of COVID-19, or another infectious disease, could also result in delays or disruptions in our supply chain or adversely affect our manufacturing facilities and personnel. Further, trade and/or national security protection policies may be adjusted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as actions by governments that limit, restrict or prevent the movement of certain goods into a country and/or region.
The estimates used for, but not limited to, determining the collectability of accounts receivable, fair value of long-lived assets and goodwill, and sales returns liability required could be impacted by the pandemic. While the full impact of COVID-19 is unknown at this time, we have made appropriate estimates based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date. These estimates may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained.
Plastic Surgery Segment
Our primary products are silicone gel breast implants for use in breast augmentation and breast reconstruction procedures, which we offer in approximately 350 variations of shapes, sizes, fill volumes and textures. Our breast implants are primarily used in elective procedures that are generally performed on a cash-pay basis. Many of our proprietary breast implants incorporate one or more technologies that differentiate us from our competitors, including High-Strength Cohesive silicone gel and shell microtexturing. Our breast implants offer a desired balance between strength, shape retention and softness due to the silicone shell and High-Strength Cohesive silicone gel used in our implants. The microtexturing on Sientra’s implant shell is designed to reduce the incidence of malposition, rotation and capsular contracture.
Our breast implants were approved by the FDA in 2012, based on data we collected from our long-term clinical trial of our breast implants in 1,788 women across 36 investigational sites in the United States, which included 3,506 implants (approximately 53% of which were smooth and 47% of which were textured). Our clinical trial is the largest prospective, long-term safety and effectiveness pivotal study of breast implants in the United States and includes the largest magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI, cohort with 571 patients. The MRI cohort is a subset of study patients that underwent regular MRI screenings in addition to the other aspects of the clinical trial protocol prior to FDA approval. Post-approval, all patients in the long-term clinical trial are subject to serial MRI screenings as part of the clinical protocol. The clinical data we collected over a ten-year follow-up period demonstrated rupture rates, capsular contracture rates and reoperation rates that were comparable to or better than those of our competitors, at similar time points. In addition to our pivotal study, our clinical data is supported by our Continued Access Study of 2,497 women in the United States. We have also commissioned a number of bench studies run by independent laboratories that we believe further demonstrate the advantages of our breast implants over those of our competitors.
On August 9, 2016, we announced our collaboration with Vesta Intermediate Funding, Inc., or Vesta, a Lubrizol Lifesciences company, pursuant to which we worked with Vesta to establish a dedicated manufacturing facility for our breast implants. On March 14, 2017, we announced that we had executed a definitive manufacturing agreement with Vesta for the manufacture and supply of our breast implants and that we had submitted a site-change pre-market approval, or PMA, supplement to the FDA for the manufacturing of our PMA-approved breast implants by Vesta. Vesta began manufacturing our breast products in October 2017 in order to build our inventory pending FDA approval of the PMA supplement. On January 30, 2018, we announced that the FDA granted approval of the PMA supplement for our contract manufacturer, Vesta, to manufacture our silicone gel breast implants. In support of the move to the Vesta manufacturing facility, we also implemented new manufacturing process improvements which, in consultation with the FDA, required three (3) additional submissions. These submissions were approved by the FDA on January 10, 2018, January 19, 2018 and April 17, 2018. Further, on November 7, 2019, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Vesta pursuant to which we purchased certain assets and obtained a non-exclusive, royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable, assignable, sublicensable, and worldwide license to certain intellectual property owned by Vesta, or the Vesta Acquisition. With this acquisition, we obtained full control of the Class 3 breast implant manufacturing operation previously owned and operated by Vesta, which we believe allows us to gain access to implement manufacturing efficiencies and improve our demand planning to ultimately reduce our manufacturing costs in the future.
In addition, we offer BIOCORNEUM, an advanced silicone scar treatment, directly to physicians and the AlloX2, and Dermaspan lines of breast tissue expanders, as well as the Softspan line of general tissue expanders. On December 31, 2021 we acquired substantially all of the assets relating to the AuraGen 1-2-3 with AuraClens fat grafting system, which we believe will help us to grow our total addressable market in existing breast procedures while providing a platform for other aesthetic treatments outside of the breast.
We sell our breast implants for augmentation procedures exclusively to Plastic Surgeons, who are thought leaders in the medical aesthetics industry. Our tissue expanders which are used in breast reconstruction procedures are predominantly sold to hospitals and surgery centers who determine the admission privileges of surgeons performing breast reconstruction procedures. We address the specific needs of Plastic Surgeons through continued product innovation, expansion of our product portfolio and enhanced customer service offerings and a twenty year limited warranty that provides patients with cash reimbursement for certain out of pocket costs related to revision surgeries in a covered event, a lifetime no charge implant replacement program for covered ruptures, and the industry’s first policy of no charge replacement implants to patients who experience covered capsular contracture, double capsule and late-forming seroma events within twenty years of the initial implant procedure.
Components of Operating Results
Net Sales
Our net sales include sales of silicone gel breast implants, tissue expanders and BIOCORNEUM. We recognize revenue on breast implants and tissue expanders, net of sales discounts and estimated returns, as the customer has a standard six-month window to return purchased breast implants and tissue expanders. We defer the value of our service warranty revenue and recognize it once all performance obligations have been met.
We expect that, in the future, our net sales will fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to a variety of factors, including seasonality of breast augmentation procedures and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that aesthetic procedures are subject to seasonal fluctuation due to patients planning their procedures leading up to the summer season and in the period around the winter holiday season.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of raw material, labor, overhead, and variable manufacturing costs, reserve for product assurance warranties, royalty costs, excess and obsolete inventory reserves, and warehouse and other related costs.
With respect to our supplier contracts, all our products and raw materials are manufactured under contracts with fixed unit costs which can increase over time at specified amounts.
We provide an assurance and service warranty on our silicone gel breast implants. The estimated warranty costs are recorded at the time of sale. Costs related to our service warranty are recorded when expense is incurred related to meeting our performance obligations.
We expect our overall gross margin, which is calculated as net sales less cost of goods sold for a given period divided by net sales, to fluctuate in future periods primarily as a result of quantity of units sold, manufacturing price increases, the changing mix of products sold with different gross margins, warranty costs, overhead costs and targeted pricing programs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits, incentive compensation, stock-based compensation, consumer marketing, and travel for our sales, marketing and customer support personnel. Our sales and marketing expenses also include expenses for trade shows, our no-charge customer shipping program and no-charge product evaluation units, as well as educational and promotional activities. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to fluctuate in future periods as a result of headcount and timing of our marketing programs.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development, or R&D, expenses primarily consist of clinical expenses, product development costs, regulatory expenses, consulting services, outside research activities, quality control and other costs associated with the development of our products and compliance with Good Clinical Practices, or cGCP, requirements. R&D expenses also include related personnel and consultant compensation and stock-based compensation expense. We expense R&D costs as they are incurred. We expect our R&D expenses to vary as different development projects are initiated, including improvements to our existing products, expansions of our existing product lines, new product acquisitions and our clinical studies.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative, or G&A, expenses primarily consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits, incentive compensation and stock-based compensation for our executive, financial, legal, and administrative functions. Other G&A expenses include contingent consideration fair market value adjustments, bad debt expense, outside legal counsel and litigation expenses, independent auditors and other outside consultants, corporate insurance, facilities and information technologies expenses. We expect future G&A expenses to remain consistent with the current period, and we also expect to continue to incur G&A expenses in connection with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income, interest expense, changes in the fair value of the embedded derivative liability, gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan, and amortization of issuance costs associated with our Credit Agreements.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense consists of an estimate for income taxes based on the projected income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021. We operate in several tax jurisdictions and are subject to taxes in each jurisdiction in which we conduct business. To date, we have incurred cumulative net losses and maintain a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty surrounding realization of such assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about our financial condition and results of operations that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily through the sale and delivery of promised goods or services to customers. Sales prices are documented in the executed sales contract, purchase order or order acknowledgement prior to the transfer of control to the customer. Typical payment terms are 30 days.
Our revenue contracts may include multiple products or services, each of which is considered a separate performance obligation. Performance obligations typically include the delivery of promised products, such as breast implants, tissue expanders, and BIOCORNEUM, along with service-type warranties. Other deliverables are sometimes promised, but are ancillary and insignificant in the context of the contract as a whole. We allocate revenue to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling prices based on observable prices for all performance obligations with the exception of the service-type warranty under the Platinum20 Limited Warranty Program, or Platinum20.
We introduced our Platinum20 warranty program in May 2018 on all breast implants implanted in the United States or Puerto Rico on or after May 1, 2018. Platinum20 provides for financial assistance for revision surgeries and no-charge contralateral replacement implants upon the occurrence of certain qualifying events. Platinum20 has an assurance warranty component and a service warranty component. The assurance component is recorded as a warranty liability at the time of sale. The service warranty component is considered an additional performance obligation and revenue is deferred at the time of sale using the expected cost plus margin approach for the performance obligation. Inputs into the expected cost plus margin approach include historical incidence rates, estimated replacement costs, estimated financial assistance payouts and an estimated margin.
The liability for unsatisfied performance obligations under the service warranty as of December 31, 2021 were as follows (in thousands):
Revenue for service warranties are recognized ratably over the term of the agreements. Specifically for Platinum20, the performance obligation is satisfied at the time that the benefits are provided and are expected to be satisfied over the following 3 to 24 month period for financial assistance and 20 years for product replacement.
For delivery of promised products, control transfers and revenue is recognized upon shipment, unless the contractual arrangement requires transfer of control when products reach their destination, for which revenue is recognized once the product arrives at its destination. A portion of our revenue is generated from the sale of consigned inventory of breast implants maintained at doctor, hospital, and clinic locations. For these products, revenue is recognized at the time we are notified by the customer that the product has been implanted, not when the consigned products are delivered to the customer’s location.
Sales Return Liability
With the exception of the Company’s BIOCORNEUM scar management products, we allow for the return of products from customers within six months after the original sale, which is accounted for as variable consideration. A sales return liability is established based on estimated sales returns using relevant historical experience taking into consideration recent gross sales and notifications of pending returns, as adjusted for changes in recent industry events and trends. The estimated sales return is recorded as a reduction of revenue and as a sales return liability in the same period revenue is recognized. Actual sales returns in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from the estimates. If actual sales returns differ significantly from the estimates, an adjustment to revenue in the current or subsequent period would be recorded. The following table provides a rollforward of the sales return liability (in thousands):
Practical Expedients and Policy Election
We generally expense sales commissions when incurred because the amortization period would have been one year or less. These costs are recorded within sales and marketing expenses.
We do not adjust accounts receivable for the effects of any significant financing components as customer payment terms are shorter than one year.
We have elected to account for shipping and handling activities performed after a customer obtains control of the products as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the products to the customer. Shipping and handling activities are largely provided to customers free of charge. The associated costs were $5.5 million, $2.9 million and $1.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These costs are viewed as part of our marketing programs and are recorded as a component of sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statement of operations as an accounting policy election.
Goodwill Impairment Testing
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets of purchased businesses. Goodwill is not amortized, but instead subject to impairment tests on at least an annual basis and whenever circumstances suggest that goodwill may be impaired. Our annual test for impairment is performed as of October 1 of each fiscal year, pursuant to which we make a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we will recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. Following the sale of the miraDry business, management evaluates one reporting unit, Plastic Surgery, formerly known as Breast Products.
The fair value analysis of goodwill utilizes the income approach and market approach, which requires the use of estimates about a reporting unit’s future revenues and free cash flows, market multiples, enterprise value, control risk premiums, discount rates, terminal value and enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value. Our future revenues and free cash flow assumptions are determined based upon actual results giving effect to management’s expected changes in operating results in future years. Our market multiples, enterprise value, control risk premiums, discount rates and terminal value are based upon market participant assumptions using a defined peer group. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect these estimates. Thus, to the extent the market changes, discount rates increase significantly or we do not meet our projected performance, we could recognize impairments, and such impairments could be material.
In the current year, we performed a qualitative analysis for the Plastic Surgery reporting unit on the annual goodwill impairment test on October 1, 2021. We determined the fair value of the reporting unit was more likely than not greater than its carrying value and did not record any goodwill impairment charges.
Warranty Reserve
We offer a product replacement and limited warranty program for our silicone gel breast implants, which we consider to be assurance-type warranties. For silicone get breast implant surgeries occurring prior to May 1, 2018, we provide lifetime replacement implants and up to $3,600 in financial assistance for revision surgeries, for covered rupture events that occur within ten years of the surgery date. We introduced our Platinum20 Limited Warranty Program in May 2018, covering OPUS silicone get breast implants implanted in the United States or Puerto Rico on or after May 1, 2018. We consider Platinum20 to have a service warranty component and an assurance warranty component. The service warranty component as an additional performance obligation and defer revenue at the time of sale based on the relative estimated selling price as detailed under Revenue Recognition above. The assurance component is recorded as a warranty liability at the time of sale and is related to the lifetime no-charge contralateral replacement implants and up to $5,000 in financial assistance for revision surgeries, for covered rupture events that occur within twenty years of the surgery date. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we held total warranty liabilities of $2.5 million and $1.9 million, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation using a fair-value based method for costs related to all employee share-based payments, including stock options, restricted stock units, and the employee stock purchase plan. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the date of grant based on the estimated fair value of the award.
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The grant date fair value of a stock-based award is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period of the award on a straight-line basis. In addition, we use the Monte-Carlo simulation option-pricing model to determine the fair value of market-based awards. The Monte-Carlo simulation option-pricing model uses the same input assumptions as the Black-Scholes model; however, it also further incorporates into the fair-value determination the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied. Compensation costs related to these awards are recognized regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied, provided that the requisite service has been provided.
The Black-Scholes and Monte-Carlo models require inputs of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected volatility and expected term, among other inputs. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
We recorded total non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $10.4 million, $8.2 million and $12.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrecognized compensation costs related to unvested stock options of $1.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had total unrecognized compensation costs of $9.8 million related to unvested restricted stock units, or RSUs. These costs are expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.03 years.
The following table represents stock-based compensation expense included in cost of goods sold and operating expenses in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Acquisitions
We evaluate acquisitions of assets and other similar transactions to assess whether or not the transaction should be accounted for as a business combination or asset acquisition by first applying a screen test to determine if substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets. If the screen is met, the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition. If the screen is not met, further determination is required as to whether or not we have acquired inputs and processes that have the ability to create outputs which would meet the definition of a business.
Business combinations
We account for acquired business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at fair value, with limited exceptions. Valuations are generally completed for business acquisitions using a discounted cash flow analysis. The most significant estimates and assumptions inherent in a discounted cash flow analysis include the amount and timing of projected future cash flows, the discount rate used to measure the risks inherent in the future cash flows, the assessment of the asset’s life cycle, and the competitive and other trends impacting the asset, including consideration of technical, legal, regulatory, economic and other factors. Each of these factors and assumptions can significantly affect the value of the intangible asset. The excess of the fair value of consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
We believe the fair values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on reasonable assumptions. However, these assumptions may be incomplete or inaccurate, and unanticipated events and circumstances may occur. We will finalize these amounts as we obtain the information necessary to complete the measurement processes. Any changes resulting from facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition dates may result in adjustments to the provisional amounts recognized at the acquisition dates. We finalize these amounts no later than one year from the respective acquisition dates.
Asset acquisitions
In an asset acquisition, the fair value of the consideration transferred, including transaction costs, is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their relative fair values. No goodwill is recognized in an asset acquisition. Subsequent changes are recorded as adjustments to the carrying amount of the assets acquired.
When intangible assets are acquired, determining their useful life requires judgment, as different types of intangible assets will have different useful lives and certain assets may even be considered to have indefinite useful lives. Useful life is the period over which the intangible asset is expected to contribute directly or indirectly to our future cash flows. We determine the useful lives of intangible assets based on a number of factors, such as legal, regulatory, or contractual provisions that may limit the useful life, and the effects of obsolescence, anticipated demand, existence or absence of competition, and other economic factors on useful life.
Deferred and liability-classified contingent consideration is initially recognized at fair value and then remeasured each reporting period, with changes in fair value recorded in general and administrative expense in a business combination. In an asset acquisition, changes in fair value are recorded as adjustments to the carrying amount of the assets acquired. We use the Monte-Carlo Simulation model to estimate the fair value of contingent consideration, which requires input assumptions about the likelihood of achieving specified milestone criteria, projections of future financial performance, and assumed discount rates. Changes in the fair value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration obligations result from several factors including changes in discount periods and rates, changes in the timing and amount of revenue estimates and changes in probability assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achieving specified milestone criteria. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our contingent consideration fair value expense could be materially different in the future. Equity-classified contingent consideration associated with a business combination is recorded at their fair values on the acquisition date and are not subsequently remeasured each reporting period unless the obligation becomes reclassified as a liability. The subsequent settlement of the obligation is accounted for within equity.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 1 in the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on recent accounting pronouncements and the expected impact on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Sales
Net sales increased $25.7 million, or 46.7%, to $80.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $55.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the volume of domestic sales of gel implants, expanders, and BioCorneum. Additionally, the Company’s net sales were less impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the current period in comparison to the prior period.
As of December 31, 2021, our sales organization included 65 U.S. employees, as compared to 60 employees as of December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold increased $12.7 million, or 54.0%, to $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the sales volume of the Company’s products.
The gross margins for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 54.9% and 57.1%, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in period distribution and production costs, partially offset by a decrease in inventory provisions.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $11.1 million, or 29.5%, to $48.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $37.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in employee payroll and incentive compensation, shipping expenses associated with the increased volume of sales of products, and increased marketing initiatives.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1.8 million, or 20.1%, to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in employee payroll, incentive, stock compensation, severance expenses and product development expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses decreased $0.5 million, or 1.7%, to $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $32.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in severance expense, consulting, accounting, and legal expenses, offset by increases in stock-based compensation expense, payroll expense, and expenses associated with our information technology systems subsequent to their implementation, including training and data conversion costs.
Restructuring Expenses
There were no restructuring expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as the organizational efficiency initiative was completed as of December 31, 2020. Restructuring expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.4 million, which consisted of severance expenses of employees affected by the organizational efficiency initiative.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a gain on extinguishment from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in the current period, offset by an increase in the fair value of the derivative liability from an increase in the Company's stock price, prior to its reclassification to equity following the amendment in September 2021.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $21,000 as compared to income tax expense of $33,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes
Income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $22.9 million, due to the Company's change in business strategy to focus on bioTips prior to the sale of the miraDry business, offset by the loss recognized on the sale of the miraDry business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant net operating losses and anticipate that our losses will continue in the near term. We expect our operating expenses will increase in connection with the growth of our business and will need to generate significant net sales to achieve profitability. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the sales of preferred stock, borrowings under our term loans and convertible note, sales of our products, and the proceeds from the sale of our common stock in public offerings.
Sale of the miraDry business
On June 10, 2021, we completed the sale of the miraDry business (the “Sale”) to miraDry Acquisition Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Buyer”), an entity affiliated with 1315 Capital II, LP, as a result of our strategic decision to focus investment on the core Plastic Surgery segment, formerly known as Breast Products. The Sale was made pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”), dated May 11,
2021, among us and certain of our subsidiaries, Buyer, and, solely for purposes of Section 8.14 of the Purchase Agreement, 1315 Capital II, LP. The aggregate purchase price was $10.0 million, which after certain adjustments for agreed upon changes in the estimated net asset value amount of purchased assets and assumed liabilities resulted in net cash proceeds to us of approximately $8.1 million. After finalization of post close adjustments, we recognized a loss on sale of $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 2 for a full description on the sale of the miraDry business.
Debt financing
On July 25, 2017, we entered into the Existing Credit Agreements with Midcap. On July 1, 2019, we entered into certain credit agreements with Midcap Financial Trust pursuant to which we repaid our existing indebtedness under our Existing Credit Agreements and the outstanding commitment fee was cancelled. Further, on May 11, 2020, February 5, 2021, and December 31, 2021, we amended certain credit agreements with Midcap Financial Trust.
On March 11, 2020, we entered into a facility agreement with Deerfield Partners, L.P., issuing $60.0 million in principal amount of 4.0% unsecured and subordinated convertible notes upon the terms and conditions set forth in the facility agreement. Further, on December 31, 2021, we amended the facility agreement pursuant to the AuraGen Asset Purchase Agreement.
In April 2020, we were granted a loan of $6.7 million under the Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act, or the PPP Loan, all or a portion of which may be forgiven dependent on our use of proceeds. The PPP Loan would have matured on April 20, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. The PPP Loan was forgiven upon submission of documentation of expenditures in accordance with certain specified requirements. We sought and obtained the PPP Loan due to the immediate and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our revenues and prospects. The PPP Loan has allowed us to satisfy our payroll obligations without a material reduction in pay for our employees or a material headcount reduction, other than the reductions in the previously announced organizational efficiency initiative. On July 30, 2021, we were notified by Silicon Valley Bank that they received payment in full from the Small Business Administration for the amount of our PPP Loan and the our PPP Loan had been fully forgiven.
Due to the continued uncertainty relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenues may continue to be adversely impacted. If we are unable to achieve certain revenue targets, we may breach certain financial covenants set forth in our Credit Agreement with MidCap Financial Trust. If we breach these covenants, MidCap will have the right to accelerate repayment of the outstanding amounts. In addition, a breach of a financial covenant in the Credit Agreement would result in a cross default under our convertible note with Deerfield, which would allow Deerfield to accelerate repayment of the amounts owed, subject to certain restrictions. In the event that either MidCap or Deerfield accelerates the repayment of our indebtedness, there can be no assurance that we will have sufficient cash on hand to satisfy such obligations and our business operations may be materially harmed.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for a full description of our long-term debt, revolving line of credit, convertible note, and PPP loan.
Equity financing
On June 7, 2019, we completed an underwritten follow-on public offering of 17,391,305 shares of common stock at $5.75 per share, as well as 2,608,695 additional shares of common stock pursuant to the full exercise of the over-allotment option granted to the underwriters. Net proceeds were approximately $107.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $6.9 million and offering expenses of approximately $0.4 million.
Further on February 8, 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of 5,410,628 shares of common stock at $6.75 per share, as well as 811,594 additional shares of common stock pursuant to the full exercise of the over-allotment option granted to the underwriters. Net proceeds were approximately $39.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $2.5 million and offering expenses of approximately $0.3 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $51.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. Our historical cash outflows have primarily been associated with research and development activities, activities relating to commercialization and increases in working capital. In addition, we have used cash to fund the acquisitions of AuraGen, Vesta, BIOCORNEUM, and the tissue expander portfolio.
To fund our ongoing operating and capital needs, we may need to raise additional equity or debt capital. We believe we have sufficient capital resources to continue as a going concern through the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows (used in) provided by operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Cash flow from operating activities of continuing operations
Net cash used in operating activities was $44.5 million and $46.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $1.7 million decrease in cash used in operating activities was primarily associated with a $27.5 million decrease in net loss, increases in the fair value of the derivative liability and stock based compensation, coupled with increases in the provision for doubtful accounts, provision for warranties, and working capital, offset by a gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan and payments related to the miraDry contingent consideration.
Cash flow from investing activities of continuing operations
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.8 million and $4.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used was due to an increase in costs associated with the implementation of information technology systems.
Cash flow from financing activities of continuing operations
Net cash provided by financing activities was $35.9 million and $31.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash provided by financing activities of $4.4 million was primarily due to an increase in proceeds from issuance of common stock, a decrease in payments under the Term Loan and Revolving Loan, offset by borrowings under the Convertible Note and PPP Loan in the prior period which did not reoccur in the current period, and payments related to the miraDry contingent consideration.
Cash flow from discontinued operations
Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $14.0 million used for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash flows was primarily driven by a decrease in cash used from operating activities as a result of the change in miraDry business strategy, in addition to an increase in cash provided by investing activities resulting from the proceeds of the sale of the miraDry business.
Our liquidity position and capital requirements are subject to a number of factors. For example, our cash inflow and outflow may be impacted by the following:
•the ability of our implant manufacturing facility in Franklin, Wisconsin to meet capacity to meet customer requirements and maintain unit costs that will drive gross margin;
•the ability of our third-party tissue expander manufacturing facility operated by SiMatrix to meet capacity to meet customer requirements;
•net sales generated and any other future products that we may develop and commercialize;
•the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our operations;
•costs associated with expanding our sales force and marketing programs;
•cost associated with developing and commercializing our proposed products or technologies;
•expenses we incur in connection with potential litigation or governmental investigations;
•cost of obtaining and maintaining regulatory clearance or approval for our current or future products;
•cost of ongoing compliance with regulatory requirements, including compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley;
•anticipated or unanticipated capital expenditures; and
•unanticipated G&A expenses.
Our primary short-term capital needs, which are subject to change, include expenditures related to:
•support of our sales and marketing efforts related to our current and future products;
•new product acquisition and development efforts;
•facilities expansion needs; and
•investment in inventory required to meet customer demands.
Although we believe the foregoing items reflect our most likely uses of cash in the short-term, we cannot predict with certainty all of our particular short-term cash uses or the timing or amount of cash used. If cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, we may be required to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain credit facilities. Additional capital, if needed, may not be available on satisfactory terms, if at all. Furthermore, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to stockholders, and debt financing, if available, may include restrictive covenants. For a discussion of other factors that may impact our future liquidity and capital funding requirements, see “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Financial Results.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.