Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-looking Statements
Certain statements in this report, including information incorporated by reference, are “forward-looking statements” as defined by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (“PSLRA”). The PSLRA provides a safe harbor under the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 for forward-looking statements. These statements relate to our intentions, beliefs, projections, estimations, or forecasts of future events and financial performance. They involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our or industry actual results, activity levels, or performance to materially differ from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by words such as “may,” “will,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “target,” “project,” “intend,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “pro forma,” “seek,” “likely,” “continue,” or comparable terms. Our forward-looking statements are only predictions, and we can give no assurance that such expectations will prove correct. We undertake no obligation, other than as federal securities laws may require, to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements for any reason.
Factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from what we project, forecast, or estimate in forward-looking statements are discussed in further detail in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K. These risk factors may not be exhaustive. We operate in a constantly changing business environment, and new risk factors may emerge at any time. We can neither predict these new risk factors nor assess their impact, if any, on our businesses or the extent any new factor or combination of factors may cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements. Given these risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, the forward-looking events we discuss in this report might not occur.
Introduction
We classify our business into four reportable segments:
•Standard Commercial Lines;
•Standard Personal Lines;
•Excess and Surplus Lines ("E&S Lines"); and
•Investments.
For more details about these segments, refer to Note 1. "Organization" and Note 12. "Segment Information" in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
We write our Standard Commercial and Standard Personal Lines products and services through nine of our insurance subsidiaries, some of which participate in the federal government's National Flood Insurance Program's ("NFIP") Write Your Own Program ("WYO"). We write our E&S products through another subsidiary, Mesa Underwriters Specialty Insurance Company, a nationally-authorized non-admitted platform for customers who generally cannot obtain coverage in the standard marketplace. Collectively, we refer to our ten insurance subsidiaries as the "Insurance Subsidiaries."
The following is Management's Discussion and Analysis ("MD&A") of the consolidated results of operations and financial condition, as well as known trends and uncertainties, that may have a material impact in future periods. The MD&A discusses and analyzes our 2021 results compared to 2020. Investors should read the MD&A in conjunction with Item 8. "Financial Statements." of this Form 10-K. For discussion and analysis of our 2020 results compared to 2019, refer to Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
In the MD&A, we will discuss and analyze the following:
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates;
•Financial Highlights of Results for Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019;
•Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment;
•Federal Income Taxes; and
•Liquidity and Capital Resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the policies and estimates critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The policies and estimates we consider most critical to the preparation of the Financial Statements involved (i) reserves for loss and loss expense, (ii) investment valuations and the allowance for credit losses on available-for-sale ("AFS") fixed income securities, and (iii) reinsurance.
Reserves for Loss and Loss Expense
Significant time can elapse between the occurrence of an insured loss, the reporting of the claim to us, and the final settlement and payment of the claim. To recognize liabilities for unpaid loss and loss expense, insurers establish reserves as balance sheet liabilities representing an estimate of amounts needed to pay reported and unreported loss and loss expense. The following tables provide case and incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) reserves for loss and loss expenses, and reinsurance recoverable on unpaid loss and loss expense as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
1Includes general liability (95% of net reserves) and commercial auto liability coverages (5% of net reserves).
2Includes commercial property (91% of net reserves) and commercial auto property coverages (9% of net reserves).
1Includes general liability (95% of net reserves) and commercial auto liability coverages (5% of net reserves).
2Includes commercial property (92% of net reserves) and commercial auto property coverages (8% of net reserves).
The Insurance Subsidiaries' net loss and loss expense reserves duration was approximately 3.5 years at December 31, 2021, down from 3.7 years at December 31, 2020.
How reserves are established
Reserves for loss and loss expense include case reserves on reported claims and IBNR reserves. Case reserves are estimated on each individual claim based on claim-specific facts and circumstances known at the time. Case reserves may be adjusted up or down as the claim's specific facts and circumstances change. IBNR reserves are established at more aggregated levels, and they include provisions for (i) claims not yet reported, (ii) future development on reported claims, (iii) closed claims that will reopen in the future, and (iv) anticipated salvage and subrogation recoveries.
Our robust reserve process relies on quarterly internal reserve reviews, based on our own loss experience, with consideration given to various internal and external factors. In addition to our internal reserve reviews, we have an external consulting actuary perform an independent review of our reserves semi-annually. We do not rely on the external consulting actuary's report to determine our recorded reserves; however, we review and discuss with the consulting actuary our respective observations regarding trends, key assumptions, and actuarial methodologies. While not required, our independent consulting actuary issues the annual statutory Statements of Actuarial Opinion for our Insurance Subsidiaries. For additional information on our accounting policy for reserves for loss and loss expense, refer to Note. 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
Range of reasonable reserve estimates
We have estimated a range of reasonable reserve estimates for net loss and loss expense of $3,564 million to $4,236 million at December 31, 2021. This range reflects low and high reasonable reserve estimates determined by judgmentally adjusting the methods, factors, and assumptions selected within the internal reserve review. This approach produces a range of reasonable reserve estimates, and does not represent a distribution of all possible outcomes. Therefore, the final outcomes may fall above or below these amounts. The range does not include a provision for potential increases or decreases associated with asbestos, environmental, and certain other continuous exposure claims, which by their nature are more variable and, therefore, traditional actuarial techniques cannot be effectively applied.
The range of reasonable reserve estimates increased as of December 31, 2021 relative to December 31, 2020. This increase primarily relates to the growth in reserves commensurate with our growth in net premiums earned ("NPE") and additional risk created by the current inflationary environment.
Changes in Reserve Estimates (Loss Development)
Our quarterly reserve process may lead to changes in the recorded reserves for prior accident years, referred to as favorable or unfavorable prior year loss and loss expense development. In 2021, we experienced net favorable prior year loss development of $82.9 million, compared to $72.9 million in 2020 and $50.3 million in 2019. The following table summarizes prior year development by line of business:
A detailed discussion of recent reserve development by line of business follows.
Standard Market General Liability Line of Business
At December 31, 2021, our general liability line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $1.6 billion, representing 39% of our total net reserves. In 2021, this line experienced favorable development of $29.0 million, attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2018 and prior. During 2020, this line experienced favorable development of $35.0 million, attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2017 and prior.
By its nature, general liability presents a diverse set of exposures. Losses and loss trends are influenced by various factors, including legislative enactments, judicial decisions, and economic and social inflation. Economic inflation directly impacts our claims severities by increasing the costs of raw materials, medical procedures and labor. Social inflation may impact both the frequency and severity of claims by affecting (i) the propensity for a claimant to file a claim, (ii) the percentage of claimants who engage lawyers, and (iii) the nature of judicial verdicts and amount of the associated awards, which influence settlement values going forward. We monitor claim litigation rates regularly and have observed modest increases in the percentage of claims with attorney involvement in recent periods. This trend and the impact of court closures are affecting the time to settle claims.
We have exposure to abuse or molestation claims, mainly through insurance policies that we (i) underwrite through our Community and Public Services ("CAPS") strategic business unit and (ii) issue to schools, religious institutions, day-care facilities, and other social services. These customers within our CAPS business unit represented approximately 10% of our total Standard Commercial Lines NPW in 2021 and 11% in 2020. Through 2017, our exposure to abuse or molestation risk increased, reflective of our CAPS book's growth. In 2018, we implemented more stringent underwriting eligibility guidelines and partnered with a third party to better assess exposure and enhance loss control measures. In 2019, we filed and approved significant rate increases for this exposure. We continue to monitor each jurisdiction's statute of limitations to ensure our rate level accounts for the changing exposure as best we reasonably can. While these underwriting and pricing actions have been necessary to ensure the profitability of the portfolio going forward, they have limited our CAPS growth in recent years.
We also have exposure to abuse or molestation claims from recently enacted state laws that extend the statute of limitations or permit windows for abuse or molestation claims and lawsuits to be filed that statutes of limitations previously barred. Consequently, we may receive claims decades after the alleged acts occurred that will involve complex claims coverage determinations, potential litigation, higher defense costs, and the need to collect from reinsurers under older reinsurance agreements. Our claims and actuarial departments actively monitor these claims to identify changes in frequency or severity and any emerging or shifting trends. While this should help us better understand this rapidly evolving exposure, the ultimate impact of social, political, and legal trends remains highly uncertain, and may significantly impact the ultimate settlement values for these claims.
The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic slowdown have presented additional risks to this line of business. The impact of the pandemic, including related governmental orders, court closures, and other behavioral and procedural changes, such as slower than usual timing in which an individual might bring a claim, may have or could impact claims reporting or
settlement patterns. Settlement patterns may be further impacted by a general trend towards increased attorney involvement in the claims process, as previously discussed.
Standard Market Workers Compensation Line of Business
At December 31, 2021, our workers compensation line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $855 million, representing 21% of our total net reserves. During 2021, this line experienced favorable reserve development of $58.0 million, driven by accident years 2019 and prior. Similarly, this line experienced favorable reserve development during 2020 of $60.0 million, driven by accident years 2018 and prior. During both 2021 and 2020, the lower loss emergence than expected was partly due to: (i) medical inflation that was lower than originally anticipated; and (ii) various significant claims initiatives we have implemented. Because of the length of time injured workers can receive related medical treatment, decreases in medical inflation can cause favorable loss development over an extended number of accident years.
While we believe our underwriting and claims operational changes improved our underwriting experience, there is risk associated with these changes. Most notably, changes in operations may inherently change paid and reported development patterns. While our reserve analyses incorporate methods that adjust for these changes, a greater risk of fluctuation remains in the estimated reserves.
In addition to the operational changes, a variety of other issues can impact the workers compensation line of business, such as the following:
Unexpected changes in medical cost inflation -The industry is currently experiencing a period of lower medical claim cost inflation. However, some signs indicate inflationary pressure on these costs. Changes in our historical workers compensation medical costs, along with potential changes in future medical inflation, can create additional variability in our reserves;
Changes in statutory workers compensation benefits - Benefit changes may be enacted that affect all outstanding claims, including claims that have occurred in the past, but have not yet been settled. Depending on the social and political climate, these changes may either increase or decrease associated claim costs;
Changes in utilization of the workers compensation system - These changes may be driven by economic, legislative, or other changes, such as increased pharmaceutical prescriptions, more complex medical procedures, changes in permanently injured workers' life expectancy, and health insurance availability.
COVID-19-related impacts - While not a major insurer of front-line workers (e.g. medical facilities and hospitals), we have potential exposure to employees contracting COVID-19 in the course of their employment. These claims may be asserted under certain state "presumption statutes" that shift the burden of proof from the claimant to the insurer. Medical system service and supply constraints, coupled with injured workers delaying non-essential procedures, may extend the duration of non-COVID-19 claims. To date, we have not seen significant COVID-19-related workers compensation losses
Standard Market Commercial Automobile Line of Business
At December 31, 2021, our commercial automobile line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $732 million, which represented 18% of our total net reserves. In 2021, this line experienced unfavorable prior year reserve development of $13.3 million, driven by higher loss severities in accident years 2016 through 2019. In 2020, this line experienced unfavorable prior year reserve development of $7.1 million, driven by higher loss severities in accident years 2016 through 2019 and higher than expected frequencies in accident year 2019.
For both us and the industry, the commercial automobile line has experienced unfavorable trends in recent years. Pre-pandemic, increased frequencies were likely due to increased miles driven related to lower unemployment, poor road quality, and an increase in distracted driving. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, along with governmental "stay-at-home" orders, dramatically reduced miles driven and road traffic, significantly reducing claims frequency in 2020. While miles driven increased in 2021, driving patterns have also shifted, including changes in the days of the week and times of day people are driving. As of the end of 2021, frequencies remained somewhat below pre-pandemic levels.
Since the pandemic's start, we have seen increasing severities in both the liability and physical damage coverages. The average value of our bodily injury paid loss settlements has increased, possibly relating to higher average driving speeds, higher jury awards, and an increase in distracted driving. Increasing property damage severities may relate to elevated repair costs for increasingly complex vehicles that incorporate more technology, as well as recent disruptions to the supply chain. Continued complications in the supply chain, including labor shortages, increase the risk of longer-term elevated economic inflation.
Over the last several years, we have taken actions to improve the profitability of this line of business, including:
•Taking meaningful rate and underwriting actions on our renewal portfolio. We will continue to leverage our predictive modeling and analytical capabilities to provide more granular insights about where we should focus our actions.
•Reducing premium leakage by improving the quality of our rating information, including validating application information with third-party data and obtaining more detailed driver information.
•Implementing new tools to score drivers to underwrite more effectively and align rate with exposure.
•Aggressively managing new business pricing and hazard mix while deploying co-underwriting by our regional underwriters and corporate underwriting teams' subject matter experts for selected higher hazard classes to improve risk driver recognition and exposure-based pricing.
Standard Market Personal Automobile Line of Business
At December 31, 2021, our personal automobile line of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $102 million, which represented 3% of our total net reserves. In 2021, this line experienced favorable prior year reserve development of $0.2 million. In 2020, this line experienced unfavorable prior year reserve development of $1.8 million.
Some of the same issues affecting the commercial automobile line are affecting this line. The COVID-19-related reduction in frequencies was even more pronounced than in commercial automobile line. As with the commercial automobile line, these frequencies significantly rebounded in 2021, yet remain less than pre-pandemic levels. This line also has a similar potential for higher average severities like the commercial automobile line. In addition to the COVID-19-related temporary impacts, the underlying trends of increased vehicle repair costs and poor road quality are likely causes of rising severities, possibly exacerbated by distracted driving trends. We continue to recalibrate our predictive models and refine our underwriting and pricing approaches. While we believe these underwriting and pricing changes will ultimately lead to improved profitability and greater stability, the resulting changes to our exposure profile may impact paid and reported development patterns, thereby increasing the uncertainty in the reserves in the near term.
E&S Casualty Lines of Business
At December 31, 2021, our E&S casualty lines of business had recorded reserves, net of reinsurance, of $445 million, representing 11% of our total net reserves. Our E&S casualty lines results have improved over recent years. In 2021, this line experienced favorable prior year reserve development of $7.0 million, primarily attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2016 and prior. In 2020, this line did not experience prior year reserve development.
Some of the risk factors for the general liability line also affect the E&S casualty lines. These include (i) economic inflation, such as materials and labor costs; (ii) social trends, such as increased attorney involvement; and (iii) COVID-19-related impacts, such as court closures.
The E&S casualty lines also are impacted by operational changes we have made to improve the portfolio's performance. Our underwriting operations have substantially exited several targeted business classes that have historically produced volatile results, including commercial automobile liability, liquor liability, and snow removal.
Recent E&S casualty claims actions have created further casualty improvements:
•In 2020, we created a dedicated E&S claims team in our corporate claims function, bringing greater expertise and consistency to E&S claims handling.
•We have segregated “litigated,” “non-litigated,” and "high exposure" claims, with separate specialized teams for each.
•We implemented the following operational and expense improvement initiatives for legal counsel:
◦Increased the use of staff counsel, increasing legal staff in their assigned territories to support claims volume;
◦Heightened focus on legal budgeting and expense management; and
◦Implemented a panel counsel review process.
While we believe these underwriting and claims operational changes improved our underwriting experience, there is risk associated with these changes. Most notably, changes in portfolio composition or our claims processes may inherently change paid and reported development patterns. While our reserve analyses incorporate methods that adjust for these changes, there remains a greater risk of fluctuation in the estimated reserves.
Other impacts creating additional loss and loss expense reserve uncertainty
Claims Initiative Impacts
Consistent with our strategic imperative to optimize operational efficiency, our Claims Department continually identifies areas for improvement and efficiency to increase our value proposition to policyholders. These improvements may lead to claims practice changes that affect average case reserve levels and claims settlement rates, which directly impact the data used to project ultimate loss and loss expense. While these changes may increase uncertainty in our estimates in the short term, we expect refined management of the claims process to be the longer-term benefit.
Our internal reserve analyses incorporate certain actuarial projection methods that make adjustments for changes in case reserve adequacy and claims settlement rates. These methods adjust our historical loss experience to the current case adequacy or settlement rate level, providing a more consistent basis for projecting future development patterns. These methods, like all projection methods, have their own associated assumptions and judgments. Therefore, no single method can be interpreted as definitive.
Unanticipated Changes in Inflation
United States ("U.S.") monetary policy and global economic conditions will bring additional uncertainty related to inflationary trends. Changes in inflation affect the ultimate settlement costs for many of our lines of business, with the greatest reserve impact on the longer-tailed lines such as general liability and workers compensation. Therefore, uncertainty about future inflation or deflation creates the potential for additional reserve variability in these lines of business.
Sensitivity analysis: Potential impact on reserve estimates due to changes in key assumptions
Our process to establish reserves includes a variety of key assumptions, including without limitation:
•The selection of loss and loss expense development factors;
•The weight to be applied to each individual actuarial projection method;
•Projected future loss trends; and
•Expected claim frequencies, severities, and ultimate loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year.
The importance of any single assumption depends on several considerations, such as the line of business and the accident year. If the actual experience emerges differently than the assumptions underlying the reserve process, changes in our reserve estimates are possible that may be material to the results of operations in future periods. Below are sensitivity tests highlighting potential impacts to loss and loss expense reserves for the major casualty lines of business under different scenarios. These tests consider each assumption and line of business individually, without any consideration of correlation between lines of business and accident years. Therefore, the results do not constitute an actuarial range. While the figures represent possible impacts from variations in certain key assumptions, there is no assurance that future loss and loss expense emergence will be consistent with either our current or alternative sets of assumptions.
While the sources of reserve variability are generated by different internal and external trends and operational changes, they ultimately manifest themselves as changes in the expected loss and loss expense development patterns. These patterns are a key assumption in the reserving process. In addition, the current accident year expected loss and loss expense ratios are also a key assumption. These ratios are developed through a rigorous process of projecting recent accident years' experience to an ultimate settlement basis. Then they are adjusted to the current accident year's pricing and loss cost levels. The impact from underwriting portfolio and claims handling practice changes are also quantified and reflected where appropriate. As with all estimates, the ultimate loss and loss expense ratios may differ from those currently estimated.
The sensitivities of loss and loss expense reserves to these key assumptions are illustrated below for the major casualty lines. The first table displays estimated impacts from changes in expected reported loss and loss expense development patterns for our major casualty lines of business. It shows line of business reserve impacts if the actual calendar year incurred amounts are greater or less than current expectations by the selected percentages. While judgmental, the selected percentages by line are based on the reserve range analysis and the actual historical reserve development for the line of business. The second table displays the estimated impacts from changes to the expected loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year. It shows reserve impacts by line of business if the expected loss and loss expense ratios for the current accident year are greater or less than current expectations by the selected percentages.
Note that there is some overlap between the impacts in the two tables. For example, increases in the calendar year development would ultimately impact our view of the current accident year's loss and loss expense ratios. However, these tables provide perspective on the sensitivity of each key assumption. While the changes represent outcomes based on reasonably likely changes to our underlying reserving assumptions, they do not represent a range of possible outcomes. Our reserves could increase or decrease significantly from what the tables above reflect.
Asbestos and Environmental Reserves
Our general liability, excess liability, and homeowners reserves include exposure to asbestos and environmental claims. The emergence of these claims occurs over an extended period and can be unpredictable. The total recorded net loss and loss expense reserves for these claims were $21.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and $21.4 million as of December 31, 2020, with asbestos claims constituting approximately 23% of these reserves in both years.
Environmental claims have arisen primarily from insured landfill exposures in municipal government and small non-manufacturing commercial risk, as well as leaking underground storage tanks within our homeowners policies. Asbestos claims have arisen primarily from policies issued to various distributors of asbestos-containing products, such as electrical and plumbing materials. We handle our asbestos and environmental claims in a centralized and specialized asbestos and environmental claim unit. That unit establishes case reserves on individual claims based on the facts and circumstances known at a given point in time, supplemented by bulk IBNR reserves.
Estimating IBNR reserves for asbestos and environmental claims is difficult because these claims have delayed and inconsistent reporting patterns. In addition, there are significant uncertainties associated with estimating critical reserve assumptions, such as average clean-up costs, third-party costs, potentially responsible party shares, allocation of damages, litigation and coverage costs, and potential state and federal legislative changes. Limiting our exposure to asbestos and environmental claims are (i) the fuel oil system exclusion on our New Jersey homeowners policies that we introduced in 2007, and (ii) the Insurance Services Office, Inc.'s Total Pollution Exclusion that was introduced in the mid-1980's, Prior to the mid-1980's, we primarily wrote Standard Personal Lines, which has also limited our exposure to asbestos and environmental claims.
Other Latent Exposures
We also have other latent and continuous trigger exposures in our ongoing portfolio. Examples include claims for construction defect and abuse or molestation, for which states have increased and expanded the statute of limitations. We manage our exposure to these liabilities through our underwriting and claims practices, and, a dedicated claims unit, similar to our handling of asbestos and environmental claims. The impact of social, political, and legal trends on these claims remains highly uncertain, so our related loss and loss expense reserves remain highly uncertain. These exposures remain in our ongoing portfolio, and as such, are reserved in aggregate, with other exposures within the line of business reserves.
Investment Valuation and the Allowance for Credit Losses on AFS Fixed Income Securities
Investment Valuation
Accounting guidance defines the fair value of our investment portfolio as the exit price, or the amount that would be (i) received to sell an asset or (ii) paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. When determining an exit price we must rely on observable market data, if available. Most securities in our equity portfolio have readily determinable fair values and are recorded at fair value with changes in unrealized gains or losses recognized through income. Our AFS fixed income securities portfolio is recorded at fair value, and the related unrealized gains or losses are reflected in stockholders' equity, net of tax. For our AFS fixed income securities portfolios, fair value is a key factor in the measurement of (i) losses on securities for which we have the intent to sell, and (ii) changes in the allowance for credit losses.
The fair value of approximately 96% of our investments measured at fair value are classified as either Level 1 or Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy and are priced using observable inputs for identical or similar assets. About 3% are classified as Level 3 and are based on unobservable market inputs because the related securities are not traded on a public market. For additional information, refer to the following within Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K: (i) item (d) of Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" regarding descriptions of the levels within the fair value hierarchy and the valuation techniques used for our Level 3 securities, and (ii) Note 7. "Fair Value Measurements" for additional information on the unobservable inputs in our securities measured using Level 3 inputs.
Allowance for Credit Losses on AFS Fixed Income Securities
When fixed income securities are in an unrealized loss position and we do not intend to sell them, we record an allowance for credit losses for the portion of the unrealized loss related to an expected credit loss. We estimate expected credit losses on these securities by performing a discounted cash flow (“DCF”). The allowance for credit losses is the excess of amortized cost over the greater of (i) our estimate of the present value of expected future cash flows, or (ii) fair value. The allowance for credit losses cannot exceed the unrealized loss, and therefore it may fluctuate with changes in the security's fair value. We also consider the need to record losses on securities in an unrealized loss position for which we have the intent to sell.
We analyze unrealized losses for credit loss in accordance with our existing accounting policy, which includes performing DCF analyses on each security at the lot level and analyzing these DCFs using various economic scenarios. In performing these DCF analyses, we calculate the present value of future cash flows using various models specific to the major security types in our portfolio. These models use security-specific information and forecasted macroeconomic data to determine possible expected credit loss scenarios based on projected changes in the economy. The models contain forecasted economic data from the Federal Reserve Board’s annual supervisory stress test review on certain large banks and financial institutions. We also have the ability to incorporate internally-developed forecast information into the models as we deem appropriate. In developing our best estimate of the allowance for credit losses, we consider our outlook as to the probability of the various scenarios occurring.
Based on these analyses, we recorded an allowance for credit losses of $9.7 million in 2021 and $4.0 million in 2020 on our AFS fixed income securities portfolio. After considering the allowance for credit losses, the remaining unrealized losses on this portfolio were $17.4 million in 2021 and $11.5 million in 2020. If the security-specific and macroeconomic assumptions in our DCF analyses or our outlook as to the occurrence probability of our DCF model scenarios were to change, our allowance for credit losses and the resulting credit loss expense will negatively impact our results of operations. Factors considered in determining the allowance for credit losses require significant judgment, including our evaluation of the security's projected cash flow stream.
For additional information regarding our allowance for credit losses on AFS fixed income securities, see item (c) of Note 2. "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and item (i) of Note 5. "Investments" within Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K, respectively.
Reinsurance
Reinsurance recoverables on paid and unpaid loss and loss expense represent our estimates of the amounts we will recover from reinsurers. Each reinsurance contract is analyzed to ensure that sufficient risk is transferred to record the transactions appropriately as reinsurance in the Financial Statements. Amounts recovered from reinsurers are recognized as assets contemporaneously and in a manner consistent with the paid and unpaid losses associated with the reinsured policies. An allowance for credit losses on our reinsurance recoverable balance is recorded based on an evaluation of balances due from reinsurers and other available information, including collateral we hold under the terms and conditions of the underlying agreements. Reinsurers often purchase and rely on their own retrocessional reinsurance programs to manage their capital position and improve their financial strength ratings. Details about retrocessional reinsurance programs are not always transparent, making it difficult to assess our reinsurers' exposure to counterparty credit risk. Our reinsurer's credit quality is
also impacted by other factors, such as their reserve adequacy, investment portfolio, regulatory capital position, catastrophe aggregations, and risk management expertise. In addition, contractual language interpretations and willingness to pay valid claims can impact our allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance. Our allowance for estimated uncollectible reinsurance totaled $1.6 million at December 31, 2021, and $1.8 million at December 31, 2020. We continually monitor developments that may impact recoverability from our reinsurers, for which we have contractual remedies if necessary. For further information regarding reinsurance, see the “Reinsurance” section below in "Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment" and Note 9. “Reinsurance” in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Form 10-K.
1Refer to the Glossary of Terms attached to this Form 10-K as Exhibit 99.1 for definitions of terms used in this financial review.
2Non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating income per diluted common share, and non-GAAP operating ROE are measures comparable to net income available to common stockholders, net income available to common stockholders per diluted common share, and ROE, respectively, but exclude after-tax net realized and unrealized gains and losses on investments, and after-tax debt retirement costs. They are used as important financial measures by us, analysts, and investors because the timing of realized investment gains and losses on sales of securities in any given period is largely discretionary. In addition, net realized and unrealized investment gains and losses on investments that are charged to earnings and the debt retirement costs could distort the analysis of trends.
Reconciliations of net income available to common stockholders, net income available to common stockholders per diluted common share, and ROE to non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP operating income per diluted common share, and non-GAAP operating ROE, respectively, are provided in the tables below:
The components of our ROE and non-GAAP operating ROE are as follows:
In 2021, we met the challenges associated with (i) the economic and societal impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) higher inflation, (iii) severe natural catastrophes, and (iv) a competitive labor market and delivered another exceptional year of results. We generated our eighth consecutive year of double-digit non-GAAP operating ROEs, with a 14.3% non-GAAP operating ROE, above our full-year 2021 target of 11% and our 2020 non-GAAP operating ROE of 10.5%. Our 2021 results included exceptional growth in revenues and a record level of net income available to common stockholders per diluted common share as discussed below. Our ongoing financial success led to an AM Best Company ("AM Best") rating upgrade to “A+” (Superior) from "A" (Excellent) in November 2021, reflecting our financial strength, accomplishments, and future prospects.
In 2021, we grew book value per common share by 9%. This increase reflected $6.50 per diluted common share of net income available to common stockholders, partially offset by $2.07 of lower unrealized gains on our fixed income securities portfolio and $1.03 in dividends paid to our common stockholders. Non-GAAP operating income per diluted common share of $6.27 in 2021, increased $2.12, or 51%, compared to 2020, with the increase driven by strong contributions from both underwriting and net investment income.
The increase in non-GAAP operating income per diluted common share in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by (i) a 60% increase in after-tax underwriting income to $172.7 million, or $2.85 per share, resulting from a decrease in net catastrophe losses of $1.02 due to industry-wide U.S. catastrophe loss activity in 2020 that significantly exceeded the 10-year historical median, and (ii) a 42% increase in after-tax net investment income to $263 million, or $4.34 per share. The $1.28 per share increase in after-tax net investment income in 2021 was driven by a $1.19 per share increase in after-tax net investment income from our alternative investments within our other investments portfolio. These strong alternative investment returns principally reflect our private equity holdings and the results were driven by strong corporate earnings and robust valuations.
Outlook
For 2022, we have established a non-GAAP operating ROE target of 11%. We have based our 2022 target on (i) our current estimated weighted average cost of capital ("WACC"), (ii) an approximate 350 basis point spread over our estimated WACC, (iii) the current interest rate environment, and (iv) property and casualty insurance market conditions. Our 2022 11% ROE target sets a high bar for our financial performance, challenges us to perform at our best, and aligns our incentive compensation structure with shareholder interests. We entered 2022 in the strongest financial position in our 95-year history, with having a record level of GAAP equity, statutory capital and surplus, and holding company cash and investments. We are well positioned to continue executing on our strategic objectives and delivering growth and profitability.
Our focus in 2022 will be on several areas to position us for ongoing success:
•Delivering on our strategy for continued disciplined and profitable growth by:
◦Continuing to expand our Standard Commercial Lines market share by (i) increasing our share towards our 12% target of our agents' premiums, (ii) strategically appointing new agents, and (iii) maximizing new business growth in the small business market through utilization of our enhanced small business platform;
◦Expanding our geographic footprint, with a plan to commence writing Standard Commercial Lines business in the states of Vermont, Alabama, and Idaho, subject to regulatory approvals, in the near-term, and other states over time;
◦Increasing customer retention by delivering a superior omnichannel experience and offering value-added technologies and services;
◦Shifting our focus towards targeting new and renewal customers in the mass affluent market within our Standard Personal Lines segment, where we believe we can be more competitive with the strong coverage and servicing capabilities that we offer; and
◦Deploying our new underwriting platform in our E&S segment that will improve agents' ease of interactions with us.
•Continuing to achieve written renewal pure price increases, along with underwriting improvements, that are in line with expected loss trend, while delivering on our strategy for continued disciplined growth.
•Continuing to build on a culture centered on the values of diversity, equity, and inclusion that fosters innovation, idea
generation, and developing a group of specially trained leaders who can guide us successfully into the future.
For 2022, our full-year guidance is as follows:
•A GAAP combined ratio, excluding catastrophe losses, of 91.0%. Our combined ratio estimate assumes no prior-year casualty reserve development;
•Net catastrophe losses of 4.0 points on the combined ratio;
•After-tax net investment income of $200 million that includes $20 million in after-tax net investment income from our alternative investments;
•An overall effective tax rate of approximately 20.5% that assumes an effective tax rate of 19.5% for net investment income and 21.0% for all other items; and
•Weighted average shares of 61 million on a fully diluted basis.
Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment
Insurance Operations
The following table provides quantitative information for analyzing the combined ratio:
The 15% NPW growth in 2021 compared to the prior-year period reflects our strong relationships with best-in-class distribution partners, sophisticated underwriting and pricing tools, and excellent customer servicing capabilities. This solid growth included (i) renewal pure price increases, and (ii) new business growth, as follows
In addition, our strong NPW growth in 2021 benefited from exposure growth driven by robust economic activity in the U.S., which resulted in our customers increasing their sales, payrolls, and exposure units, all of which favorably impacted our NPW.
The growth in 2021 was further impacted by the 2020 COVID-19-related $75 million estimate of return audit and mid-term endorsement premium and $19.7 million of premium credits to our personal and commercial automobile customers, which reduced NPW by $94.7 million in 2020. The reduction in NPW in 2020 from COVID-19-related adjustments had the impact of increasing our 2021 NPW growth rate by 4 percentage points.
Consistent with the impacts to NPW, the increase in NPE in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected the items discussed above.
Loss and Loss Expenses
The loss and loss expense ratio decreased 0.9 points in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to (i) non-catastrophe and catastrophe property loss and loss expenses, (ii) prior year casualty reserve development, and (iii) the current year loss and loss expense ratio, which is detailed as follows:
Net catastrophe losses of 5.4 points in 2021 and 8.0 points in 2020 were higher than our longer-term net catastrophe loss averages. Catastrophe losses in 2021 included gross losses of $53 million from Hurricane Ida, or net losses of approximately $41 million, or 1.4 points, after factoring in the benefit from our Property Catastrophe Excess of Loss Treaty, which attaches at $40 million. The structure of our Property Catastrophe Excess of Loss Treaty is detailed in the "Reinsurance" section in "Results of Operations and Related Information by Segment" of this MD&A. The majority of the Hurricane Ida losses, which included meaningful property losses from damage to personal and commercial automobiles, occurred in New Jersey and the
surrounding states. Losses in 2020 were mainly driven by a tornado and subsequent hail event that impacted Tennessee in March, two large storms in April, civil unrest claims, the Midwestern derecho, and Hurricane Isaias.
Details of the prior year casualty reserve development were as follows:
In addition to the prior year casualty reserve development, the current year loss and loss expense ratio was 0.9 points higher in 2021 compared to 2020. In 2020, we experienced lower claims frequencies in our commercial and personal automobile lines of business reflecting reductions in miles driven due to the pandemic environment, which benefited our loss ratio in 2020. Although some benefit continued in 2021, it was not as significant as in 2020.
For additional qualitative reserve development discussion, refer to the insurance segment sections below.
Underwriting Expenses
The underwriting expense ratio decreased 1.3 points in 2021 compared to 2020. The underwriting expense ratio in 2020 was elevated by 1.1 points for COVID-19-related items. The decrease in the underwriting expense ratio in 2021 reflects the absence of these COVID-19-related impacts, as well as a continued below-normal travel and entertainment expense levels due to most of 2021's pandemic-related limited business travel. The COVID-19-related items included in 2020 results were as follows: (i) lower NPE from the estimate of return audit and mid-term endorsement premium and premium credits given to our personal and commercial automobile customer; and (ii) a $13.5 million increase to our allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable.
Standard Commercial Lines Segment
NPW growth of 16% in this segment in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected (i) renewal pure price increases, (ii) new business growth, and (iii) stable retention as follows:
Consistent with our overall insurance operations, NPW growth in 2021 (i) benefited from exposure growth, and (ii) was positively impacted by approximately four points due to the following 2020 COVID-19 related items that did not reoccur in 2021:
•A $75 million estimate of return audit and mid-term endorsement premium that reduced 2020 NPW.
•A $15.4 million premium credit to our commercial automobile customers that reduced 2020 NPW.
Consistent with the impacts to NPW, the increase in NPE in 2021 compared to 2020 reflected the items discussed above.
The 0.3-point increase in the loss and loss expense ratio in 2021 compared to 2020 was driven by the following:
Our losses in 2021 and 2020 included elevated levels of catastrophe losses, with 4.3 points this year and 5.5 points last year. Both years compared unfavorably to our longer-term catastrophe loss average for this segment. Catastrophe losses for this segment are consistent with the discussion in the "Insurance Operations" section above.
In addition to the prior year casualty reserve development above, current year casualty loss costs were 0.4 points higher in 2021 compared to 2020, driven by our commercial automobile line of business, which experienced an increase in claim frequencies as driving patterns continued to evolve in the COVID-19 environment, despite still being below our 2019 pre-pandemic levels. In 2020, we experienced lower claim frequencies in our commercial automobile line of business due to the pandemic environment. Lower claims frequencies and lower non-catastrophe property losses provided an offset to the $15.4 million premium credit to customers in 2020.
For quantitative information on the prior year development by line of business, see "Financial Highlights of Results for Years Ended December 2021, 2020, and 2019" above and for qualitative information about the significant drivers of this development, see the line of business discussions below.
The Standard Commercial Lines underwriting expense ratio decreased 1.3-points in 2021 compared to 2020. The ratio was elevated in 2020 by 1.2 points for COVID-19-related items, as discussed in the "Insurance Operations" section above. The decrease in the 2021 underwriting expense ratio reflects the absence of these COVID-19-related impacts.
The following is a discussion of our most significant Standard Commercial Lines of business:
NPW grew 20% in 2021 due to renewal pure price increases, exposure growth, and higher direct new business. NPW growth in 2021 also included a 7-point benefit from the 2020 COVID-19-related $46 million estimate of return audit and mid-term endorsement premium recorded on this line in the first quarter of 2020, which did not reoccur in 2021.
The combined ratio decreased 0.4 points in 2021, driven principally by a decrease in the underwriting expense ratio of 1.5 points, the drivers of which are consistent with the items discussed in the Standard Commercial Lines Segment above.
Partially offsetting this decrease in the combined ratio was less favorable prior year casualty reserve development compared to 2020, as outlined in the table below.
In 2021, the prior year reserve development was primarily attributable to favorable reserve development on loss severities in accident years 2018 and prior. In 2020, the prior year reserve development was primarily attributable to favorable reserve development on loss severities in accident years 2017 and prior. While this line experienced favorable prior year casualty reserve development in 2021 and 2020, it is also exposed to changes in economic and social trends, including litigation propensity and outcomes, and changes in state laws such as those that extend the statute of limitations or open windows for previously time-barred actions.
NPW growth of 17% benefited from renewal pure price increases and higher direct new business, as shown in the table above. Additionally, NPW growth in 2021 included (i) exposure growth, and (ii) a 3-point benefit from the 2020 COVID-19-related
$15.4 million premium credit to our commercial automobile customers in the second quarter of 2020, which did not reoccur in 2021.
The 2.7-point increase in the combined ratio in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by the items in the tables shown below.
The 2021 and 2020 prior year casualty reserve development was primarily attributable to unfavorable reserve development on loss severities in accident years 2016 through 2019. The 2020 prior year casualty reserve development also experienced higher than expected frequencies in accident year 2019.
In addition to the items in the table above, the combined ratio variances included the following:
•A 1.4-point increase in the current year casualty loss costs in 2021 compared to 2020, driven primarily by increased claim frequencies in 2021 due to driving patterns that continue to evolve in the COVID-19 environment compared to 2020. Last year experienced lower claim frequencies reflecting reductions in miles driven due to the COVID-19-related driving pattern shifts impacting this line of business. Lower claims frequencies and lower non-catastrophe property losses provided an offset to the $15.4 million of premium credits to customers in 2020.
•A 2.2-point decrease in the underwriting expense ratio in 2021 compared to 2020, the drivers of which are consistent with the items discussed in the Standard Commercial Lines Segment above.
This line of business remains an area of focus for us and most of the industry, as profitability challenges continue to generate
combined ratios higher than risk-adjusted targets. We will continue to (i) actively implement price increases consistent with levels experienced in 2021 and 2020, (ii) enhance our underwriting tools to further improve the accuracy of our rating information to prevent premium leakage, and (iii) actively manage our new and renewal business.
NPW increased 17% in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher retention, exposure growth, and increased direct new business. Additionally, NPW growth in 2021 included an 11-point benefit due to the 2020 COVID-19-related $29 million estimate of return audit and mid-term endorsement premium recorded on this line in the first quarter of 2020 that did not reoccur in 2021.
The decrease in the combined ratio in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to: (i) a decrease in the underwriting expense ratio of 1.7 points, the drivers of which are consistent with the items discussed in the Standard Commercial Lines Segment above; and (ii) a 1.4-point reduction in the current year casualty loss costs. This reduction was in recognition of the favorable frequency trends and sustained lower medical severity trends impacting this line.
Partially offsetting the decreases in the combined ratio was less favorable prior year casualty reserve development compared to 2020, as follows:
For both periods, the favorable reserve development was due to continued favorable medical severity trends impacting accident years 2019 and prior. Due to the length of time injured workers can receive related medical treatment, decreases in medical inflation can cause favorable loss development across an extended number of accident years.
NPW growth of 14% in this line in 2021 compared to 2020 was driven by renewal pure price increases, exposure growth, and higher new business.
Quantitative information regarding property losses is as follows:
Our losses in 2021 and 2020 included elevated levels of catastrophe losses, with 18.2 points this year and 23.3 points last year. Both years compare unfavorably to our longer-term catastrophe loss average for this line of business. Catastrophe losses for this segment are consistent with the discussion in the "Insurance Operations" section above.
Standard Personal Lines Segment
NPW declined 1% in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by a reduction in direct new business and slightly lower retention, both of which were impacted by the challenging personal automobile competitive environment. This decrease was
partially offset by the impact of the COVID-19 related premium credits to our personal automobile customers, which reduced NPW by $4.3 million in 2020 and added one point of growth in 2021 compared to 2020, as these premium credits did not reoccur in 2021. In the third quarter of 2021, we transitioned our personal lines strategy to targeting new and renewal customers in the mass affluent market where we believe our strong coverage and servicing capabilities can be more competitive.
1Excludes our flood direct premiums written, which is 100% ceded to the NFIP and therefore has no impact on our NPW.
The reduction in NPE in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects the decreases in NPW discussed above.
The loss and loss expense ratio decreased 5.8 points in 2021 compared to 2020, the primary drivers of which were as follows:
Our 2021 losses were impacted by 44 events that were designated as catastrophes by Property Claims Services ("PCS"), an internationally recognized authority on insured catastrophe property losses, including two severe thunderstorms accompanied by wind and hail occurring in March and June, Hurricane Ida in late August and early September, and a series of severe tornadoes that swept the Midwest in December. Our 2020 losses were impacted by 38 events that PCS designated as catastrophes, including a tornado affecting Tennessee in March, two severe April storms with damaging winds and tornadoes affecting the Midwestern states, Hurricane Isaias in late July and early August, and the August derecho in the Midwest.
There was no prior year casualty reserve development in either 2021 and 2020. However, current year casualty loss costs were 1.2 points higher in 2021 compared to 2020, driven by our personal automobile line of business, reflecting increases in claim frequencies as driving patterns continued to evolve in the COVID-19 environment.
The underwriting expense ratio decreased 0.8-points in 2021 compared to 2020. The ratio was elevated in 2020 by 1.0 points for COVID-19-related items, as discussed in the "Insurance Operations" section above. The decrease in the underwriting expense ratio in 2021 reflects the absence of these COVID-19-related impacts.
E&S Lines Segment
The strong NPW growth of 23% in 2021 was due to increases in direct new business, renewal pure price, and exposure growth driven by favorable market conditions in E&S lines in the U.S.
Quantitative information is as follows:
The increase in NPE in 2021 compared to 2020 reflects the increases in NPW discussed above.
The 2.9-point decrease in the loss and loss expense ratio in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to favorable prior year casualty reserve development and a decrease in property losses. This was partially offset by an increase in current year casualty loss costs of 1.4 points, driven primarily by increased claim frequencies in 2021 compared to the decreased levels experienced in 2020.
Quantitative information regarding our property losses and prior year casualty reserve development are as follows:
Our 2021 losses were impacted by 50 events that PCS designated as catastrophes, including Winter Storm Uri affecting Texas in February, a series of large storms affecting the Southern and Midwestern states in May, and Hurricane Ida in late August and early September. Our 2020 losses were impacted by 49 events that PCS designated as catastrophes, including the civil unrest throughout the country in June and Hurricane Laura in August.
The favorable prior year casualty reserve development in 2021 was primarily attributable to lower loss severities in accident years 2016 and prior. There was no prior year casualty reserve development in 2020.
The 2.7-point decrease in the underwriting expense ratio in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by: (i) a decrease in labor expenses of 1.5 points and (ii) a decrease in compensation to our distribution partners of 0.6 points from changes in premium mix and corresponding commission rates. In addition, the underwriting expense ratio in 2020 was elevated by 0.9 points for the COVID-19-related increase in our allowance for credit losses on premiums receivable, as discussed in "Insurance Operations" above. The decrease in the underwriting expense ratio in 2021 reflects the absence of this COVID-19-related impact.
Reinsurance
We use reinsurance to protect our capital resources and insure against losses on property and casualty risks that we underwrite in excess of the amount that we are prepared to accept. We use two main reinsurance vehicles: (i) a reinsurance pooling agreement among our Insurance Subsidiaries through which each company agrees to share in premiums and losses based on certain specified percentages; and (ii) reinsurance contracts and arrangements with third parties that cover various policies that we issue to our customers.
Reinsurance Pooling Agreement
The primary purposes of the Insurance Subsidiaries' reinsurance pooling agreement are to:
•Pool or share proportionately the underwriting profit and loss results of property and casualty insurance underwriting operations through reinsurance;
•Reduce administration expenses; and
•Permit all the Insurance Subsidiaries to obtain a uniform rating from AM Best.
The following illustrates the pooling percentages by Insurance Subsidiary as of December 31, 2021:
Reinsurance Treaties and Arrangements
By entering into reinsurance treaties and arrangements, we can increase our underwriting capacity, accepting larger individual risks and aggregations of risks without directly increasing our capital or statutory surplus. Our reinsurance program principally consists of traditional reinsurance. Under our reinsurance treaties, we cede to our reinsurers a portion of our incurred losses from an individual policy or group of policies in exchange for a portion of the premium on those policies. Amounts not reinsured below a specified dollar threshold are known as retention. Reinsurance does not legally discharge us from liability under the terms and limits of our policies, but it does make our reinsurers liable to us for the amount of liability we cede to them. Our reinsurers often rely on their own reinsurance programs, or retrocessions, to manage their large loss exposures. The size of the global reinsurance community is relatively small. If our reinsurers are unable to collect on their retrocessional programs, it may impair their ability to pay us for the amounts we cede to them.
Consequently, our reinsurers present us with direct, indirect, and contingent counterparty credit risk. We attempt to mitigate this credit risk by (i) pursuing relationships with reinsurers rated “A-” or higher by AM Best and/or (ii) obtaining collateral to secure reinsurance obligations. Some of our reinsurance treaties permit us to terminate or commute them - or require the reinsurer to post collateral if the reinsurer's financial condition or rating deteriorates. We monitor our reinsurers' financial condition, and we review the quality of reinsurance recoverables and reserves for uncollectible reinsurance. For additional information regarding our reinsurance counterparty credit risk, see Note 9. "Reinsurance" in Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Form 10-K.
We have reinsurance contracts that separately cover our property and casualty insurance business that can be segregated into the following key categories:
•Property Reinsurance, which includes our (i) property excess of loss treaties purchased for protection against large individual property losses and (ii) property catastrophe treaties purchased to provide protection for the overall property portfolio against severe catastrophic events. We also purchase a limited amount of facultative reinsurance, primarily for large individual property risks greater than our property excess of loss treaty capacity.
•Casualty Reinsurance, which provides protection for both individual large casualty losses and catastrophic casualty losses involving multiple claimants or insureds. We also may use facultative reinsurance for large individual casualty risks in excess of our treaty capacity. We may also purchase quota share capacity for certain new or higher severity casualty lines of business.
•Terrorism Reinsurance, which provides a federal reinsurance backstop, behind the protection built into our property and casualty reinsurance treaties, for terrorism losses covered under the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act (“TRIPRA”). For further information about TRIPRA, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K.
•Flood Reinsurance, for which all of the premiums and losses related to our participation in the WYO (for which we also receive a servicing fee) are 100% ceded to the federal government.
Property Reinsurance
We renewed our main property catastrophe treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S business, effective January 1, 2022. For this treaty, we purchased an additional $50 million in limit to respond to our growing property portfolio, thereby
extending the coverage to $835 million in excess of the $40 million retention. Due to growth in our E&S property book of business, more challenging market conditions, and our recent and planned Standard Commercial Lines geographic expansion, we restructured our non-footprint catastrophe treaty from a $35 million in excess of $5 million structure covering a limited number of states to a $30 million in excess of $10 million treaty, covering all 50 states and the District of Columbia, for our E&S business only. This removed our five newest Standard Commercial Lines states from coverage under this treaty, as they are covered under the main property catastrophe treaty. We also increased our co-participation from 15% to 34% to balance the cost versus volatility protection provided by this treaty. Consistent with the prior year, both treaties were renewed with restrictions in coverage related to the systemic perils of communicable disease and first-party cybersecurity coverage, in line with current market conditions. Consequently, the property catastrophe program excludes coverage for communicable disease, but retains limited reinsurance coverage for cybersecurity risks. Despite these limitations, coverage for traditionally covered property perils was maintained.
We seek to minimize reinsurance credit risk by transacting with highly-rated reinsurance partners and purchasing collateralized reinsurance products, particularly for high-severity, low-probability events, if feasible. Our current reinsurance program includes $259 million in collateralized limit, primarily in the top layer of the catastrophe program, compared to $281 million in collateralized limit under the prior year's reinsurance program.
Overall, we expect ceded premium for our property catastrophe reinsurance treaties to increase modestly in 2022 due to three factors: (i) increases in underlying property exposures in line with our growing property insurance portfolio; (ii) the addition of $50 million of coverage purchased to maintain stability in our net risk profile; and (iii) modest risk-adjusted price increases.
We model various catastrophic perils, and hurricane risk continues to be our portfolio's most significant natural catastrophe peril because of the geographic location of the risks we insure. The table below illustrates the impact of the five largest hurricane losses we have experienced in the last 35 years:
1This amount represents reported and unreported gross losses estimated as of December 31, 2021.
2Net loss does not include reinstatement premiums, taxes, or flood claims handling fees.
We review our exposure to hurricane risk by examining third-party vendor models and conducting our own proprietary analysis. The third-party vendor models provide a long-term view that closely relates modeled event frequency to historical hurricane activity, adjusting to reflect certain non-modeled cost assumptions, such as the impact of loss expenses, residual market assessments, and automobile-related losses. We believe that modeled estimates provide a range of potential outcomes, and we review multiple estimates to understand our catastrophic risk.
1Gross losses include uncertainty associated with damage/loss estimation, demand and storm surge, and assumptions for certain un-modeled costs, such as the impact of loss expenses, residual market assessments, and automobile-related losses, which collectively increase our gross losses by approximately 13%.
2Net losses are after-tax losses net of catastrophe reinsurance including reinstatement premiums.
3GAAP Equity as of December 31, 2021.
Our current catastrophe reinsurance program exhausts at an approximately 1 in 216 year return period, or events with 0.5% probability, based on a multi-model view of hurricane risk. Our actual gross and net losses incurred from hurricanes making U.S.-landfall will vary, perhaps materially, from our estimated modeled losses.
We renewed the property excess of loss treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S business, on July 1, 2021, and the top layer renewed on January 1, 2022. This treaty was renewed with an increase in the retention on the first layer to $3.0 million from $2.0 million to manage the overall reinsurance cost on our growing portfolio and maintain projected earnings volatility protection in line with our historical levels.
The following table summarizes of our property reinsurance treaties and arrangements covering our Insurance Subsidiaries:
PROPERTY REINSURANCE ON INSURANCE PRODUCTS
Treaty Name Reinsurance Coverage Terrorism Coverage
Property Catastrophe Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) $835 million above $40 million retention treaty that responds on per occurrence basis in four layers: All nuclear, biological, chemical, and radioactive ("NBCR") losses are excluded regardless of whether or not they are certified under TRIPRA. Non-NBCR losses are covered to the same extent as non-terrorism losses. Please see Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” of this Form 10-K for discussion regarding TRIPRA.
- 82% of losses in excess of $40 million up to
$100 million;
- 97% of losses in excess of $100 million up to
$225 million;
- 97% of losses in excess of $225 million up to
$525 million; and
- 90% of losses in excess of $525 million up
to $875 million.
The treaty provides one reinstatement in each of the first three layers and no reinstatement in the fourth layer. The per occurrence limit is $776.5 million and the annual aggregate limit is $1.2 billion, net of the Insurance Subsidiaries' co-participation.
In addition, our $30 million above $10 million retention treaty that responds on per occurrence basis covers 66% of E&S losses only, in all states, and has an annual aggregate limit of $34 million, net of the Insurance Subsidiaries' co-participation.
Property Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) $57 million above $3 million retention covering 100% in three layers. Losses other than TRIPRA certified losses are subject to the following reinstatements and annual aggregate limits: All NBCR losses are excluded regardless of whether or not they are certified under TRIPRA. For non-NBCR losses, the treaty distinguishes between acts committed on behalf of foreign persons or foreign interests ("Foreign Terrorism") and those that are not. The treaty provides annual aggregate limits for Foreign Terrorism (other than NBCR) acts of $21 million for the first layer; $60 million for the second layer; and $40 million for the third layer. Non-foreign terrorism losses (other than NBCR) are covered to the same extent as non-terrorism losses.
- $7 million in excess of $3 million layer
provides unlimited reinstatements;
- $30 million in excess of $10 million layer
provides three reinstatements, $120 million in
aggregate limits; and
- $20 million in excess of $40 million layer
provides three reinstatements, $80 million in aggregate
limits.
Flood 100% reinsurance by the federal government’s WYO. None
Casualty Reinsurance
We renewed the casualty excess of loss treaty, which covers both our standard market and E&S Lines business, on July 1, 2021, substantially on the same terms as the treaty expiring June 30, 2021.
The following table summarizes our casualty reinsurance treaties and arrangements covering our Insurance Subsidiaries:
CASUALTY REINSURANCE ON INSURANCE PRODUCTS
Treaty Name Reinsurance Coverage Terrorism Coverage
Casualty Excess of Loss
(covers all insurance operations) There are six layers covering 100% of $88 million in excess of $2 million. Losses other than terrorism losses are subject to the following: All NBCR losses are excluded. All other losses stemming from the acts of terrorism are subject to the following:
- $3 million in excess of $2 million layer
provides 33 reinstatements, $102 million annual aggregate
limit; - $3 million in excess of $2 million layer with
$15 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $7 million in excess of $5 million layer
provides six reinstatements, $49 million annual aggregate
limit; - $7 million in excess of $5 million layer with
$28 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $12 million layer
provides three reinstatements; $36 million annual
aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $12 million layer with
$27 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $9 million in excess of $21 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $18 million annual aggregate
limit;
- $9 million in excess of $21 million layer with
$18 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit;
- $20 million in excess of $30 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $40 million annual aggregate
limit; and
- $20 million in excess of $30 million layer with
$40 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit; and
- $40 million in excess of $50 million layer
provides one reinstatement, $80 million annual aggregate
limit.
- $40 million in excess of $50 million layer with
$80 million net annual terrorism aggregate limit.
We have other reinsurance treaties, such as our (i) Surety and Fidelity Excess of Loss Reinsurance Treaty, (ii) National Workers Compensation Reinsurance Pool Quota Share, which covers business assumed from the involuntary workers compensation pool, (iii) Endurance Specialty Quota share and Loss Development Cover, which protects against losses on policies written before the acquisition and any development on reserves established by MUSIC as of the date of acquisition, (iv) Equipment Breakdown Coverage Reinsurance Treaty, (v) Multi-line Quota Share, which covers additional personal lines coverages, (vi) Cyber Liability Quota Share, and (vii) Excess Liability Quota Share, which covers MUSIC's excess liability business.
We regularly evaluate our overall reinsurance program, and we try to develop effective ways to manage the transfer of risk. We base our analysis on a comprehensive process that includes periodic analysis of modeling results, our own loss experience, aggregation of exposures, exposure growth, diversification of risks, limits written, projected reinsurance costs, reinsurer financial strength, and projected impact on earnings, equity, and statutory surplus. We strive to balance reinsurer credit quality, price, terms, and our appetite to retain a certain level of risk.
Investments Segment
The primary objective of the investment portfolio is to maximize after-tax net investment income and the overall total return of the portfolio, while maintaining a high credit quality core fixed income securities portfolio and managing our duration risk profile. The effective duration of the fixed income securities portfolio, including short-term investments, was 3.9 years as of December 31, 2021, compared to the Insurance Subsidiaries' net loss and loss expense reserves duration of 3.5 years. The effective duration is monitored and managed to maximize yield while managing interest rate risk at an acceptable level. We maintain a well-diversified portfolio across sectors, with credit quality and maturities that provide ample liquidity. Purchases and sales are made with the intent of maximizing investment returns in the current market environment while balancing capital preservation.
Our fixed income and short-term investments represented 91% of our invested assets at December 31, 2021, and 92% at December 31, 2020. These investments had a weighted average credit rating of “A+” as of December 31, 2021 and "AA-" as of December 31, 2020, with a 96% allocation to investment grade holdings at both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The weighted average credit rating decline reflects a planned reduction in our sector allocation to agency residential mortgage-backed securities over the past year as lower interest rates accelerated prepayments, as expected. Given the very low reinvestment rates for this asset class, we reallocated these non-sale disposal cash flows into other high-quality fixed income sectors, including corporate securities and other asset-backed security classes without a "AAA" rating but in our view currently offer a better risk and reward trade-off.
For further details on the composition, credit quality, and the various risks to which our portfolio is subject, see