Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a medical device company focused on reducing the risk of stroke and its devastating impact. We believe a key to stroke prevention is minimally-invasive and technologically advanced intervention to safely and effectively treat carotid artery disease, one of the leading causes of stroke. We have pioneered a new approach for the treatment of carotid artery disease called transcarotid artery revascularization, or TCAR, which we seek to establish as the standard of care. We manufacture and sell in the United States our portfolio of TCAR products, which are designed to provide direct access to the carotid artery, effective reduction in stroke risk throughout the procedure, and long-term restraint of carotid plaque.
We began commercializing our products in the United States in late 2015. Our products are currently the only devices cleared and approved by the FDA specifically for transcarotid use. While our current commercial focus is on the U.S. market, our products have obtained CE Mark approval, allowing us to commercialize in Europe in the future. We are also pursuing regulatory clearances in select international markets. TCAR is reimbursed based on established current procedural technology, or CPT, codes and International Classification of Diseases, or ICD-10, codes related to carotid stenting that track to Medicare Severity Diagnosis Related Group, or MS-DRG, classifications.
We designed our commercial strategy and built our direct sales force with a particular focus on vascular surgery practices. Vascular surgeons are skilled in endovascular procedures, and our sales and marketing efforts are focused on driving adoption and supporting their practice development by offering them an innovative, safe, effective and minimally-invasive alternative for treating carotid artery disease. We also market to other specialists with experience in CEA or CAS with the appropriate skill set for TCAR, including neurosurgeons, cardiothoracic surgeons and non-surgical interventionalists in radiology, neuroradiology and cardiology. We also work on developing strong relationships with physicians and hospitals that we have identified as key opinion leaders. We consider the hospitals and medical centers where the procedure is performed to be our customers, as they typically are responsible for purchasing our products.
We currently manufacture and distribute the ENROUTE NPS at our facility in Sunnyvale, California, using components and sub-assemblies manufactured both in-house and by third party manufacturers and suppliers. We purchase our other products from third-party contract manufacturers, including our ENROUTE stent. Many of these third-party manufacturers and outside vendors are currently single-source suppliers. In May 2021, we entered into a lease for an additional facility in Plymouth, Minnesota. We expect to begin commercial production in the second half of 2022 and believe our combined facilities will be sufficient to meet our manufacturing needs for at least the next five years.
In April 2019, we completed our initial public offering by issuing 6,000,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, for net proceeds of approximately $109.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses. In August 2019, we completed a secondary public offering of 4,200,000 shares of common stock by selling stockholders, and the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase 630,000 additional shares of common stock from selling stockholders, at a public offering price of $39.50 per share. We received no proceeds from the sale of our common stock by the selling stockholders.
Prior to our initial public offering in April 2019, our primary sources of capital were private placements of convertible preferred stock, debt financing arrangements and revenue from sales of our products.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 6,808,154 shares of our common stock, of which we offered 1,923,076 shares for sale and the remaining 4,885,078 shares were offered for sale by certain selling stockholders, at a public offering price of $39.00 per share. From the public offering, we received cash proceeds of approximately $70.5 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs which were paid by us. Also, in May 2020, the underwriters fully exercised their option to purchase 1,021,223 additional shares of common stock from the selling stockholders. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the shares of common stock by the
selling stockholders. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $110.2 million, short-term debt of $3.9 million, long-term debt of $44.8 million and an accumulated deficit of $288.7 million.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The global COVID-19 pandemic presents significant risks to us and has had, and continues to have intermittent impacts on our business, operations, and financial results and condition, directly and indirectly, including, without limitation, impacts on: the health of our management and employees; our manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales operations; our research and development activities, including clinical activities; and customer and patient behaviors. COVID-19 and its variants have negatively impacted, and may continue to negatively impact our operations and revenue and overall financial condition by significantly decreasing the number of TCAR procedures performed. The pandemic has also reduced our expectations for the growth rate in the number of TCAR procedures to be performed in the future. The number of TCAR procedures performed, similar to other surgical procedures, has significantly decreased as many health care organizations globally have prioritized the treatment of patients with COVID-19. In addition, hospitals have and continue to experience staffing shortages that cause problems scheduling or rescheduling TCAR procedures. These measures and challenges will likely continue for the duration of the pandemic, which is uncertain, and will significantly reduce our expected revenue while the pandemic continues. As well, due to presumed fear and anxiety, some patients are not accessing routine or emergency health care which may impact our expected procedures and revenue.
Governmental mandates related to COVID-19 or other infectious diseases have impacted, and we expect them to continue to impact, our personnel and personnel at third-party manufacturing facilities in the United States and other countries, and the availability or cost of materials. Numerous state and local jurisdictions have imposed, and others in the future may impose, “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19. Such orders or restrictions have resulted in our facilities periodically closing, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays, travel restrictions and cancellation of events, among other effects, thereby negatively impacting our operations. However, we are considered an essential business under applicable state rules and our manufacturing operations are ongoing.
Other disruptions or potential disruptions include intermittent restrictions on our personnel to travel and access customers for selling, marketing, training, case support and product development feedback; delays in approvals by regulatory bodies; delays in product development efforts; delays in preparation for and launch of our international expansion efforts; and additional government requirements or other incremental mitigation efforts that may further impact our capacity to manufacture, sell and support the use of our products.
While some of these restrictions began to lift in 2021 and early 2022, new virus variants, and increased infection rates has continued to make the current COVID-related environment highly volatile and uncertain. The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us remains highly uncertain and will depend on future developments and factors that continue to evolve, including the duration and severity of the pandemic, the actions taken to reduce the transmission of COVID-19 or mitigate the burden on hospitals, and the speed with which normal economic, labor market and operating conditions resume, among others. Most of these developments and factors are outside of our control and could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
We currently derive all of our revenue from the sale of our portfolio of TCAR products to hospitals and medical centers in the United States. Each of our products is purchased individually, and the majority of our revenue is derived from sales of the ENROUTE NPS and ENROUTE stent. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our revenue during the during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We expect revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales territories and trained physician base, add new accounts and as existing physicians perform more TCAR procedures. However, we anticipate continued headwinds related to the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its variants and their nearer term impact on hospital capacity, staffing challenges and patient behavior.
We expect our revenue to fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter due to a variety of factors, including seasonality. For example, in the first quarter, our results can be harmed by adverse weather and by resetting of annual patient healthcare insurance plan deductibles, both of which may cause patients to delay elective procedures. Holiday and summer vacations by physicians and/or their patients can also affect procedure volumes that in turn affect hospital ordering patterns. We have also seen procedure volumes moderate during major medical conferences when significant portions of our customer base are attending the conferences.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
We currently manufacture the ENROUTE NPS in California at our facility in Sunnyvale. We purchase our other products from third party manufacturers. Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs related to materials, components and sub-assemblies, direct labor, manufacturing overhead, reserves for excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventories as well as distribution-related expenses. Overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment and operations supervision and management. Cost of goods sold also includes depreciation expense for production equipment and certain direct costs such as those incurred for shipping our products and royalties related to the sale of our ENROUTE stent. We expense all inventory provisions as cost of goods sold. We record adjustments to our inventory valuation for estimated excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventories based on assumptions about future demand, past usage, changes to manufacturing processes and overall market conditions. We expect cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars to the extent more of our products are sold.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily average selling prices, product sales mix, production and ordering volumes, manufacturing costs, product yields, replacement of expired product, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. We expect our gross margin to increase over the long-term as our production and ordering volumes increase and as we spread the fixed portion of our overhead costs over a larger number of units produced, potentially offset by any investments in additional operational infrastructure in both California and our new facility in Minnesota. We expect gross margin to be slightly lower for the year ended December 31, 2022, as we incur additional overhead related to our investment in the start-up and expansion of our manufacturing capacity in Minnesota. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing know-how and capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs and have a positive long-term impact on our gross margin. However, our gross margin could fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we introduce new products, due to the timing of certain manufacturing engineering projects, as we adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies and as we expand our distribution operations and infrastructure to support long term growth and risk mitigation. In addition, COVID-19 and its variants may continue to negatively impact our gross margin in the near term due to unfavorable production variances as a result of lower production and lower demand.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical studies to develop and support our products, regulatory expenses, medical affairs, and other costs associated with products and technologies that are in development. These expenses include employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, consulting, prototyping, testing, materials, travel expenses, depreciation and an allocation of facility overhead expenses. Additionally, R&D expenses include costs associated with our clinical studies, including clinical trial design, clinical trial site initiation and study costs, data management, related travel expenses and the cost of products used for clinical trials, internal and external costs associated with our regulatory compliance and quality assurance functions and overhead costs. We expect R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trial and other related activities. In addition, we anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our product development efforts and clinical and regulatory matters for the foreseeable future. COVID-19 is delaying enrollment in clinical trials across the medical device industry and may affect any new trials we decide to pursue.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, related to selling and marketing functions, physician education programs, commercial operations and analytics, reimbursement, finance, information technology and human resource functions. Other SG&A expenses include sales commissions, training, travel expenses, promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees (including legal, audit and tax fees), insurance costs, general corporate expenses and allocated facilities-related expenses. We expect SG&A expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our infrastructure to both drive and support anticipated growth in revenue, due to additional legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses associated with being a public company, and as we expand our presence in Minnesota. In addition, we will continue exploring sales and marketing expansion opportunities in international geographies.
While some of these restrictions began to lift throughout 2021 and allowed for the resumption in certain employee and physician travel, tradeshow and other expenses, due to new virus variants and increased infections, we expect the
COVID-19 pandemic to continue to modulate our SG&A expenses over the short term. The outbreak and persistence of COVID-19 in international markets that we have targeted for our international expansion may also delay preparation for and launch of such expansion efforts.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income (expense), net consists primarily of cash interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs associated with our debt agreements. Our interest expense was partially offset by interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Other Income (Expense), net
During the year ended December 31, 2019, other expense, net primarily consists of losses resulting from the remeasurement of the fair value of our convertible preferred stock warrant liability at each balance sheet date. We had recorded adjustments to the estimated fair value of the convertible preferred stock warrants until they were exercised in connection with our initial public offering in April 2019. At such time, the final fair value of the warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity and we no longer record any related periodic fair value adjustments.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue. Revenue increased $26.2 million, or 35%, to $101.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $75.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was attributable to an increase in the number of products sold as we expanded our sales territories, increased the number of new accounts, trained more physicians in TCAR and as physicians performed more TCAR procedures. Although revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the prior year, the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact our revenue as resurgences due to the Delta and Omicron variants adversely effected hospital capacity and patient behaviors and presented staffing challenges. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, included the recognition of $1.3 million in deferred revenue in the second quarter due to a decrease in the provision for sales returns. Excluding the contribution of the $1.3 million, revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $27.5 million, or 37%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not anticipate future potential decreases in the sales return provision to materially impact subsequent quarters.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin. Cost of goods sold increased $4.2 million, or 20%, to $25.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to the increase in the number of products sold and also to additional overhead related to the start-up and expansion of our manufacturing capacity at our facility in Minnesota. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 75%, compared to 72% in the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin in the prior year period included unfavorable production variances as a result of temporarily idled manufacturing operations and lower than anticipated demand due to COVID-19, partially offset by the decrease in our provision for sales returns.
Research and Development Expenses. R&D expenses increased $5.8 million, or 27%, to $27.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in R&D expenses was driven by growth in personnel and investment in new and ongoing R&D programs. The increase in R&D expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $6.6 million in personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $2.6 million in product development materials and costs, an increase of $0.8 million related to the allocation of facilities, depreciation and other related expenses, and
an increase of $0.6 million in outside services, partially offset by a decrease of $4.5 million in clinical and regulatory expense and a decrease of $0.3 million in educational grants. Clinical and regulatory expense in the prior year included costs attributable to our continued efforts to obtain label expansion of the ENROUTE stent in standard surgical risk patients.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. SG&A expenses increased $20.9 million, or 28%, to $96.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $75.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in SG&A costs was due to the continued expansion of our sales team and commercial efforts, and general corporate and other costs associated with operating as a public company, compared to the prior year period. The increase in SG&A expenses is primarily attributable to an increase of $17.2 million in payroll and personnel-related expenses, an increase of $2.2 million in physician training and travel related costs, an increase of $0.8 million in software related expense, an increase of $0.3 million in marketing and tradeshow expenses, an increase of $0.3 million related to the allocation of facilities, depreciation and other related expenses, and an increase of $0.2 million in insurance costs, partially offset by decreases in costs attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. Personnel-related expenses included stock-based compensation expense of $11.1 million and $5.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Income (Expense), Net. Interest income (expense), net decreased $1.0 million, or 30%, to an expense of $2.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an expense of $3.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in net interest expense was attributable to the reduced interest rate as a result of the October 2020 refinancing of our debt obligations, partially offset by a decrease in interest income due to lower interest rates and lower cash, cash equivalents and investment balances during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with the prior year period.
Other Income (Expense), Net. There were no significant changes within other income (expense), net during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the sales of our common stock in our public offerings, private sales of our equity securities, payments received from customers using our TCAR products, and to a lesser extent the issuance of common stock through the exercise of stock options and our employee stock purchase program and proceeds from our debt financings. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $110.2 million, an accumulated deficit of $288.7 million and $49.0 million outstanding principal under our Loan Agreement.
In April 2019, we completed our initial public offering by issuing 6,000,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, for net proceeds of approximately $109.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and expenses. In August 2019, we completed a secondary public offering of 4,200,000 shares of common stock by selling stockholders, and the exercise in full of the underwriters' option to purchase 630,000 additional shares of common stock from selling stockholders, at a public offering price of $39.50 per share. We received no proceeds from the sale of the common stock by the selling stockholders.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 6,808,154 shares of our common stock, of which we offered 1,923,076 shares for sale and the remaining 4,885,078 shares were offered for sale by certain selling stockholders, at a public offering price of $39.00 per share. From the public offering, we received cash proceeds of approximately $70.5 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs which were paid by us. Also, in May 2020, the underwriters fully exercised their option to purchase 1,021,223 additional shares of common stock from the selling stockholders. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of the shares of common stock by the selling stockholders.
On October 29, 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or Loan Agreement, with Stifel Bank which provides for a $50.0 million loan facility, comprised of a $50.0 million secured revolving credit facility, with a $2.0 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit and other ancillary banking services, and a $50.0 million secured term loan facility, provided that amounts outstanding under both facilities may not exceed an aggregate principal amount of $50.0
million at any time. Any borrowings under the revolving loan facility mature on October 29, 2022, or October 29, 2023 if as of October 29, 2022, no event of default has occurred and we are in compliance with the terms of the Loan Agreement. Borrowings under the term loan facility mature on October 29, 2024. Also on October 29, 2020, we drew down $49.0 million under the term loan facility and used the majority of the proceeds to pay off and terminate our prior loan agreement with CRG.
We expect to continue to devote a substantial amount of our resources to expand commercialization efforts and increase adoption of TCAR using our products, improve and expand reimbursement for TCAR, expand the labeled indications for our products and develop additional products. We will continue exploring sales and marketing expansion opportunities in international geographies. In addition, as a public company, we incur significant legal, accounting, director & officer liability insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company, all of which continue to increase. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur substantial net losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, together with our expected revenue, will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented below:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.9 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $49.8 million and an increase in net operating assets of $6.5 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $17.4 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales and in inventories to support the growth of our operations, decreases in accounts payable and other liabilities, due to timing of payments. These changes were partially offset by increases in accrued liabilities due to timing of payments and the growth of our operations and accrued payroll and related expenses. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of premiums on investments and of right-of-use assets, non-cash interest expense and provision for excess and obsolete inventories.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $42.1 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $47.4 million and an increase in net operating assets of $5.2 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $10.5 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable and inventories to support the growth of our operations and the repayment of paid in kind interest to CRG, partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments and the growth of our operations. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, provision for excess and obsolete inventories, amortization of premiums on investments, non-cash interest expense and loss on debt extinguishment related to our term loan agreement with CRG.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $29.6 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $52.4 million and a decrease in net operating assets of $3.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $25.8 million. The decrease in net operating assets was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable, inventories and prepaid expenses and other current assets to support the growth of our operations, partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, due to timing of payments and growth of our operations. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation, stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense and other charges related to our term loan agreement, accretion of discounts on investments, and an increase in the fair value of the convertible preferred stock warrants.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $72.6 million. Cash provided by investing reflected maturities of investments of $77.4 million offset by purchases of property and equipment of $4.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.4 million. Cash used in investing reflected purchases of purchases of property and equipment of $0.8 million and net purchases of investments of $8.6 million.
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $70.0 million consisting of purchases of available-for-sale investments of $69.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $535,000.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.0 million and primarily consisted of proceeds from stock option exercises and purchases under our employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $81.7 million, consisting of proceeds of $70.6 million from our public offering in May 2020, net of issuance costs paid, proceeds from the issuance of debt of $48.5 million, net of issuance costs paid, and proceeds of $5.2 million from stock option exercises and purchases under our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by repayment of debt of $40.0 million and $2.5 million in premiums paid on loss on extinguishment of debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $113.8 million, primarily attributable to proceeds of $109.4 million from our initial public offering, net of issuance costs paid, proceeds of $2.6 million from stock option exercises and purchases under our employee stock purchase plan and warrant exercises of $1.8 million.
Term Loan Agreement
On October 29, 2020, we drew down $49.0 million under the term loan facility with Stifel Bank using the majority of the proceeds to pay off outstanding amounts under our loan agreement with CRG and to terminate the CRG loan agreement. The principal amount of outstanding term loans under the Loan Agreement with Stifel Bank shall be repaid in equal monthly installments beginning on November 29, 2022. The term loan may not be reborrowed once repaid, but we may prepay the term loan at any time without premium or penalty. We are also obligated to pay a fee to the lender upon the occurrence of certain liquidity events, along with other customary fees for a loan facility of this size and type. Assuming no event of default has occurred, and we are in compliance with the terms of the Loan Agreement, we intend to use the revolving credit facility to amortize the term loan obligations, effectively extending the interest-only period through October 2023. All principal amounts borrowed under the revolving credit facility will be due in October 2023. We would continue to pay the remaining monthly term loan obligations through October 2024.
Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets. The Loan Agreement requires that we maintain unrestricted cash and cash equivalents with Stifel Bank or at Stifel Bank Affiliates of at least $20.0 million. In addition, for any fiscal quarter where our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents maintained with Stifel Bank or at Stifel Bank Affiliates are less than $60.0 million for any day during such fiscal quarter, we must comply with a minimum revenue covenant. Additionally, the Loan Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants limiting our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to, among other things, dispose of assets, effect certain mergers, incur debt, grant liens, pay dividends and distributions on capital stock, make investments and acquisitions, and enter into transactions with affiliates, in each case subject to customary exceptions for a loan facility of this size and type.
The events of default under the Loan Agreement include, among others, payment defaults, material misrepresentations, breaches of covenants, cross defaults with certain other material indebtedness, bankruptcy and insolvency events, and judgment defaults. The occurrence of an event of default could result in the acceleration of our obligations under the Loan Agreement, the termination of the lender’s commitments, a 5% increase in the applicable rate of interest and the exercise by the lender of other rights and remedies provided for under the Loan Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate outstanding principal balance under the Loan Agreement was $49.0 million. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we were in compliance with all covenants under the term loan agreement.
Cordis License Agreement
In December 2010, we entered into a license agreement, or the Cordis License Agreement, with Cordis Corporation, or Cordis. Pursuant to the Cordis License Agreement, Cordis granted us a worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-bearing license to certain of its intellectual property related to the PRECISE carotid stent, or the Licensed IP, for transcervical treatment of carotid artery disease with an intravascular stent for certain applications for accessing blood vessels through the neck and cervical area. Cordis may not license the Licensed IP in our licensed field of use to any other third party during the term of the Cordis License Agreement.
We have paid Cordis a one-time license execution fee and are obligated to pay royalties to Cordis on a calendar quarter basis during the term of the Cordis License Agreement, calculated based on net sales of the licensed products we sell during the preceding quarterly period. The license granted under Cordis License Agreement shall remain in full force and effect on a country-by-country basis until the last to expire of the Licensed IP in such country.
The Cordis License Agreement requires us to work exclusively with either Cordis or Confluent Medical Technologies, Inc. (f/k/a Nitinol Devices and Components, Inc.), or Confluent, for the development, manufacture and supply of the licensed products. If either Cordis or Confluent cannot continue to manufacture or supply the licensed products, we can seek a third-party manufacturer with the prior written consent of Cordis.
We have the right to assign or transfer the Cordis License Agreement to an entity that succeeds all or substantially all of our equity or assets. The Cordis License Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of uncured material breach by the other party that remains uncured for 60 days (or 30 days for payment related breaches), or bankruptcy of the other party.
Cordis Supply Agreement
In October 2011, we entered into a supply agreement, or Cordis Supply Agreement, with Cordis and have since entered into four amendments in March and July 2012, April 2013 and April 2018. Pursuant to the Cordis Supply Agreement, Cordis has assisted in the development of a transcarotid stent delivery system according to our specifications with a PRECISE carotid stent implant, or ENROUTE stent, has supplied the ENROUTE stent through preclinical and clinical trials, and continues to supply the ENROUTE stent for our commercial sale. The Cordis Supply Agreement will continue in full force and effect until the earlier to occur of (i) termination of the Cordis License Agreement; (ii) our election if and when Cordis approves another manufacturer; (iii) mutual written termination; or (iv) termination pursuant to the terms therein. The Cordis Supply Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of uncured material breach by the other party that remains uncured for 30 days, or bankruptcy of the other party.
We are obligated under the Cordis Supply Agreement to purchase a minimum volume of the ENROUTE stent annually. This obligation is binding until the natural expiration of the Cordis License Agreement, due to expiration of the last-to-expire of the Licensed IP, if the Cordis License Agreement remains in effect through such natural expiration.
Cordis has the exclusive right to manufacture and supply the ENROUTE stent during the term of the Cordis Supply Agreement. However, if Cordis is not able to supply the ENROUTE stent, upon our election, Cordis shall permit Confluent or a third-party manufacturer to provide supply of the ENROUTE stent, provided that Cordis retains the right to manufacture and supply the ENROUTE stent to us to the extent it is able to do so. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we, without Cordis’ consent, may work directly with Confluent for the development and supply of next-generation products that materially expand or change the specification of the ENROUTE stent.
Lease Agreements
We currently lease our headquarters in Sunnyvale, California pursuant to a lease agreement which terminates in October 2024. We have an additional option to extend the lease term for a period of five years. The option must be exercised no more than 12 months and no less than nine months prior to the expiration of the applicable term. The facility lease is for approximately 31,000 square feet.
In May 2021, we entered into a lease agreement for a 63,000 square foot facility in Plymouth, Minnesota which terminates in November 2029. We have the option to extend the lease term for two additional five-year periods. The
option must be exercised no more than 12 months and no less than nine months prior to the expiration of the applicable term.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal obligations consist of the operating lease for our facilities, our Loan Agreement with Stifel Bank and non-cancellable inventory purchase commitments. The following table sets out, as of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations and commitments due by period:
The non-cancellable purchase commitments primarily consist of ENROUTE stents and other inventory components.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance, special purpose entities, or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our audited financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated from the sale of our products to hospitals and medical centers in the United States through direct sales representatives. Revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with customers are satisfied, which occurs with the transfer of control of our products to customers, either upon shipment of the product or delivery of the product to the customer under our standard terms and conditions. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the goods. We accept product returns at our discretion or if the product is defective as manufactured. We establish estimated provisions for returns based on historical experience and consideration of other factors that we believe could significantly impact our expected returns.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for new accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.