ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans, expectations, intentions and projections that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are an advanced materials company that develops and commercializes advanced ceramics for biomedical, industrial, and antipathogenic applications. The core strength of SINTX Technologies is the manufacturing, research, and development of advanced ceramics for external partners.
Biomedical Applications: Since its inception, SINTX has been focused on medical grade silicon nitride. SINTX products are biocompatible, bioactive, antipathogenic, and have shown superb bone affinity. Spinal implants made from SINTX silicon nitride have been successfully implanted in humans since 2008 in the US, Europe, Brazil, and Taiwan. This established use, along with its inherent resistance to bacterial adhesion and bone affinity - mean that it may also be suitable in other fusion device applications such as hip, knee and dental implants. Bacterial infection of any biomaterial implants is always a concern. SINTX silicon nitride is inherently resistant to bacterial colonization and biofilm formation, making it antibacterial. SINTX silicon nitride products can be polished to a smooth and wear-resistant surface for articulating applications, such as bearings for hip and knee replacements .
We believe that silicon nitride has a superb combination of properties that make it suited for long-term human implantation. Other biomaterials are based on bone grafts, metal alloys, and polymers- all of which have well-known practical limitations and disadvantages. In contrast, silicon nitride has a legacy of success in the most demanding and extreme industrial environments. As a human implant material, silicon nitride offers bone ingrowth, resistance to bacterial and viral infection, ease of diagnostic imaging, resistance to corrosion, and superior strength and fracture resistance, among other advantages, all of which claims are validated in our large and growing inventory of peer-reviewed, published literature reports. We believe that our versatile silicon nitride manufacturing expertise positions us favorably to introduce new and innovative devices in the medical and non-medical fields.
Industrial Applications: It is the belief of SINTX that its silicon nitride has the best combination of mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties of any technical ceramic material. It is a high-performance technical ceramic with high strength, toughness, and hardness, and is extremely resistant to thermal shock and impact. It is also an electrically insulating ceramic material. Typically, it is used in applications where high load-bearing capacity, thermal stability, and wear resistance are required. The Company has obtained AS9100D certification and ITAR registration to facilitate entry into the aerospace portion of this market.
SINTX has recently entered the ceramic armor market through the purchase of assets from B4C, LLC and a technology partnership with Precision Ceramics USA. SINTX intends to develop and manufacture high-performance ceramics for personnel, aircraft, and vehicle armor including a 100% Boron Carbide material for ultimate lightweight performance in ballistic applications, and a composite material made of Boron Carbide and Silicon Carbide for exceptional multi-hit performance against ballistic threats. SINTX has signed a 10-year lease at a building near its headquarters in Salt Lake City, UT to house development and manufacturing activities for SINTX Armor.
Antipathogenic Applications: Today, there is a global need to improve protection against pathogens in everyday life. SINTX believes that by incorporating its unique composition of silicon nitride antipathogenic powder into products such as face masks, filters, and wound care devices, it is possible to manufacture surfaces that inactivate pathogens, thereby limiting the spread of infection and disease. The discovery in 2020 that SINTX silicon nitride inactivatesSARS-CoV-2, the virus which causes the disease COVID-19, has opened new markets and applications for our material and we have refocused many of our resources on these opportunities.
SINTX presently manufactures advanced ceramic powders and components in our manufacturing facilities based in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Components of our Results of Operations
We manage our business within one reportable segment, which is consistent with how our management reviews our business, makes investment and resource allocation decisions and assesses operating performance.
Product Revenue
We derive our product revenue primarily from the manufacture and sale of spinal fusion products used in the treatment of spine disorders to CTL, with whom we entered into a 10-year exclusive sales agreement in October 2018. We are currently pursuing other sales opportunities for silicon nitride products outside the spinal fusion application and have shipped new orders for these products. In 2021, we made progress in diversifying our revenue by selling a composite product of silicon nitride and PEEK as well as products for the industrial silicon nitride market, the ceramic armor market, and for the antipathogenic market. We generally recognize revenue from sales where control transfers at a point in time as the title and risk of loss passes to the customer, which is at the time the product is shipped. In general, our customer does not have rights of return or exchange.
We believe our product revenue will increase as we secure opportunities to manufacture third party products with silicon nitride, launch and generate revenue from our ceramic armor products, and as we continue to introduce new products into the market.
Cost of Revenue
The expenses that are included in cost of revenue include all in-house manufacturing costs for the products we manufacture.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit measures our product revenue relative to our cost of revenue. We expect our gross profit percentage to decrease as we expand the penetration of our silicon nitride technology platform through OEM and private label partnerships, which offer additional avenues for the adoption of silicon nitride. Prior to the sale of our retail spine implant business, our revenues and gross profits were based on our retail sales. With the focus on OEM and private label partnerships, the margins are lower, thus causing the decrease in our gross profit percentage.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs consist of engineering, product development, clinical trials, test-part manufacturing, testing, developing and validating the manufacturing process, manufacturing, facility and regulatory-related costs. Research and development expenses also include employee compensation, employee and non-employee stock-based compensation, supplies and materials, consultant services, and travel and facilities expenses related to research and development activities.
We expect to incur additional research and development costs as we continue to develop new medical devices, industrial and ceramic armor products, product candidates for antipathogenic applications, and other products which may increase our total research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation for certain members of our executive team and other personnel employed in finance, compliance, administrative, information technology, customer service, executive and human resource departments. General and administrative expenses also include other expenses not part of the other cost categories mentioned above, including facility expenses and professional fees for accounting and legal services.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars, in thousands):
Product Revenue
Total product revenue was $0.6 million in 2021 as compared to $0.6 million in 2020, remaining largely unchanged.
Costs of Revenue and Gross Profit
There was no significant change in the Company’s cost of revenue year over year. Gross profit was approximately unchanged as compared to the same period in 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1.1 million, or 22%, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an overall increase in R&D activity to support the Company’s strategic objective of developing new technologies and related products.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $0.5 million, or 15%, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase is largely due to an increase in insurance costs and fees for external consulting when compared to the prior year.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $0.6 million, or 89%, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an overall increase in marketing activities and personnel to generate interest in and exposure to the Company’s potential new product lines.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income increased $0.4 million, or 25%, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to offering costs in the amount of $1.2 million in the prior year, the forgiveness of PPP loans of $0.9 million, and the gain on the sale of assets of $0.1 million, offset by a decrease in the change in the fair value of the derivative liabilities in the amount of $1.4, a $0.2 million reduction in interest income, and a $0.2 million reduction in accrued sterilization in the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue to operate as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business, and does not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from uncertainty related to its ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred a net loss of $8.8 million and $7.0 million, respectively, and used cash in operations of $10.1 million and $9.1 million, respectively. The Company had an accumulated deficit of $249.9 million and $241.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. To date, the Company’s operations have been principally financed from proceeds from the issuance of preferred and common stock and, to a lesser extent, cash generated from product sales. It is anticipated that the Company will continue to generate operating losses and use cash in operations. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to increase sales, and/or raise additional funds through the capital markets. Whether and when the Company can attain profitability and positive cash flows from operations or obtain additional financing is uncertain.
The Company is actively generating additional scientific and clinical data to have it published in leading industry publications. The unique features of our silicon nitride material are not well known, and we believe the publication of such data would help sales efforts as the Company approaches new prospects. The Company is also making additional changes to the sales strategy, including a focus on revenue growth by expanding the use of silicon nitride in other areas outside of spinal fusion applications. For instance, results from an independent study demonstrated the potential anti-viral properties of our silicon nitride. We believe that we may be able to apply our silicon nitride powder to personal protection products, such as face masks, gowns and gloves, resulting in inactivation of viruses that come into contact with the items.
The Company has common stock that is publicly traded and has been able to successfully raise capital when needed since the date of the Company’s initial public offering in February 2014. On February 6, 2020, the Company closed on a rights offering to its stockholders of units, consisting of convertible preferred stock and warrants, for gross proceeds of $9.4 million, which excludes underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company. Additionally, during the period of June 2020 through August 2020, the Company closed four registered direct offerings of shares of its common stock, priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules, resulting in the issuance of a total of 11,015,000 shares of its common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $20.9 million, which excludes underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by the Company.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company entered into an ATM equity distribution agreement in which the Company may sell, from time to time, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $2.5 million. During the year ending December 31, 2020, the Company sold 354,381 shares of common stock, raising approximately $0.8 million before considering issuance costs. As a result of the sales during the first half of 2020 there are no longer any funds available to the Company under the ATM.
On February 25, 2021, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “2021 Distribution Agreement”) with Maxim Group LLC (“Maxim”), pursuant to which we may sell from time to time, shares of our common stock, $0.01 par value per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $15.0 million through Maxim, as agent. No shares have been sold under the 2021 Distribution Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
On October 1, 2018, the Company sold the retail spine implant business to CTL Medical. The sale included a $6 million noninterest bearing note receivable payable over a 36-month term. CTL Medical has paid this note in full, and the Company does not expect any future cashflows associated with the note.
Management has concluded that its existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund operations for at least the next 12 months, or through March 2023.
Risks Related to COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the United States and global economies and may affect the Company’s operations and those of third parties on which the Company relies. In response to the spread of COVID-19 and to ensure safety of employees and continuity of business operations, we temporarily restricted access to the facility, with our administrative employees continuing their work remotely and limited the number of staff in our manufacturing facility. We implemented protective measures such as wearing of face masks, maintaining social distancing, and additional cleaning. Beginning in 2021, we have offered vaccination incentives. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital, which could negatively impact the Company’s short-term and long-term liquidity. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. The Company does not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on its business, financing or other activities or on healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material impact on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources, operations and business and those of the third parties on which we rely.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes, for the periods indicated, cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $10.1 million in 2021, compared to $9.1 million used in 2020, an increase of $1.0 million. The increase in the net loss for operations, and related non-cash add backs to the net loss, was $1.1 million from 2021 when compared to 2020. The increase in cash used for operating activities during 2021 was primarily due to the $1.1 million mentioned above plus changes in the movement of working capital items during 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 as follows: a $0.3 million increase in cash used for inventory, a $0.1 million increase in cash payments in account and other receivables, a $0.1 increase in cash used in prepaids, offset by a $0.6 million decrease in cash used in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.7 million during 2021, compared to $1.8 million provided by investing activities during the same period in 2020, a decrease of $3.5 million. The decrease in cash provided in investing activities during 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in cash of $3.4 million for the purchase of property and equipment, and $0.2 million from the proceeds from notes receivable, offset by the increase of $0.1 million for the proceeds from the sale of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.7 million during 2021, compared to $30.9 million provided by financing activities during the same period in 2020, a decrease of $30.2 million. This decrease was primarily attributable to proceeds in the prior year from warrant derivative liabilities of $6.3 million, proceeds from issuance of common stock in the amount of $20.0 million, proceeds from issuance of preferred stock in the amount of $3.1 million and a decrease in the proceeds from warrants exercised for cash of $0.9 million, all offset by a $0.1 million increase from the issuance of debt.
Indebtedness
PPP Loan
On April 28, 2020, the Company received funding under a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan (the “PPP Loan”) from First State Community Bank (the “Lender”). The principal amount of the PPP Loan was $0.4 million. The PPP was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). Loans made under the PPP may be partially or fully forgiven if the recipient complies with the provisions of the CARES Act, including the use of PPP Loan proceeds for payroll costs, rent, utilities and other expenses, provided that such amounts are incurred during a 24-week period that commenced on April 28, 2020 and at least 60% of any forgiven amount has been used for covered payroll costs as defined by the CARES Act. On January 5, 2021, the Lender provided notice to the Company that the principal amount and accrued interest had been forgiven. The Company removed the PPP Loan obligation and recorded other income for forgiveness of debt totaling $0.4 million.
PPP Loan
On March 15, 2021, the Company received funding under the SBA Second Draw Program under the Paycheck Protection Program (“2021 PPP”) (the “2021 PPP Loan”) from the Lender. The principal amount of the 2021 PPP Loan is $0.5 million. The Company received notice on November 24, 2021, that the principal amount and accrued interest had been forgiven. The Company removed the 2021 PPP Loan obligation and recorded other income for forgiveness of debt totaling $0.5 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Related-Party Transactions
For a description of our related-party transactions, see Item 13 “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions, Director Independence” contained in Part III of this 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Seasonality and Backlog
Our business is generally not seasonal in nature. We derive our product revenue primarily from the sale of spinal fusion products, used in the treatment of spine disorders, to CTL Medical, with whom we have an exclusive sales agreement in place with a remaining term of 7-years. CTL Medical’s sales generally consist of products that are in stock with them or maintained at hospitals or with their sales distributors. Accordingly, we do not have a backlog of sales orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A summary of our significant accounting policies and estimates is discussed in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. There have been no material changes to those policies for the year ended December 31, 2021. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions regarding uncertainties that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. Significant areas of uncertainty that require judgments, estimates and assumptions include the accounting for income taxes and other contingencies as well as valuation of derivative liabilities, asset impairment and collectability of accounts receivable. We use historical and other information that we consider to be relevant to make these judgments and estimates. However, actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions that are used to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
New Accounting Pronouncement, Not Yet Adopted
The Company has reviewed all other recently issued, but not yet adopted, accounting standards, in order to determine their effects, if any, on its results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Based on that review, the Company believes that no other pronouncements will have a significant effect on its financial statements upon adoption.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its product revenue primarily from the sale of spinal fusion products, used in the treatment of spine disorders to CTL Medical, with whom the Company has a 10-year exclusive sales agreement in place,7 years of which remain. The Company is currently pursuing other sales opportunities for silicon nitride outside the spinal fusion application. The sale of the Company’s products has a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized at the time the product is shipped to the customer. In general, the Company’s customers do not have any rights of return or exchange.
Revenue is recognized when control of the goods or services promised under the contract is transferred to the customer either at a point in time (e.g., upon delivery) or over time (e.g., as performed under the contract). The Company accounts for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights and payment terms of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Contracts are reviewed to determine whether there is one or multiple performance obligations. A performance obligation is a promise to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer and represents the unit of accounting for revenue recognition. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the expected consideration, or the transaction price, is allocated to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation. Revenue is then recognized for the transaction price allocated to the performance obligation when control of the promised goods or services underlying the performance obligation is transferred. Contract consideration is not adjusted for the effects of a significant financing component when, at contract inception, the period between when control transfers and when the customer will pay for that good or service is one year or less. Contact modifications that provide for additional distinct goods or services at the standalone selling price are treated as separate contracts. The transaction price for our contracts reflects our estimate of returns, rebates and discounts, which historically have not been significant. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included in the transaction price and generally are not treated as separate performance obligations as these costs fulfill a promise to transfer the product to the customer. The Company does not employee salespeople to actively seek additional customers; there are no incremental costs for obtaining customers that need to be capitalized.
Account and Other Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Account and other receivables are carried at invoiced amount less an allowance for doubtful accounts. On a regular basis, the Company evaluates account and other receivables and estimates an allowance for doubtful accounts, as needed, based on various factors such as customers’ current credit conditions, length of time past due, and the general economy as a whole. Receivables are written off against the allowance when they are deemed uncollectible.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost for manufactured inventory determined under the standard costs, which approximate actual costs, determined on the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method. Manufactured inventory consists of raw material, direct labor and manufacturing overhead cost components. The Company reviews the carrying value of inventory on a periodic basis for excess or obsolete items, and records any write-down as a cost of revenue, as necessary.
Long Lived Intangible Assets
The Company evaluates the carrying value of definite-lived intangibles when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors the Company considers important which could trigger an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant under-performance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of its use of acquired assets or its overall business strategy, and significant industry or economic trends. The Company amortizes definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. The Company recorded no impairment loss for definite-lived intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2021. As explained above, the Company sold most intangible assets that had a carrying value, retaining the carrying value of only one trademark asset.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment, including leasehold improvements, are stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Property and equipment are depreciated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from three to five years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the related lease term, generally five years.
The Company reviews the carrying value of the Company’s property and equipment that are held and used in the Company’s operations for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined based upon expected undiscounted future net cash flows from the operations to which the assets relate, utilizing management’s best estimate, assumptions, and projections at the time. If the carrying value is determined to be unrecoverable from future operating cash flows, the asset is deemed impaired and an impairment charge would be recognized to the extent the carrying value exceeded the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company estimates the fair value of assets based on the estimated future discounted cash flows of the asset.
As of December 31, 2021, $2.7 million of property and equipment is related to the purchase of equipment for SINTX Armor. As explained in Note 1, on July 20, 2021, the Company acquired the equipment and obtained certain intellectual know how with which it intends to develop, manufacture and commercialize protective armor plates from boron carbide and a composite material of silicon carbide and boron carbide for military, law enforcement and civilian uses. As of December 31, 2021, the assets have not yet been placed in service, nor has the Company recognized any depreciation expense associated with these assets.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying value of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the fiscal year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The Company operates in various tax jurisdictions and is subject to audit by various tax authorities. The Company provides for tax contingencies whenever it is deemed probable that a tax asset has been impaired, or a tax liability has been incurred for events such as tax claims or changes in tax laws. Tax contingencies are based upon their technical merits relative tax law and the specific facts and circumstances as of each reporting period. Changes in facts and circumstances could result in material changes to the amounts recorded for such tax contingencies.
The Company recognizes uncertain income tax positions taken on income tax returns at the largest amount that is more-likely than-not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained.
The Company’s policy for recording interest and penalties associated with uncertain tax positions is to record such items as a component of our income tax provision. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not record any material interest income, interest expense or penalties related to uncertain tax positions or the settlement of audits for prior periods.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock-based awards based on the estimated fair value of the awards as determined on the date of grant and is recognized as expense over the remaining requisite service period. The Company utilizes the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the fair value of employee stock options. The Black-Scholes-Merton model requires the input of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the estimated fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant, the expected term of the stock option, and the expected volatility of the Company’s common stock over the period equal to the expected term of the grant. The Company estimates forfeitures at the date of grant and revises the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The Company accounts for stock options to purchase shares of stock that are issued to non-employees based on the estimated fair value of such instruments using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model.
Derivative Liabilities
Derivative liabilities include the fair value of instruments such as common stock warrants, preferred stock warrants and convertible features of notes, that are initially recorded at fair value and are required to be re-measured to fair value at each reporting period. The change in fair value of the instruments is recognized as a component of other income (expense) in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations until the instruments settle, expire or are no longer classified as derivative liabilities. The Company estimates the fair value of these instruments using the Black-Scholes-Merton or Monte-Carlo valuation models depending on the complexity of the underlying instrument. The significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value include the exercise price, volatility of the stock underlying the instrument, risk-free interest rate, estimated fair value of the stock underlying the instrument and the estimated life of the instrument.