Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations
Merger Agreement
On February 23, 2022, South Jersey Industries, Inc. (SJI or the Company) announced that it had signed an agreement and plan of merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with NJ Boardwalk Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Parent”) and Boardwalk Merger Sub, Inc., a New Jersey corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Parent (“Merger Sub”), pursuant to which, Merger Sub will be merged with and into the Company, with the Company surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Parent. Each of Parent and Merger Sub are affiliates of Infrastructure Investments Fund. Following completion of the transaction, SJI intends to delist its shares from the New York Stock Exchange.
At the effective time of the merger (the “Effective Time”), each share of SJI’s common stock issued and outstanding immediately before the Effective Time will be converted into the right to receive $36.00 in cash, without interest.
SJI’s stockholders will be asked to vote on the adoption of the Merger Agreement and the merger at a special stockholders’ meeting that will be held on a date to be announced. The closing of the merger is subject to customary conditions, including the receipt of regulatory approvals by the BPU, and that the Merger Agreement be adopted by at least a majority of the votes cast by shareholders entitled to vote thereon at the meeting.
The Merger Agreement places limitations on SJI’s ability to engage in certain types of transactions without Parent’s consent between the signing of the Merger Agreement and the Effective Time, including limitations on SJI’s ability to issue dividends other than consistent with its past practices, acquire other businesses, issue equity of SJI (except in the ordinary course pursuant to equity compensation plans) and, subject to certain exceptions, incurring certain indebtedness for borrowed money.
The Merger Agreement contains certain termination rights, including the right of SJI or Parent to terminate if the merger is not consummated within 12 months after signing, subject to certain extensions and exceptions. Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Company may be required to pay Parent a termination fee of $140.0 million if the Merger Agreement is terminated under certain specified circumstances. The Merger Agreement additionally provides that Parent pay the Company a termination fee of $255.0 million under certain specified circumstances.
Introduction
Item 7 analyzes the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of SJI and its subsidiaries. It also includes management’s analysis of past financial results and potential factors that may affect future results, potential future risks and approaches that may be used to manage them. Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, “SJI,” “we,” “us” or “our” refers to the holding company or the consolidated entity of SJI and all of its subsidiaries.
Management's Discussion is divided into the following two major sections:
•SJI - This section describes the financial condition and results of operations of SJI and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. It includes discussions of our regulated operations, including SJG, and our non-regulated operations.
•SJG - This section describes the financial condition and results of operations of SJG, a subsidiary of SJI and separate registrant, which comprises the SJG utility operations segment.
These sections of Item 7 are designed to provide an understanding of each company's respective operations and financial performance and should be read in conjunction with each other as well as in conjunction with the respective company's financial statements and the combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise noted, earnings per share amounts are presented on a diluted basis, and are based on weighted average common and common equivalent shares outstanding.
OVERVIEW - SJI (or the Company) is an energy services holding company that provides a variety of products and services through the following direct or indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries:
SJIU
SJIU was established as a subsidiary of SJI for the purpose of serving as a holding company that owns SJG, ETG and, until its sale in July 2020, ELK.
SJG
SJG, a New Jersey corporation, is an operating public utility company engaged in the purchase, transmission and sale of natural gas for residential, commercial and industrial use. SJG also sells natural gas and pipeline transportation capacity (off-system sales) on a wholesale basis to various customers on the interstate pipeline system and transports natural gas purchased directly from producers or suppliers to their customers. SJG contributed approximately $127.6 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis in 2021.
SJG's service territory covers approximately 2,500 square miles in the southern part of New Jersey. It includes 113 municipalities throughout Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem Counties and portions of Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties. SJG benefits from its proximity to Philadelphia, PA and Wilmington, DE on the western side of its service territory and the popular shore communities on the eastern side. Continuing expansion of SJG's infrastructure throughout its seven-county region has fueled annual customer growth and creates opportunities for future extension into areas not yet served by natural gas.
Southern New Jersey's oceanfront communities continue to experience demand for new single and multifamily homes for both seasonal and year-round living. Demand for existing homes has increased throughout our service territory, in line with national trends. Building expansions in the medical, education, warehouse/distribution, and retail sectors contributed to SJG's growth. At present, SJG serves approximately 81% of households within its territory with natural gas. SJG also serves southern New Jersey's diversified industrial base that includes processors of petroleum and agricultural products; chemical, glass and consumer goods manufacturers; and high technology industrial parks.
As of December 31, 2021, SJG served 384,062 residential customers, 26,826 commercial customers and 413 industrial customers in southern New Jersey. Net additions in 2021 of residential and commercial/industrial customers amounted to 5,959 and 456, respectively. No part of SJG's business is dependent upon a single customer or a few customers. Gas sales, transportation and capacity release for 2021 amounted to 136.2 MMdts, of which 52.5 MMdts were firm sales and transportation, 1.1 MMdts were interruptible sales and transportation and 82.6 MMdts were off-system sales and capacity release. The breakdown of firm sales and transportation includes 48.5% residential, 23.1% commercial, 19.9% industrial, and 8.5% cogeneration and electric generation.
SJG makes wholesale gas sales to gas marketers for resale and ultimate delivery to end users. These “off-system” sales are made possible through the issuance of the FERC Orders No. 547 and 636. Order No. 547 issued a blanket certificate of public convenience and necessity authorizing all parties, which are not interstate pipelines, to make FERC jurisdictional gas sales for resale at negotiated rates, while Order No. 636 allowed SJG to deliver gas at delivery points on the interstate pipeline system other than its own city gate stations and release excess pipeline capacity to third parties. During 2021, off-system sales amounted to 14.7 MMdts and capacity release amounted to 67.9 MMdts.
Supplies of natural gas available to SJG that are in excess of the quantity required by those customers who use gas as their sole source of fuel (firm customers) make possible the sale and transportation of gas on an interruptible basis to commercial and industrial customers whose equipment is capable of using natural gas or other fuels, such as fuel oil and propane. The term “interruptible” is used in the sense that deliveries of natural gas may be terminated by SJG at any time if this action is necessary to meet the needs of higher priority customers as described in SJG's tariffs. In 2021, usage by interruptible customers, excluding off-system customers, amounted to 1.1 MMdts.
ETG
SJI, through its wholly-owned subsidiary SJIU, acquired the assets of ETG and ELK from Pivotal Utility Holdings, Inc., a subsidiary of Southern Company Gas in 2018. ELK was subsequently sold on July 31, 2020.
ETG is a regulated natural gas utility which distributes natural gas in seven counties in northern and central New Jersey. ETG serves residential, business and industrial customers, with a service territory that covers the northern part of New Jersey, including municipalities throughout Union, Middlesex, Sussex, Warren, Hunterdon, Morris and Mercer Counties. ETG was founded in 1855 and is based in Union, New Jersey. ETG contributed net income of approximately $50.7 million during 2021.
ETG believes growth exists in the expansion of its Northwestern service territory, the Franklin/Sparta area, and the Hackettstown Interconnect. ETG also serves northern New Jersey's diversified industrial base within its territory with natural gas, which includes pharmaceutical, food and beverage, and transportation industries.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, ETG served 305,464 and 301,613 total customers, respectively, in northern and central New Jersey. As of December 31, 2021, ETG served 281,612 residential customers, 23,750 commercial customers and 102 industrial customers. Net additions in 2021 of residential and commercial/industrial customers amounted to 3,760 and 91, respectively. No part of ETG's business is dependent upon a single customer or a few customers. Gas sales and transportation for 2021 amounted to 49.8 MMdts, of which 43.6 MMdts were firm sales and transportation and 6.2 MMdts were interruptible sales and transportation. The breakdown of firm sales and transportation includes 23.2 MMdts residential, 13.8 MMdts commercial, and 6.6 MMdts industrial.
SJIEE
SJIEE is a direct subsidiary for the purpose of serving as a holding company for all of SJI's non-utility businesses. The following businesses are wholly-owned subsidiaries of SJIEE:
SJE
SJE provides services for the acquisition and transportation of electricity for retail end users and markets total energy management services. SJE markets electricity to residential, commercial and industrial customers. Most customers served by SJE are located within New Jersey, northwestern Pennsylvania and New England. In 2021, SJE contributed approximately $0.7 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis.
SJRG
SJRG markets natural gas storage, commodity and transportation assets along with fuel management services on a wholesale basis. Customers include energy marketers, electric and gas utilities, power plants and natural gas producers. SJRG's marketing activities occur mainly in the mid-Atlantic, Appalachian and southern regions of the country.
SJRG also conducts price risk management activities by entering into a variety of physical and financial transactions including forward contracts, swap agreements, option contracts and futures contracts. In 2021, SJRG contributed approximately $36.9 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis.
SJEX
SJEX owns oil, gas and mineral rights in the Marcellus Shale region of Pennsylvania. SJEX is considered part of SJI's wholesale energy operations. In 2021, SJEX contributed approximately $0.4 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis.
Marina
Marina develops and operates on-site energy-related projects. There are several businesses under Marina, as discussed below.
Marina owns entities and solar energy projects which own and operate rooftop solar generation sites located in New Jersey.
Marina also includes the Catamaran joint venture that was entered into in August 2020, which was formed for the purpose of developing, owning and operating renewable energy projects, and supporting SJI's commitment to clean energy initiatives. Catamaran owns Annadale and Bronx Midco, operators of fuel cell projects in New York. Marina, through Catamaran, owns
93% and 92% of Annadale and Bronx Midco, respectively. In 2021, Catamaran completed its acquisition of a solar project in Massachusetts, of which Marina has a 90% ownership interest.
ACLE, BCLE, SCLE and SXLE own landfill gas-to-energy production facilities in Atlantic, Burlington, Salem and Sussex Counties, respectively, located in New Jersey. ACLE ceased operations on September 30, 2021, while BCLE, SCLE and SXLE ceased operations on June 1, 2020.
In 2020, the Company sold MTF and ACB for a final sales price of $97.0 million. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. MTF previously provided cooling, heating and emergency power to the Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa in Atlantic City, NJ. ACB previously owned and operated a combined heating, cooling and power facility fueled by natural gas located in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
In 2021, Marina incurred a net loss of approximately $7.5 million, which reduced SJI's net income on a consolidated basis by such amount. The loss was primarily due to Marina’s share, through Equity in (Losses) Earnings of Affiliated Companies, of an impairment charge recorded by Energenic, as well as an other-than-temporary impairment charge recognized by Marina related to the realizability of the outstanding notes receivable, including accrued interest, related to Energenic (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements).
SJESP
SJESP receives commissions on appliance service contracts from a third party. In 2021, SJESP contributed approximately $1.8 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis.
SJEI
SJEI provides energy procurement and cost reduction services. SJEI includes the following wholly-owned subsidiaries:
•AEP, an aggregator, broker and consultant in the retail energy markets that matches end users with suppliers for the procurement of natural gas and electricity.
•EnerConnex, an aggregator, broker and consultant in the retail and wholesale energy markets that matches end users with suppliers for the procurement of natural gas and electricity. On August 7, 2020, SJEI acquired the remaining 75% of EnerConnex, of which SJEI previously held a 25% interest. (see Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements).
In 2021, SJEI incurred a net loss of approximately $0.5 million, which reduced SJI's net income on a consolidated basis by such amount.
Midstream
Midstream owns a 20% equity investment, along with four other investors, in PennEast. In 2021, Midstream incurred a net loss of approximately $85.7 million, which reduced SJI's net income on a consolidated basis by such amount. This loss was caused by an other-than-temporary impairment charge recorded in 2021, and the decision by the partners in PennEast to no longer develop the project. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Other
SJI Renewable Energy Ventures, LLC and SJI RNG Devco, LLC hold our equity interest in REV and our renewable natural gas development rights and costs incurred in order to develop certain dairy farms, respectively. In 2021, these entities contributed approximately $0.4 million to SJI's net income on a consolidated basis.
Primary Factors Affecting SJI's Business
SJI's current long-term goals are to grow Economic Earnings Per Share 5-8% annually driven by high quality earnings, a strong balance sheet and a low-to-moderate risk profile. Economic Earnings Per Share is a non-GAAP performance measure that is used by our management to indicate the amount and timing of income from continuing operations after taking into account the impacts of non-utility derivative instruments, noncontrolling interests, and transactions, contractual arrangements and other events that affect comparability of financial statements. This non-GAAP performance measure is explained below in Item 7, "Results of Operations." Our long-term targets are based on expected annual rate base growth of approximately 10 percent,
driven by customer growth, a long runway for infrastructure modernization, and clean energy and decarbonization investment. Management established those goals in conjunction with SJI's Board of Directors based upon a number of different internal and external factors that characterize and influence SJI's current and expected future activities.
The following is a summary of the primary factors we expect to have the greatest impact on SJI's performance and ability to achieve the long-term goals going forward:
Business Model - In developing SJI's current business model, our focus has been on our core Utilities and natural extensions of those businesses, as well as strategic opportunities in our nonutility business that align with the goals of the EMP. That focus enables us to concentrate on business activities that match our core competencies. Going forward we expect to pursue business opportunities that fit and complement this model.
Customer Growth - SJG's area of operations is southern New Jersey. Residential new construction activity remains steady, supported by growth in higher density and multi-family units. Customers for SJG grew 1.6% for 2021 as SJG continues its focus on customer conversions. In 2021, the 4,489 consumers converting their homes and businesses from other heating fuels, such as electric, propane or oil, represented approximately 61% of the total new customer acquisitions for the year.
ETG's primary area of operations is central and northern NJ, which continues to grow in multifamily housing and gas infrastructure extensions to unserved areas. While ETG continues to partner with builders in the new construction sector with the view of increasing natural gas burner tips, ETG is also pursuing conversions throughout its service territory. As a result, customer additions for ETG grew approximately 1%. In 2021, consumers converting their homes and businesses from other heating fuels, such as electric, propane or oil, represented approximately 42% of the total new customer acquisitions for the year.
Customers in the Utilities' service territory typically base their decisions to convert on comparisons of fuel costs, environmental considerations and fuel pricing stability. While oil and propane prices have become more competitive with natural gas in the past two years, affecting the number of conversions, the Utilities' leverage their comprehensive partnership with the State’s Office of Clean Energy to educate consumers on energy efficiency and to promote the rebates and incentives available to natural gas users.
Regulatory Environment - SJG and ETG are primarily regulated by the BPU. The BPU approves the rates that are charged to rate-regulated customers for services provided and the terms of service under which the Utilities operate. The rates and established terms of service are designed to enable the Utilities to recover costs of service and obtain a fair and reasonable return on capital invested.
The BPU approved regulatory mechanisms, along with other BPU approvals, that have the most significant impact on the Utilities' results are described below. For more information on the regulatory environments of the Utilities, see Notes 10 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
SJG
In September 2020, SJG settled its rate case petition, resulting in an increase in annual revenues from base rates effective October 1, 2020 of $39.5 million.
The CIP protects SJG's net income from severe fluctuations in gas used by residential, commercial and small industrial customers. See "Rates and Regulations" below.
SJG's AIRP had a program to replace cast iron and unprotected bare steel mains and services. All AIRP investments were reflected in base rates. Additionally, the BPU issued an Order approving an extension of the AIRP for a five-year period (“AIRP II”), commencing October 1, 2016, with authorized investments of up to $302.5 million to continue replacing cast iron and unprotected bare steel mains and associated services. SJG earned a return on AIRP II investments once they were placed in service and, thereafter, once they were included in rate base, through annual filings. The AIRP II program concluded September 30, 2021 and the final rate adjustment for this program became effective January 1, 2022.
SJG's SHARP is a program to replace low-pressure distribution mains and services with high-pressure mains and services in coastal areas that are susceptible to flooding during major storms. In May 2018, the BPU issued an order approving a second phase of the SHARP ("SHARP II") for a three-year period, commencing June 1, 2018, with authorized investments of up to $100.3 million to continue storm hardening efforts to further improve safety, redundancy and resiliency of SJG’s natural gas
system in coastal areas. Pursuant to the order, SHARP II investments are to be recovered through annual base rate adjustments. The SHARP II program ended June 30, 2021 and the final rate adjustment for this program became effective October 1, 2021.
In September 2020, the BPU approved, on a provisional basis, a $59.4 million decrease in SJG's BGSS gas cost recoveries, effective October 1, 2020 based on SJG's June 2020 BGSS filing. Although SJG's June 2020 BGSS filing included consideration of $22.9 million of costs requested to be recovered over a two-year period related to a previous dispute on a long-term gas supply contract that was settled during 2019 ("supply contract costs"), the provisional rate adjustments effective October 1, 2020 included the temporary removal of the supply contract costs to allow for a further review of these costs during the course of the proceeding. In May 2021, the BPU approved these provisional rates, adjusted for a two-year amortization of the supply contract costs through September 30, 2022, as final, effective June 1, 2021.
In November 2021, the BPU approved, on a provisional basis, a $36.2 million increase in SJG's BGSS gas cost recoveries, effective December 1, 2021. The approval extended the amortization of the supply contract costs to September 30, 2024. In addition, as allowed under the BGSS clause, in November 2021, SJG issued a notice to the BPU of SJG's intent to self-implement a BGSS rate adjustment representing an additional 5% increase of the monthly bill of a typical residential customer, effective December 1, 2021, for a total increase of $56.6 million in revenues.
In November 2020, SJG filed a petition with the BPU, seeking authority to implement an IIP pursuant to which SJG would recover the costs associated with SJG's planned initial investment of approximately $742.5 million from 2021-2026 to, among other things, replace its at-risk plastic and coated steel mains, as well as excess flow valves on new service lines, and related services. This matter is pending before the BPU.
ETG
In November 2019, the BPU approved the settlement of ETG's rate case petition, resulting in an increase to base rate revenues of $34.0 million with new rates in effect November 15, 2019. In December 2021, ETG filed a petition with the BPU requesting a base rate revenue increase, which was updated in February 2022 to a requested increase of $72.9 million, primarily to obtain a return on new capital investments made by ETG since the settlement of its last base rate case in 2019. This matter is pending before the BPU.
ETG's CIP, which was implemented in 2021, is similar to SJG's discussed above. See "Rates and Regulations" below.
In September 2020, the BPU approved, on a provisional basis, a $21.1 million decrease in ETG's BGSS gas cost recoveries, effective October 1, 2020. In June 2021, the BPU approved these provisional rates as final, effective July 1, 2021.
In November 2021, the BPU approved, on a provisional basis, an $11.3 million increase in ETG's BGSS gas cost recoveries, effective December 1, 2021. In addition, as allowed under the BGSS clause, in November 2021, ETG issued a notice to the BPU of ETG's intent to self-implement a BGSS rate adjustment representing an additional 5% increase of the monthly bill of a typical residential customer, effective December 1, 2021, for a total increase of $19.1 million in revenues.
In June 2019, the BPU approved a $300.0 million IIP for ETG effective July 1, 2019. The Order authorized the recovery of costs associated with ETG’s investments of approximately $300.0 million between 2019-2024 to replace its cast-iron and bare steel vintage main and related services. The Order provides for annual recovery of ETG's investments through a separate rate mechanism. In April 2021, ETG submitted its annual filing, reflecting rider rates to increase annual revenues by $7.1 million to reflect the roll-in of $64.0 million of IIP investments for the period July 2020 through June 2021. The BPU issued an Order in September 2021 approving the updated IIP rates effective October 1, 2021.
COVID-19 Impact on the Utilities
On July 2, 2020, the BPU issued an Order authorizing New Jersey's regulated utilities to create a COVID-19-related regulatory asset by deferring on their books and records the prudently incurred incremental costs related to COVID-19 beginning on March 9, 2020 and continuing through September 30, 2021, or 60 days after the termination of the public health emergency, whichever is later. On September 14, 2021, the BPU extended this period to December 31, 2022. See "COVID-19" section below.
Weather Conditions and Customer Usage Patterns - Usage patterns can be affected by a number of factors, such as wind, precipitation, temperature extremes and customer conservation. The Utilities' earnings are largely protected from fluctuations in temperatures by the CIP. The CIP has a stabilizing effect on utility earnings as the Utilities adjust revenues when actual usage per customer experienced during an annual period varies from an established baseline usage per customer. The WNC rate
previously allowed ETG to implement surcharges or credits during the months of October through May to compensate for weather-related changes in customer usage from the previous winter period; the CIP replaced the WNC effective July 1, 2021. The impact of different weather conditions on the earnings of our nonutility businesses is dependent on a range of different factors. Consequently, weather may impact the earnings of SJI's various subsidiaries in different, or even opposite, ways. Further, the profitability of individual subsidiaries may vary from year-to-year despite experiencing substantially similar weather conditions.
Changes in Natural Gas and Electricity Prices - The Utilities' gas costs are passed on directly to customers without any profit margin added. The price the Utilities charge their periodic customers is set annually, with a regulatory mechanism in place to make limited adjustments to that price during the course of a year. In the event that gas cost increases would justify customer price increases greater than those permitted under the regulatory mechanism, the Utilities can petition the BPU for an incremental rate increase. High prices can make it more difficult for customers to pay their bills and may result in elevated levels of bad debt expense. Among our nonutility activities, the business most likely to be impacted by changes in natural gas prices is our wholesale gas marketing business. Wholesale gas marketing typically benefits from volatility in gas prices during different points in time. The actual price of the commodity does not typically have an impact on the performance of this business line. Our ability to add and retain customers at our retail electric business is affected by the relationship between the price that the utility charges customers for electricity and the cost available in the market at specific points in time. However, retail electric accounts form a very small portion of SJI's overall activities.
Fuel Supply Management - SJRG has acquired pipeline transportation capacity that allows SJRG to match end users, many of which are merchant generators, with producers looking to find a long-term solution for their supply. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had ten and nine fuel supply management contracts, respectively, and we expect to continue expanding this business.
Changes in Interest Rates - SJI has operated in a relatively low interest rate environment over the past several years. Rising interest rates would raise the expense associated with existing variable-rate debt and all issuances of new debt. We have sought to mitigate the impact of a potential rising rate environment by issuing fixed-rate debt, along with paying down variable-rate debt in 2019 and 2020. SJG also has derivative transactions to hedge against rising interest rates on its variable-rate debt. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, SJI had 90.1% and 82.5%, respectively, and SJG had 88.5% and 93.6%, respectively, of total short-term debt (including short-term notes payable and current portion of long-term debt) and long-term debt at fixed rates.
Balance Sheet Strength - SJI's and SJG's goal is to maintain a strong balance sheet. SJI's average equity-to-capitalization ratio was approximately 35% and 33% as calculated for the four quarters of 2021 and 2020, respectively. SJG's average equity-to-capitalization ratio was approximately 56% and 53% as calculated for the four quarters of 2021 and 2020, respectively. A strong balance sheet assists us in maintaining the financial flexibility necessary to take advantage of growth opportunities and to address volatile economic and commodity markets while maintaining a low-to-moderate risk platform.
Labor and Benefit Costs - Labor and benefit costs have a significant impact on SJI's profitability. Benefit costs, especially those related to pension and health care, have risen in recent years. We seek to manage these costs by revising health care plans offered to existing employees, capping postretirement health care benefits, and changing health care and pension packages offered to new hires.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS - We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Management must make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and related disclosures. The accounting estimates discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to our financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is material to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate is material to our financial condition and/or results of operations. Actual results could differ from those estimates and changes in these estimates could have a material effect on our financial statements. Management has reviewed these critical accounting estimates with the Company's Audit Committee.
The following types of transactions presented in our consolidated financial statements require a significant amount of judgment and estimation: regulatory accounting; derivatives; environmental remediation costs; pensions and other postretirement benefit costs; revenue recognition; goodwill; evaluation of equity method investments for other-than-temporary impairment; income taxes and allowance for credit losses as a result of the impacts of COVID-19. Estimates may be subject to future uncertainties, including the continued evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operations and economic conditions. We regularly evaluate our estimates, and we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable.
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, which discusses our significant accounting policies.
Regulatory Accounting (see Notes 10 & 11 to the consolidated financial statements) - The Utilities maintain their accounts according to the Uniform System of Accounts as prescribed by the BPU. As a result of the ratemaking process, the Utilities are required to follow ASC 980, Regulated Operations (ASC 980), which requires them to recognize the impact of regulatory decisions on their financial statements. Accordingly, the Utilities assess whether the regulatory assets and liabilities continue to meet the criteria for probable future recovery or refund at each balance sheet date and when regulatory events occur. This assessment includes consideration of recent rate orders, historical regulatory treatment for similar costs in the Utilities' jurisdictions, and factors such as changes in applicable regulatory and political environments. If the assessments and estimates made for regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities are ultimately different than actual regulatory outcomes, the impact to our consolidated financial statements could be material.
The Utilities are required under their BGSS clauses to forecast their natural gas costs and customer consumption in setting their rates. Customer consumption is forecast by extrapolating expected future customer consumption based upon recent historical trends including expected customer growth to which the expected rates to be charged to customers for BGSS clause surcharges is then applied. Forecasted natural gas costs are based upon the expected customer consumption volumes multiplied by the relevant forward curve NYMEX pricing expected during the period. Subject to regulator approval, the Utilities are able to recover or return the difference between gas cost recoveries and the actual costs of gas through a BGSS rate on customer billings. The Utilities record any over/under recoveries as a regulatory asset or liability on the consolidated balance sheets and reflect them in the BGSS charge to customers in subsequent years. The Utilities also enter into derivatives that are used to hedge natural gas purchases. The offset to the resulting derivative assets or liabilities is recorded as a regulatory asset or liability on the consolidated balance sheets.
Derivatives (see Notes 16 & 17 to the consolidated financial statements) - SJI recognizes assets or liabilities for contracts that qualify as derivatives that are entered into by its subsidiaries when such contracts are executed. We record contracts at their fair value at the end of each reporting period in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Certain derivatives that result in the physical delivery of the commodity may meet the criteria to be accounted for as normal purchases and normal sales, if so designated, in which case the contract is not marked-to-market, but rather is accounted for when the commodity is delivered. Due to the application of ASC 980, derivatives related to the Utilities' gas purchases that are marked-to-market are recorded through the BGSS. The Utilities also periodically enter into financial derivatives to hedge against forward price risk. These derivatives are recorded at fair value with an offset to regulatory assets and liabilities through the BGSS, subject to BPU approval (see Notes 10 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements). Currently we do not have any energy-related derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges.
Hedge accounting has been discontinued for the remaining interest rate derivatives. As a result, unrealized gains and losses on these derivatives, that were previously recorded in AOCL on the consolidated balance sheets, are being recorded into earnings over the remaining life of the derivative.
Counterparty credit risk and the credit risk of SJI, are incorporated and considered in the valuation of all derivative instruments, as appropriate. The effect of counterparty credit risk and the credit risk of SJI on the derivative valuations is not significant.
As discussed in Notes 16 and 17 of the consolidated financial statements, energy-related derivative instruments are traded in both exchange-based and non-exchange-based markets. Exchange-based contracts are valued using unadjusted quoted market sources in active markets and are categorized in Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy established by ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. Certain non-exchange-based contracts are valued using indicative price quotations available through brokers or over-the-counter, on-line exchanges and are categorized in Level 2. These price quotations reflect the average of the bid-ask mid-point prices and are obtained from sources that management believes provide the most liquid market. Management reviews and corroborates the price quotations with at least one additional source to ensure the prices are observable market information, which includes consideration of actual transaction volumes, market delivery points, bid-ask spreads and contract duration. Derivative instruments that are used to limit our exposure to changes in interest rates on variable-rate, long-term debt are valued using quoted prices on commonly quoted intervals, which are interpolated for periods different than the quoted intervals, as inputs to a market valuation model. Market inputs can generally be verified and model selection does not involve significant management judgment, as a result, these instruments are categorized in Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy. For non-exchange-based derivatives that trade in less liquid markets with limited pricing information, model inputs generally would include both observable and unobservable inputs. In instances where observable data is unavailable, management considers the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. This includes assumptions about market risks such as liquidity, volatility and contract duration. Such instruments are categorized in Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy as the model inputs generally are not observable.
Management uses the discounted cash flow model to value Level 3 physical and financial forward contracts, which calculates mark-to-market valuations based on forward market prices, original transaction prices, volumes, risk-free rate of return and credit spreads. Inputs to the valuation model are reviewed and revised as needed, based on historical information, updated market data, market liquidity and relationships, and changes in third party pricing sources. The validity of the mark-to-market valuations and changes in these values from period to period are examined and qualified against historical expectations by the risk management function. If any discrepancies are identified during this process, the mark-to-market valuations or the market pricing information is evaluated further and adjusted, if necessary.
Level 3 valuation methods for natural gas derivative contracts include utilizing another location in close proximity adjusted for certain pipeline charges to derive a basis value. The significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement of certain natural gas contracts consist of forward prices developed based on industry-standard methodologies. Significant increases (decreases) in these forward prices for purchases of natural gas would result in a directionally similar impact to the fair value measurement, and for sales of natural gas, would result in a directionally opposite impact to the fair value measurement. Level 3 valuation methods for electricity derivative contracts are not material. Unobservable inputs are updated daily using industry-standard techniques. Management reviews and corroborates the price quotations to ensure the prices are observable which includes consideration of actual transaction volumes, market delivery points, bid-ask spreads and contract duration.
Market pricing risks are further discussed in