Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(Dollar amounts in thousands, except where otherwise noted)
Description of Business
SJW Group is a publicly traded company and is a holding company with four subsidiaries:
SJWC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJW Group, is a public utility in the business of providing water service to approximately 231,000 connections that serve a population of approximately one million people in an area comprising approximately 139 square miles in the metropolitan San Jose, California area.
SJWNE LLC is a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJW Group. On October 9, 2019, CTWS became a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJWNE LLC. Connecticut Water Service, Inc. is a holding company whose subsidiaries are primarily public utilities providing water service to approximately 140,000 service connections that serve a population of approximately 456,000 people in 81 municipalities with a service area of approximately 269 square miles throughout Connecticut and Maine and 3,000 wastewater connections in Southbury, Connecticut.
SJWTX, Inc., doing business as CLWSC, is a public utility in the business of providing water service to approximately 24,000 service connections that serve approximately 70,000 people. CLWSC’s service area comprises more than 266 square miles in Bandera, Blanco, Comal, Hays, Kendall, Medina and Travis County in the growing region between San Antonio and Austin, Texas. On December 17, 2021, CLWSC completed its acquisition of Kendall West Utility and Bandera East Utility, companies that provide water services, including wastewater and recycled water services, in Kendall, Bandera and Medina counties which are located in south central Texas. Kendall West Utility and Bandera East Utility, together, added approximately 5,000 people through 1,600 service connections in a service area approximately 19 square miles to CLWSC’s operations. SJWTX, Inc. has a 25% interest in Acequia Water Supply Corporation. Acequia has been determined to be a variable interest entity within the scope of ASC Topic 810 with SJWTX, Inc. as the primary beneficiary. As a result, Acequia has been consolidated with SJWTX, Inc. SJWTX, Inc is undergoing a corporate reorganization to separate regulated operations from non-tariffed activities. In November 2021, SJWTX Holdings and TWOS were formed for the purpose of effecting a corporate reorganization of our water services organization in Texas. TWOS was created for non-tariffed operations and is wholly-owned by SJWTX Holdings. SJWTX Holdings is a wholly-owned subsidiary of SJW Group, incorporated to hold the investments in SJWTX, Inc. and TWOS. In addition, in 2022, SJWTX Holdings intends to create a new subsidiary to hold future wholesale water supply assets.
SJW Land Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of SJW Group, owns undeveloped land in the States of California and Tennessee, owns and operates commercial buildings in Tennessee.
Business Strategy for Water Utility Services
SJW Group focuses its business initiatives in three strategic areas:
(1)Regional regulated water utility operations;
(2)Regional non-tariffed water utility related services provided in accordance with the guidelines established by the CPUC in California, PURA in Connecticut, PUCT in Texas, and MPUC in Maine; and
(3)Out-of-region water and utility related services.
Regional Regulated Activities
SJW Group’s regulated utility operation is conducted through SJWC, Connecticut Water, CLWSC and Maine Water. SJW Group plans and applies a diligent and disciplined approach to maintaining and improving its water system infrastructures and also seeks to acquire regulated water systems adjacent to or near its existing service territory. Connecticut Water also provides regulated wastewater services.
The United States water utility industry is largely fragmented and is dominated by municipal-owned water systems. The water industry is regulated, and provides a life-sustaining product. This makes water utilities subject to lower business cycle risks than non-tariffed industries.
Regional Non-tariffed Activities
Operating in accordance with guidelines established by the CPUC, SJWC provides non-tariffed services, such as water system operations, maintenance agreements and antenna site leases under agreements with municipalities and other utilities. CLWSC provides non-tariffed wholesale water service to adjacent utilities and non-tariffed wastewater services. CTWS provides non-tariffed services, such as water system operations and maintenance under agreements with municipalities and other utilities. Additionally, CTWS offers Linebacker, an optional service line protection program covering a limited amount of the cost of
repairs for leaking or broken water and wastewater service lines and in-home plumbing to eligible residential customers in Connecticut and water service lines to eligible residential customers in Maine.
SJW Group also seeks appropriate non-tariffed business opportunities that complement its existing operations or that allow it to extend its core competencies beyond existing operations. SJW Group seeks opportunities to fully utilize its capabilities and existing capacity by providing services to other regional water systems, which also will benefit its existing regional customers.
Out-of-Region Opportunities
SJW Group also from time to time pursues opportunities to participate in out-of-region water and utility related services, particularly regulated water businesses. SJW Group evaluates out-of-region and out-of-state opportunities that meet SJW Group’s risk and return profile.
The factors SJW Group considers in evaluating such opportunities include:
•Potential profitability;
•Regulatory environment;
•Additional growth opportunities within the region;
•Water supply, water quality and environmental issues;
•Capital requirements;
•General economic conditions; and
•Synergy potential.
As part of our pursuit of the above three strategic areas, we consider from time to time opportunities to acquire businesses and assets. However, we cannot be certain we will be successful in identifying and consummating any strategic business combination or acquisitions relating to such opportunities. In addition, the execution of our business strategy will expose us to different risks than those associated with the current utility operations. We expect to incur costs in connection with the execution of this strategy and any integration of an acquired business could involve significant costs, the assumption of certain known and unknown liabilities related to the acquired assets, the diversion of management’s time and resources, the potential for a negative impact on SJW Group’s financial position and operating results, entering markets in which SJW Group has no or limited direct prior experience and the potential loss of key employees of any acquired company. Any strategic combination or acquisition we decide to undertake may also impact our ability to finance our business, affect our compliance with regulatory requirements, and impose additional burdens on our operations. Any businesses we acquire may not achieve sales, customer growth and projected profitability that would justify the investment. Any difficulties we encounter in the integration process, including the integration of controls necessary for internal control and financial reporting, could interfere with our operations, reduce our operating margins and adversely affect our internal controls. SJW Group cannot be certain that any transaction will be successful or that it will not materially harm operating results or our financial condition.
Real Estate Services
SJW Group’s real estate investment activity is conducted through SJW Land Company and Chester Realty, Inc. SJW Land Company owns undeveloped land in California and Tennessee and owns and operates commercial buildings in Tennessee. Chester Realty, Inc. owns and operates land and commercial buildings in the State of Connecticut. SJW Land Company and Chester Realty, Inc. manage its acquired income producing and other properties until such time a determination is made to reinvest proceeds from sale of such properties.
Critical Accounting Policies
SJW Group has identified accounting policies delineated below as the policies critical to its business operations and the understanding of the results of operations. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reporting period. SJW Group bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.” SJW Group’s critical accounting policies are as follows:
Recognition of Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
Generally accepted accounting principles for water utilities include the recognition of regulatory assets and liabilities as permitted by ASC Topic 980. In accordance with ASC Topic 980, Water Utility Services, to the extent applicable, records
deferred costs and credits on the balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabilities when it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the ratemaking process in a period different from when the costs and credits are incurred. Accounting for such costs and credits is based on management’s judgment and prior historical ratemaking practices, and it occurs when management determines that it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the future revenue of Water Utility Services through the ratemaking process. The regulatory assets and liabilities recorded by Water Utility Services primarily relate to the recognition of deferred income taxes for ratemaking versus tax accounting purposes, balancing and memorandum accounts, postretirement pension benefits, medical costs, accrued benefits for vacation and asset retirement obligations that have not been passed through in rates. The company primarily adjusts the related asset and liabilities for these items through its regulatory asset and liability accounts on a monthly basis. The disallowance of any asset in future ratemaking, including deferred regulatory assets, would require Water Utility Services to immediately recognize the impact of the costs for financial reporting purposes. No disallowances were recognized during the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recognition of Balancing and Memorandum Accounts
Balancing and memorandum accounts are utilized by our California operations. The purpose of a balancing account is to track the under-collection or over-collection associated with expense changes and the revenue authorized by the CPUC to offset those expense changes. Pursuant to Section 792.5 of the California Public Utilities Code, a balancing account must be maintained for expense items for which revenue offsets have been authorized.
Balancing accounts are currently being maintained for the following items: purchased water, purchased power, groundwater extraction charges, pensions, and general rate case and cost of capital true-ups. The amount in the water production balancing accounts varies with the seasonality of the water utility business such that, during the summer months when the demand for water is at its peak, the account tends to reflect an under-collection, while during the winter months when demand for water is relatively lower, the account tends to reflect an over-collection. The pension balancing account is intended to capture the difference between actual pension expense and the amount approved in rates by the CPUC. The general rate case true-up accounts are a result of revenue shortfalls authorized for collection or refund by the CPUC due to delayed rate case and cost of capital decisions.
SJWC also maintains memorandum accounts to track revenue impacts due to catastrophic events, certain unforeseen water quality expenses related to new federal and state water quality standards, energy efficiency, water conservation, water tariffs, and other approved activities or as directed by the CPUC. The Monterey Water Revenue Adjustment Mechanism tracks the difference between the revenue received for actual metered sales through the tiered volumetric rate and the revenue that would have been received with the same actual metered sales if a uniform rate would have been in effect.
Balancing and memorandum accounts are recognized by SJWC when it is probable that future recovery of previously incurred costs or future refunds that are to be credited to customers will occur through the ratemaking process. In addition, in the case of special revenue programs such as the WCMA, SJWC follows the requirements of ASC Topic 980-605-25-“Alternative Revenue Programs” in determining revenue recognition, including the requirement that such revenues will be collected within 24 months of the year-end in which the revenue is recorded. A reserve is recorded for amounts SJW Group estimates will not be collected within the 24-month period. This reserve is based on an estimate of actual usage over the recovery period, offset by applicable drought surcharges. In assessing the probability criteria for balancing and memorandum accounts between general rate cases, SJWC considers evidence that may exist prior to CPUC authorization that would satisfy ASC Topic 980 subtopic 340-25 recognition criteria. Such evidence may include regulatory rules and decisions, past practices, and other facts and circumstances that would indicate that recovery or refund is probable. When such evidence provides sufficient support, the balances are recorded in SJW Group’s financial statements.
It is typical for the CPUC to incorporate any over-collected and/or under-collected balances in balancing or memorandum accounts into customer rates at the time rate decisions are made as part of SJWC’s general rate case proceedings by assessing temporary surcredits and/or surcharges. In the case where SJWC’s balancing or memorandum-type accounts that have been authorized by the CPUC reach certain thresholds or have termination dates, SJWC can request the CPUC to recognize the amounts in customer rates prior to the next regular general rate case proceeding by filing an advice letter.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of a business. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment annually on October 1st or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not, reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. SJW Group first performs a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative impairment test. In assessing the qualitative factors, SJW Group considers the impact of these key factors: change in industry and competitive environment, financial performance, macroeconomic conditions, and other relevant Company-specific events. If SJW Group determines that as a result of the qualitative assessment it is more likely than not (>
50% likelihood) that the fair value is less than carrying amount, then a quantitative test is performed. SJW Group’s goodwill is primarily associated with the recent merger with CTWS on October 9, 2019. SJW Group performed an impairment analysis as of October 1, 2021. The qualitative assessment found no indicators of impairment and therefore did not perform the quantitative impairment test. No impairments occurred during 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
SJW Group’s financial condition and results of operations are influenced by a variety of factors including the following:
•Economic utility regulation;
•Infrastructure investment;
•Compliance with environmental, health and safety standards;
•Production expenses;
•Customer growth;
•Water usage per customer;
•Weather conditions, seasonality and sources of water supply; and
•Merger and acquisition activities, if any.
Economic Utility Regulation
Water Utility Services is generally subject to economic regulation by the Regulators overseeing public utilities. Regulatory policies vary from state to state and may change over time. In addition, there may be regulatory lag between the time a capital investment is made, a consumption decrease occurs, or an operating expense increases and when those items are adjusted in utility rates.
SJWC employs a forward-looking test year and has been authorized to use several mechanisms to mitigate risks faced due to regulatory lag and new and changing legislation, policies and regulation. These include memorandum accounts to track revenue impacts due to catastrophic events, certain unforeseen water quality expenses related to new federal and state water quality standards, energy efficiency, water conservation, water tariffs, and other approved activities or as directed by the CPUC. Rate recovery for the balances in these memorandum accounts is generally allowed in a subsequent general rate case. SJWC also maintains balancing accounts to track changes in purchased water, purchased power, groundwater extraction charges and pension costs for later rate recovery. Regulatory risk in California is mitigated by use of a forward-looking test year which allows the return on and return of utility plant on a forecasted basis as it is placed in service, and in some cases interim rate relief is allowed in the event of regulatory lag.
Pursuant to Connecticut regulations, Connecticut Water employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Connecticut. Additionally, to mitigate regulatory lag for pipeline replacement and conservation related projects, the Connecticut State Legislature has approved WICA that allows for a surcharge to be added to customer bills semi-annually for certain eligible pre-approved projects. Further to mitigate risks from variations in revenues from changes in customer usage, the Connecticut State Legislature has approved a WRA to provide for recovery of the company’s authorized revenues.
Pursuant to Texas regulation, CLWSC employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Texas, provided there is no current rate case outstanding. Further, rate cases may not be filed more frequently than once every 12 months.
Pursuant to Maine regulations, Maine Water employs a historical test year. To address regulatory risk due to regulatory lag and changing legislation policies and regulations, rate cases may be filed as necessary in Maine. Additionally, to mitigate regulatory lag for all infrastructure replacements (except meters), the Maine State Legislature has approved of WISC that allows for a surcharge to be added to customer bills semi-annually for certain pre-approved projects.
Infrastructure Investment
The water utility business is capital-intensive. In 2021 and 2020, company-funded capital improvements were $233,933 and $195,323, respectively, for additions to, or replacements of, property, plant and equipment for our Water Utility Services. We plan to spend approximately $222,823 in 2022 and $1,311,271 over the next five years for capital improvements, subject to CPUC, PURA, PUCT, and MPUC approval. SJW Group funds these expenditures through a variety of sources, including earnings received from operations, debt and equity financing, and other borrowings. SJW Group relies upon lines of credit to fund capital expenditures in the short term and has historically issued long-term debt to refinance our short-term debt. While
our ability to obtain financing will continue to be a key risk, we believe that based on our 2021 activities, we will have access to the external funding sources necessary to implement our on-going capital investment programs in the future.
Compliance with Environmental, Health and Safety Standards
Water Utility Services’ operations are subject to water quality and pollution control regulations issued by the EPA and environmental laws and regulations administered by the respective states and local regulatory agencies. Under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, Water Utility Services is subject to regulation by the EPA of the quality of water it sells and treatment techniques it uses to make the water potable. The EPA promulgates nationally applicable standards, including maximum contaminant levels for drinking water. Water Utility Services has implemented monitoring activities and installed specific water treatment improvements enabling it to comply with existing maximum contaminant levels and plan for compliance with future drinking water regulations. However, the EPA and the respective state agencies have continuing authority to issue additional regulations under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Water Utility Services incur substantial costs associated with compliance with environmental, health and safety and water quality regulation to which our water services are subject.
Environmental, health and safety and water quality regulations are complex and change frequently, and the overall trend has been that they have become more stringent over time. It is possible that new or more stringent environmental standards and water quality regulations could be imposed that will increase Water Utility Services’ water quality compliance costs, hamper Water Utility Services’ available water supplies, and increase future capital expenditures. Future drinking water regulations may require increased monitoring, additional treatment of underground water supplies, fluoridation of all supplies, more stringent performance standards for treatment plants and procedures to further reduce levels of disinfection by-products. In the past, Water Utility Services have generally been able to recover expenses associated with compliance related to environmental, health and safety standards, but future recoveries could be affected by regulatory lag and the corresponding uncertainties surrounding rate recovery.
Production Expenses
Water Utility Services’ operations require significant production inputs which result in substantial production expenses. These expenses include power, which is used to operate pumps and other equipment, purchased water and groundwater extraction charges. For 2021, production expenses accounted for approximately 50% of our total operating expenses. Price increases associated with these production inputs would adversely impact our results of operations until rate relief is granted.
Customer Growth
Customer growth in our water Water Utility Services’ is driven by: (i) organic population growth within our authorized service areas and (ii) the addition of new customers to our regulated customer base by acquiring regulated water systems adjacent to or near our existing service territories. During 2021, we had cash outflows of $23,587 for business acquisitions and water rights which we believe will allow SJW Group to expand our regulated customer base, including the recent expanded customer base in Texas as a result of the Kendall West Utility and Bandera East Utility acquisition. Before entering new regulated markets, we evaluate the regulatory environment to ensure that we will have the opportunity to achieve an appropriate rate of return on our investment while maintaining our high standards for quality, reliability and compliance with environmental, health and safety and water quality standards.
Water Usage Per Customer
Fluctuations in customer demand for water could be due to seasonality, restrictions of use, weather or lifestyle choices, all of which could affect Water Utility Services’ results of operations. SJWC residential usage decreased 11.4% from 2020 to 2021 and increased 13.3% from 2019 to 2020. SJWC business usage decreased 2.7% and increased 1.4% from 2020 to 2021 and from 2019 to 2020, respectively. In addition, 2021 residential and business usage was lower by 0.09% and 5.25%, respectively, than the amount authorized in our 2019-2021 general rate case. Residential usage and business usage in 2020 was 12.75% higher and 2.57% lower, respectively, than the amount authorized in our 2019-2021 general rate case. CLWSC residential and business usage decreased 8.5% from 2020 to 2021 and increased 13.6% from 2019 to 2020. CTWS residential usage decreased 4.5% and business usage increased 0.9% from 2020 to 2021 With the availability of the WRA in Connecticut that allows for recovery of authorized revenues, decreases in consumption year to year do not present the same financial risk as in our other water utility services utilities.
Weather Conditions, Seasonality and Sources of Water Supply
Our ability to meet the existing and future water demands of our customers depends on an adequate supply of water. Drought, governmental restrictions, overuse of sources of water, the protection of threatened species or habitats or other factors may limit the availability of ground and surface water. Also, customer usage of water is affected by weather conditions, in particular during the warmer months. Our water systems experience higher demand in the summer due to the warmer temperatures and
increased usage by customers for outside irrigation of lawns and landscaping. In periods of drought, if customers are encouraged or required to conserve water due to a shortage of supply or restriction of use, revenue tends to be lower. Water use restrictions may be imposed at a regional or state level and may affect our service areas regardless of our readiness to meet unrestricted customer demands. Similarly, in unusually wet periods, water supply tends to be higher and customer demand tends to be lower, again resulting in lower revenues.
SJWC believes that its various sources of water supply, which consists of groundwater from wells, surface water from watershed run-off and diversion, reclaimed water, and purchased imported water, will be sufficient to meet customer demand for 2022. In addition, SJWC actively works with Valley Water to address California’s long-term water supply challenges by continuing to educate customers on responsible water use practices and to conduct long-range water supply planning. Connecticut Water and Maine Water believes that they will be able to meet customer demand for 2022 with their existing water supply which consists of groundwater from wells, surface water in reservoirs and purchased water treated by neighboring water utilities. CLWSC believes that it will be able to meet customer demand for 2022 with their water supply which consists of groundwater from wells and purchased treated and raw water from the GBRA.
Results of Operations
Among other things, water sales are seasonal in nature and influenced by weather conditions. The timing of precipitation and climatic conditions can cause seasonal water consumption by customers to vary significantly. Revenue is generally higher in the warm, dry summer months when water usage and sales are greater and lower in the winter months when cooler temperatures and increased rainfall curtail water usage and sales.
See Item 1, “Business” for a discussion of SJW Group’s general business and regulatory activities.
Overview
SJW Group’s consolidated net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $60,478, compared to $61,515 for the same period in 2020. This represents a decrease of $1,037 or 2%, from 2020. The decrease in net income was primarily due to an increase in administrative and general expenses as a result of increased insurance costs and higher employee compensation, an increase in depreciation expense due to assets placed in service in 2020, an increase in maintenance expenses due to an increase in leak repairs, an increase in production costs due to higher average per unit costs for purchased water, groundwater extraction, energy charges, and a decrease in available surface water at SJWC, and an impairment of long-lived asset for a customer care and billing implementation project no longer being pursued by CLWSC. These increases were partially offset by an increase in revenue due to cumulative water rate increases and net recognition of certain balancing and memorandum accounts, offset by a decrease in usage. In addition, the sale of real estate investments and nonutility properties generated a pre-tax gain of $8,421 and the sale of Texas Water Alliance generated a $3,000 pre-tax gain.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impact on the global economy. Financial impacts experienced by SJW Group due to the COVID-19 pandemic include higher uncollectible accounts receivables and increased costs from COVID-19 related prevention activities. The regulators in the states SJW Group operates have approved mechanisms to either record a regulatory asset or track in a memorandum account expenses and savings related to COVID-19. SJWC and CLWSC have determined that future recovery of the amount related to COVID-19 activities is probable and have recognized the related regulatory assets. Probability criteria have not yet been met for CTWS. If a state regulator disagrees with the calculation of recorded COVID-19 account balances, we may be required to make adjustments that could adversely affect our results of operations. SJW Group continues to monitor COVID-19 developments affecting our business, employees and suppliers and will take additional precautions as management believes is necessary. See Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and Item 7, “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion.
Operating Revenue
Operating revenue by segment was as follows:
Operating Revenue
The change in consolidated operating revenues was due to the following factors:
2021 vs. 2020
The revenue increase consists of $9,313 from Water Utility Services offset by a $153 decrease from Real Estate Services.
The revenue increase for Water Utility Services is primarily due to an increase in authorized rates which resulted in $25,179 of additional revenue, a net increase in revenue recognized from certain balancing and memorandum accounts of $3,941, an increase due to new customers of $2,896, and an increase in other regulatory mechanisms of $2,491, partially offset by a decrease in revenue of $24,702 due to lower usage and a decrease of $839 from the winter storm credits in Texas.
2020 vs. 2019
The revenue increase consists of $143,909 from Water Utility Services and $135 from Real Estate Services.
The revenue increase for Water Utility Services is primarily due to an increase of $111,183 due to higher customer usage primarily due to the acquisition of CTWS in October 2019. In addition, we experienced an increase in authorized rates which resulted in $12,234 of additional revenue and an increase from customer rate credits of $4,964 related to a CTWS merger commitment and as a result of our billing settlement with the CPUC. Also, in 2019, we wrote off the 2018 and 2019 WCMA balances as we determined these amounts were no longer probable of recovery. No similar write-off occurred in 2020.
Water Utility Services’ Operating Revenue and Customer Counts
The following tables present operating revenues and number of customers by customer group of Water Utility Services:
Operating Revenue by Customer Group
Number of Customers
Operating Expense
Operating expense by segment was as follows:
Operating Expense
The change in consolidated operating expenses was due to the following factors:
Sources of Water Supply
SJWC’s water supply consists of groundwater from wells, surface water from watershed run-off and diversion, reclaimed water, and imported water purchased from Valley Water under the terms of a master contract with Valley Water expiring in 2051. Surface water, which is the least expensive water supply, is sourced from SJWC’s 6,500 acre of watershed in the Santa Cruz mountains. Changes and variations in quantities from each of these sources affect the overall mix of the water supply, thereby affecting the cost of the water supply. In addition, the water rates for purchased water and the groundwater extraction charge
may be increased by Valley Water at any time. If an increase occurs, then SJWC would file an advice letter with the CPUC seeking authorization to increase revenues to offset the rate increase.
Connecticut Water’s infrastructure consists of 65 noncontiguous water systems in the State of Connecticut. These systems, in total, consist of approximately 1,800 miles of water main and reservoir storage capacity of 2.4 billion gallons. The safe, dependable yield from our 235 active wells and 18 surface water supplies is approximately 65 million gallons per day. Water sources vary among the individual systems, but overall approximately 80% of the total dependable yield comes from surface water supplies and 20% from wells.
CLWSC’s water supply consists of groundwater from wells and purchased treated and raw water from the GBRA. CLWSC has long-term agreements with the GBRA, which expire in 2037, 2040, 2044 and 2050. The agreements, which are take-or-pay contracts, provide CLWSC with an aggregate of 7,650 acre-feet of water per year from Canyon Lake at prices that may be adjusted periodically by GBRA. CLWSC also has raw water supply agreements with the LCRA and WTPUA expiring in 2059 and 2046, respectively, to provide for 250 acre-feet of water per year from Lake Austin and the Colorado River, respectively, at prices that may be adjusted periodically by the agencies.
Maine Water’s infrastructure consists of 12 noncontiguous water systems in the State of Maine. These systems, in total, consists of approximately 600 miles of water main and reservoir storage capacity of 7.0 billion gallons. The safe, dependable yield from our 14 active wells and 7 surface water supplies is approximately 120 million gallons per day. Water sources vary among the individual systems, but overall approximately 90% of the total dependable yield comes from surface water supplies and 10% from wells.
The following table presents the sources of water supply for water utility services:
The percentages of water supply by source excluding reclaimed water by state is presented below:
Water production in 2021 for water utility services decreased 2,563 million gallons from 2020. Water production in 2020 for water utility services increased 11,388 million gallons from 2019 primarily due to a full year of CTWS operations in 2020. The changes are primarily attributable to changes in consumption by customers and are consistent with the changes in the related water production expenses.
The contract water rates for SJWC are determined by Valley Water. These rates are adjusted periodically and coincide with Valley Water’s fiscal year, which ends on June 30. The contract water rate for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020 was $5.0, $4.5 and $4.5 per million gallons, respectively. The contractual cost of the groundwater extraction charge for water pumped from the ground basin was $4.6, $4.2 and $4.2 per million gallons for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. SJWC’s unaccounted-for water for 2021 and 2020 approximated 7.8% and 6.5%, respectively, as a percentage of production. The unaccounted-for water estimate is based on the results of past experience and the impact of flows through the system, partially offset by SJWC’s main replacements and water loss reduction programs.
Connecticut Water has an agreement with the South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority (“RWA”) to purchase water from RWA. The agreement was signed in April 2006 and became effective upon the receipt of all regulatory approvals in 2008 and will remain in effect for a minimum of fifty years upon becoming effective. Connecticut Water will pay RWA $75 per year as part of a capacity agreement, for a total of 14 years, starting on the effective date of the agreement and sunsetting in 2022. In addition, Connecticut Water is able, but under no obligation, to purchase up to one million gallons of water per day at the then current wholesale rates per the agreement, $2.621 per million gallons as of December 31, 2021. Connecticut Water has an agreement with The Metropolitan District (“MDC”) to purchase water from MDC to serve the Unionville system. The agreement became effective on October 6, 2000 and has a term of fifty years beginning May 19, 2003, the date the water supply facilities related to the agreement were placed in service. Connecticut Water has agreed to purchase 283 million gallons of water annually from MDC at the published retail rate, $4.05 per hundred cubic feet as of December 31, 2021.
Maine Water has an agreement with the Kennebec Water District for potable water service. The agreement has been in place for 20 years and was extended on November 7, 2020 for a new term of up to 20 years. Maine Water guarantees a minimum consumption of 50 million gallons of water annually. Water sales to Maine Water are billed at a wholesale discount of $0.20 per hundred cubic feet of water below Kennebec Water District's tariffed rates. The current tariff rate was $1.51 per hundred cubic feet as of December 31, 2021.
CTWS’s unaccounted-for water for the period ending December 31, 2021 was approximately 14.3% as a percentage of total production. The unaccounted-for water estimate is based on the results of past experience and the impact of flows through CTWS’s systems, unadjusted for any required system flushing, partially offset by WICA and Water Infrastructure Surcharge (“WISC”) main replacement programs and lost water reduction initiatives.
The various components of operating expenses are discussed below.
Water production expenses
2021 vs. 2020
Water production expenses increased $11,626 in higher per unit costs paid for purchased water, groundwater extraction and energy charges, $3,897 as a result of decreased availability of California surface water in 2021 compared to 2020, and $1,302 due to changes in water production balancing and memorandum accounts, offset by a decrease of $13,534 due to a decrease in customer usage.
2020 vs. 2019
Water production expenses increased $33,864 due to an increase in customer usage including increases due to the October 2019 acquisition of CTWS, $18,992 as a result of decreased availability of California surface water in 2020 compared to 2019, and $588 in higher per unit costs paid for purchased water, groundwater extraction and energy charges, offset by a decrease of $3,421 due to changes in water production balancing and memorandum accounts. Valley Water did not increase the unit price of purchased water and groundwater extraction fees for their fiscal year beginning July 1, 2020.
Administrative and General Expense
Administrative and general expenses include payroll related to administrative and general functions, all employee benefits charged to expense accounts, insurance expenses, legal fees, regulatory utility commissions’ expenses, expenses associated with being a public company, and general corporate expenses.
2021 vs. 2020
Administrative and general expense increased $7,591 in 2021, or 2%, in comparison to 2020. The increase consisted primarily of $1,928 in group health insurance costs, $1,542 increase in compensation, $1,229 increase in insurance expense, $1,108 increase in uncollectible accounts due to a credit recorded in 2020 for the Current Expected Credit Loss adoption, $1,104 increase in contracted work, and $703 increase in rate case expenses.
2020 vs. 2019
Administrative and general expense increased $13,440 in 2020, or 4%, in comparison to 2019. The increase consisted primarily of $17,793 due to the addition of CTWS’s operations, partially offset by a decrease of $4,520 due to integration costs incurred in 2019 related to the merger that did not recur in 2020.
Maintenance Expense
Maintenance expense increased $3,873 in 2021, or 17%, in comparison to 2020, and increased $1,653 in 2020, or less than 1%, in comparison to 2019. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to increases of $2,402 in contract, repairs and maintenance, and
materials expense as a result of increased leaks, $1,298 due to a favorable change in the probability assessment of regulatory recovery of a hydro-turbine generator project reserve established in a prior year, and $408 increase in compensation. The increase in 2020 consisted primarily of $3,639 due to the addition of CTWS’s operations, offset by a decrease of $1,745 in SJWC primarily due to a change in the probability assessment of regulatory recovery of the hydro-turbine generator project.
Property Taxes and Other Non-income Taxes
Property taxes and other non-income taxes for 2021 and 2020 increased $1,078 and $10,818 from the prior years, respectively. The increase in 2021 was primarily a result of increased utility plant. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to the addition of $10,603 related to CTWS’s operations. SJW Group anticipates increases in 2022 for property taxes and other non-income taxes due to increases in utility plant.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $5,121 in 2021, or 1%, in comparison to 2020, and increased $23,687 in 2020, or 6%, in comparison to 2019. The increases were primarily due to increases in utility plant. In addition, the increase in 2020 also included $16,380 due to the the addition of CTWS’s operations. SJW Group anticipates increases in 2022 for depreciation expense due to increases in utility plant.
Impairment of long-lived asset
Impairment of long-lived asset increased $2,211 in 2021 due to the write-off of a customer care and billing system implementation in Texas.
Sale of nonutility properties
Sale of nonutility properties increased $7,494 in 2021 primarily due to the sales of multiple vacant land properties located in California.
Other Income and Expense
The change in other (expense) income in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to a $3,000 pre-tax gain on sale from the release of a holdback amount by GBRA for the sale of TWA recorded in 2017 and $1,704 decrease in pension non-service cost due to an increase on the return of pension assets and an increase in the discount rate.
The change in other (expense) income in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in interest on long-term debt as a result of the issuance of SJW Group’s Series 2019A, 2019B, 2019C and 2020 notes. In addition, interest income decreased due to the use of previously invested money market funds for the merger with CTWS. The new CTWS operations generated an additional increase of $5,144 in expense.
SJW Group’s consolidated weighted-average cost of long-term debt, including the mortgages and the amortization of debt issuance costs, was 4.1%, 4.3% and 4.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
Income tax expense for 2021 was $8,369, compared to $8,380 in 2020. The effective consolidated income tax rate was 12% for 2021, 12% for 2020 and 26% for 2019. The effective income tax rate decreased from 2019 due to flow-through deductions and the absence of the write-off of non-deductible merger costs in 2020 and 2021.
Please refer to Note 7, “Income Taxes,” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of actual to expected income tax expense.
Other Comprehensive (Loss) Income
The change in other comprehensive income in 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to the change in the benefit obligation for Connecticut Water’s supplemental executive retirement agreements as a result of a change in the discount rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Water Utility Services’ business derives the majority of its revenue directly from residential and business customers. Water Utility Services bills the majority of its customers on a bi-monthly basis. Payments from customers are impacted by the general economic conditions in the areas where SJW Group operates. Payment delinquencies are mitigated by service interruptions due to non-payment prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. In California, the current state executive order suspending water service disconnections due to non-payment by customers expired December 31, 2021. However, the CPUC directed that regulated water utilities continue to suspend customer disconnections until February 1, 2022. There are currently no such orders effective
in the other states where we operate. There is no guarantee that the Regulators will extend or reinstate such orders. As of December 31, 2021, the change in allowance for doubtful accounts was primarily due to adjustments made for the effect of COVID-19 on our customers. Impacts to allowance for doubtful accounts related to COVID-19 are being recorded for future recovery through the rate-making process. On February 3, 2022, SJWC received $9,757 through the State of California Water and Wastewater Arrearages Payment Program to relieve outstanding payment delinquencies for customers accounts greater that 60-days past due as of June 30, 2021. Write-offs for uncollectible accounts remain less than 1% of total revenue consistent with prior year. Management believes that the accounts receivable aging will continue to deteriorate throughout the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic as long as the moratoriums on water service disconnections for non-payment continue in California. There is no guarantee that such recovery will be approved by the respective state regulatory utility commissions.
Funds collected from Water Utility Services’ customers are used to pay for water production expenses, in addition to costs associated with general operations. Funds were also generated from borrowings. In 2021, SJW Group and its subsidiaries obtained $247,000 in funds from new long-term debt. From these amounts, SJW Group funded its 2021 capital expenditure programs refinanced certain short and long-term borrowings, and funded working capital. See Note 6 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for discussion on the debt financing activities of SJW Group. In addition, SJW Group paid cash dividends of approximately $40,137 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The condition of the capital and credit markets or the strength of financial institutions could impact SJW Group’s ability to draw on its lines of credit, issue long-term debt, sell its equity or earn interest income. In addition, government policies, the state of the credit markets and other factors could result in increased interest rates, which would increase SJW Group’s cost of capital. While our ability to obtain financing will continue to be a risk, we believe that based on our 2021 activities, we will have access to the external funding sources necessary to implement our on-going capital investment programs in the future. The current Standard & Poor’s Rating Service assigned company rating for SJW Group is an A-, with a stable outlook, for SJWC is an A, with a stable outlook, and for Connecticut Water is an A- with a stable outlook.
In 2021, the common dividends declared and paid on SJW Group’s common stock represented 66% of net income. Dividends have been paid on SJW Group’s and its predecessor’s common stock for 313 consecutive quarters and the annual dividend amount has increased in each of the last 54 years. While historically SJW Group has generally paid dividends equal to approximately 50% to 60% of its net income, SJW Group cannot guarantee that this trend will continue in the future.
Cash Flow from Operations
In 2021, SJW Group generated cash flow from operations of approximately $130,040 compared to $104,051 in 2020 and $130,005 in 2019. Cash flow from operations is primarily generated by net income from revenue producing activities, adjusted for non-cash expenses for depreciation and amortization, deferred income taxes, share-based compensation, allowance for equity funds used during construction, gains on the sale of assets, and other changes in working capital items. Cash flow from operations increased in 2021 by approximately $26,000. The increase was primarily due to a combination of the following factors: (1) increase in collections of previously billed and accrued receivables by $13,000, (2) an increase in general working capital and net income adjusted for non-cash items increase by $6,800, (3) payments of previously invoiced and accrued payables or amounts, decreased by $5,200, and (4) a $5,000 up-front service concession payment that occurred in the previous year, offset by (5) an increase in accrued groundwater extraction charges, purchased water and power of $4,000. Cash flow from operations decreased in 2020 by approximately $25,900. The decrease was primarily due to a combination of the following factors: (1) a decrease in collections of the balancing and memorandum accounts by $45,300, (2) a decrease in collections of previously billed and accrued receivables by $15,000, (3) a decrease in the other noncurrent assets and noncurrent liabilities of $6,700 primarily from an increase in payments for executive and board deferrals for retirees and deferred tax changes, and (4) an up-front payment of $5,000 for renewal of the Cupertino service concession agreement, offset by (5) general working capital and net income, adjusted for non-cash items which increased by $46,100.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
In 2021, SJW Group used approximately $234,000 of cash for Company funded capital expenditures, $23,600 for SJWTX, Inc.’s acquisition of Kendall West Utility and Bandera East Utility, $17,100 for developer funded capital expenditures, $2,800 in utility plant retirement costs, and $800 for real estate investments related to leasehold improvement additions for the properties located in Knoxville, Tennessee. These uses were offset by cash proceeds of $18,200 from the sale of Texas Water Alliance, real estate investments and nonutility properties. In 2020, SJW Group used approximately $195,300 of cash for Company funded capital expenditures, $17,100 for developer funded capital expenditures, $2,600 in utility plant retirement costs, and $400 for real estate investments related to leasehold improvement additions for the properties located in Knoxville, Tennessee. These uses were offset by cash proceeds of $1,200 from the sale of real estate investments and utility property.
Water Utility Services budgeted capital expenditures for 2022, excluding capital expenditures financed by customer contributions and advances is estimated as follows:
The 2022 capital expenditures budget is concentrated in main replacements. Included in the distribution system budgeted capital expenditures of $128,592 is approximately $101,526 that is planned to be spent to replace Water Utility Services’ pipes and mains.
Water Utility Services’ capital expenditures are incurred in connection with normal upgrading and expansion of existing facilities and to comply with environmental regulations. Over the next five years, Water Utility Services expects to incur approximately $1,311,271 in capital expenditures. A significant portion of this amount is subject to future approval from the Regulators. Capital expenditures have the effect of increasing utility plant rate base on which Water Utility Services earns a return. Water Utility Services’ actual capital expenditures may vary from projections due to changes in the expected demand for services, weather patterns, actions by governmental agencies and general economic conditions. Total additions to utility plant normally exceed company-financed additions as a result of new facilities construction funded with advances from developers and contributions in aid of construction.
The Water Utility Services’ distribution systems were constructed during the period from the early 1900’s through today. Expenditure levels for renewal and modernization will occur as the components reach the end of their useful lives. In most cases, replacement cost will significantly exceed the original installation cost of the retired assets due to increases in the costs of goods and services and increased regulation.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by approximately $31,300 from the same period in the prior year, primarily as a result of increase in cash proceeds from long-term debt issued in current year, cash proceeds from issuances of common stock, and increase in cash receipts of advances and contributions in aid of construction, partially offset by an decrease in the amount of net borrowings on our lines of credit and an increase in payments for dividends. SJW Group’s cash management policy includes the issuance of long-term debt to pay down borrowings on our lines of credit. As such, during years when long-term borrowings are high, borrowings on our line of credit tend to be low and when long-term borrowings are low, borrowings on our line of credit tend to be high.
SJWC, CTWS and SJWTX, Inc. have unsecured bank lines of credit totaling $260,000 as of December 31, 2021. Drawdowns on our lines of credit are restricted by our funded debt not exceeding a percent of total capitalization as defined in our debt covenants. SJW Group expects to periodically draw down on its lines of credit as dictated by our funding needs and subsequently repay such borrowings with cash from operations and issuance of long-term debt or equity. See also “Sources of Capital” below.
Sources of Capital
SJW Group’s regulated operations ability to finance future construction programs and sustain dividend payments depends on its ability to maintain or increase internally generated funds and obtain external financing through the issuance of new long-term debt or issuance of equity. The level of future earnings and the related cash flow from operations is dependent, in large part, on the timing and outcome of regulatory proceedings. SJW Group’s regulated operations financing activity is designed to achieve capital structures consistent with regulatory guidelines in the locations where the companies operate. See current authorized capital structures in Item 1, “Business” under “Regulation and Rates.”
Short-term Financing Arrangements
SJW Group and its subsidiaries have unsecured line of credit agreements where borrowings are used to refinance existing debt, for working capital, and for general corporate purposes. A summary of the line of credit agreements as of December 31, 2021, and 2020 are as follows:
___________________________________
(a)Credit agreement also provides for a letter of credit sublimit of $15,000.
(b)Credit agreement also provides for a letter of credit sublimit of $1,000.
On April 23, 2021, SJWC closed its $140,000 line of credit agreement which was set to mature on June 1, 2021, and entered into a new $140,000 credit agreement (“SJWC Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as the lender (the “Lender”). The SJWC Credit Agreement provides an unsecured credit facility with a letter of credit sublimit of $15,000. Proceeds of borrowings under the SJWC Credit Agreement may be used to refinance existing debt, for working capital, and for general corporate purposes. The new SJWC Credit Agreement has a maturity date of December 31, 2023. The line of credit bears interest at variable rates.
Also on April 23, 2021, SJW Group, as guarantor, and CLWSC closed its $5,000 line of credit agreement which was set to mature on June 1, 2021, and entered into a new $5,000 credit agreement (“SJWTX Credit Agreement”) with the Lender. The SJWTX Credit Agreement provides an unsecured credit facility with a letter of credit sublimit of $1,000. The new SJWTX Credit Agreement has a maturity date of December 31, 2023.
Cost of borrowing on the lines of credit averaged 1.32% and 1.78% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
All of SJW Group’s and subsidiaries lines of credit contain customary representations, warranties and events of default, as well as certain restrictive covenants customary for facilities of this type, including restrictions on indebtedness, liens, acquisitions and investments, restricted payments, asset sales, and fundamental changes. All of the lines of credit also include certain customary financial covenants such as a funded debt to capitalization ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio. As of December 31, 2021, SJW Group and its subsidiaries were in compliance with all covenants on their lines of credit.
Long-term Financing Arrangements
SJW Group and its subsidiaries long-term debt activities are for purposes of refinancing short-term borrowings, funding capital expenditures and working capital, and repayments of maturing long-term debt. The following table summarizes the long-term debt issuances and repayments for the year ended December 31, 2021:
The debt and credit agreements of SJW Group and its subsidiaries contain various financial and other covenants. Non-compliance with these covenants could result in accelerated due dates and termination of the agreements. In addition, the credit agreements contain customary representations and warranties and are subject to customary events of default, which may result in the outstanding debt becoming immediately due and payable. As of December 31, 2021, SJW Group and its subsidiaries were in compliance with all covenants related to its long-term debt agreements.
Equity Financing Arrangements
On March 8, 2021, SJW Group entered into an underwriting agreement with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, as the representative of the several underwriters named therein (the “Underwriters”), which provided for the issuance and sale by SJW Group to the Underwriters 1,030,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, in an underwritten public offering (the “Offering”). The shares in the Offering were sold at a public offering price of $59.00 per share. SJW Group also granted the Underwriters an option to purchase up to 154,500 additional shares of common stock, which was exercised in full. The Offering closed on March 11, 2021, and the offering of option shares closed on March 16, 2021. SJW Group received net proceeds of approximately $66,775 from the Offering and the sale of option shares, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. SJW Group used the proceeds from the offerings to pay down a bank line of credit agreement, dated as of June 1, 2016, between SJWC and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and for general corporate purposes, which included, among other things, financing infrastructure improvements and other capital expenditures, repayment of debt or other corporate obligations and working capital.
On November 17, 2021, SJW Group entered into an equity distribution agreement (the “Equity Distribution Agreement”) with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, RBC Capital Markets, LLC and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC (each a “Sales Agent” and, collectively, the “Sales Agents”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of its common stock, $0.001 par value per share (the “Shares”), from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings, having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $100,000. Pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement, the Shares may be offered and sold through the Sales Agents in transactions that are deemed to be “at-the-market” offerings as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act
of 1933, as amended, including sales by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on the New York Stock Exchange or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to the prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices, in block transactions, or as otherwise agreed upon by the Company and the Sales Agents. Proceeds from the sale of the shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement can be used in the financing of acquisitions, including the acquisition of the Kendall West and Bandera East utilities in Texas, infrastructure improvements and other capital expenditures, repayment of debt or other corporate obligations, and working capital over the term of the Equity Distribution Agreement as such needs arise. SJW Group issued and sold a total of 355,115 shares of common stock with a weighted average price of $70.40 per share and received approximately $24,253 in net proceeds under the Equity Distribution Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangement/Contractual Obligations
SJW Group has no significant contractual obligations not fully recorded on its Consolidated Balance Sheet or not fully disclosed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
SJW Group’s contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
___________________________________
(1) As of December 31, 2021, advances for construction was $130,693 of which $36,388 was related to non-refundable advances for construction and $28,445 was related to advances which are refundable based on service connections made.
In regards to uncertain tax positions, we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. For further discussion on uncertain tax positions, please see Note 7 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
Water Supply Agreements
SJWC purchases water from Valley Water under terms of a master contract expiring in 2051. Delivery schedules for purchased water are based on a contract year beginning July 1, and are negotiated every three years under terms of the master contract with Valley Water. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, SJWC purchased from Valley Water 19,365 million gallons ($91,938), 21,269 million gallons ($96,212) and 21,862 million gallons ($96,285), respectively, of contract water. On June 24, 2021, Valley Water Board of Directors approved treated water deliveries reflecting the contractual delivery schedule reduced by 23% through June 30, 2022. Effective February 1, 2022, the treated water contract delivery schedule will increase by 10%, and Valley Water will evaluate supply conditions and adjust the delivery schedules as appropriate. Based on current prices and estimated deliveries, SJWC is committed to purchase from Valley Water a minimum of 90% of the reduced delivery schedule, or 18,756 million gallons ($92,902) of water at the current contract water rate of $5.0 per million gallons in the year ending December 31, 2022. Additionally, SJWC purchases non-contract water from Valley Water on an “as needed” basis if the water supply is available. The contract water rates for SJWC are determined by Valley Water. These rates are adjusted periodically and coincide with Valley Water’s fiscal year, which ends on June 30. The contract water rate for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020 was $5.0, $4.5 and $4.5 per million gallons, respectively. The contractual cost of the groundwater extraction charge for water pumped from the ground basin was $4.6, $4.2 and $4.2 per million gallons for Valley Water’s fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
SJWC also pumps water from the local groundwater basin. There are no delivery schedules or contractual obligations associated with the purchase of groundwater. Valley Water determines the groundwater extraction charge and it is applied on a
per unit basis. In addition to the Valley Water groundwater extraction charge, SJWC also incurs power costs to pump the groundwater from the basin.
Connecticut Water has an agreement with the RWA to purchase water. The agreement was signed in April 2006 and became effective upon the receipt of all regulatory approvals in 2008 and will remain in effect for a minimum of fifty years upon becoming effective. Connecticut Water will pay RWA $75 per year as part of a capacity agreement, for a total of 14 years, starting on the effective date of the agreement. In addition, Connecticut Water has the option, but is under no obligation, to purchase up to one million gallons of water per day at the then current wholesale rates per the agreement ($2.6 per million gallons as of December 31, 2021). Connecticut Water has an agreement with the MDC to purchase water from MDC to serve the Unionville system. The agreement became effective on October 6, 2000 and has a term of fifty years beginning May 19, 2003, the date the water supply facilities related to the agreement were placed in service. Connecticut Water has agreed to purchase 283 million gallons of water annually from MDC. The rate charged by the MDC at December 31, 2021 were $4.05 per hundred cubic feet.
Maine Water has an agreement with the Kennebec Water District for potable water service. The agreement has been in place for 20 years and was extended on November 7, 2020 for a new term of up to 20 years. Maine Water guarantees a minimum consumption of 50 million gallons of water annually. Water sales to Maine Water are billed at a wholesale discount of $0.20 per hundred cubic feet of water below Kennebec Water District's tariffed rates. The current tariff rate was $1.51 per hundred cubic feet as of December 31, 2021.
CLWSC has long-term contracts with the GBRA. The agreements expire in 2037, 2040, 2044 and 2050. The agreements, which are take-or-pay contracts, provide CLWSC with 7,650 acre-feet per year of water supply from Canyon Lake. The water rate may be adjusted by GBRA at any time, provided GBRA gives CLWSC a 60-day written notice on the proposed adjustment. CLWSC also has raw water supply agreements with the LCRA and WTPUA expiring in 2059 and 2046, respectively, for 250 acre-feet of water per each agreement per year from Lake Austin and the Colorado River, respectively, at prices that may be adjusted periodically by the agencies.
Employee Benefit Arrangements
SJWC and CTWS sponsor noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and provide health care and life insurance benefits for retired employees. In 2021, SJWC and CTWS contributed $13,147 and $669 to the pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans, respectively. In 2022, SJWC and CTWS expect to make required and discretionary cash contributions of up to $8,820 to the pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans. The amount of required contributions for years thereafter is not actuarially determinable.
SJWC’s other benefit obligations include employees’ and directors’ postretirement benefits, an Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, Cash Balance Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, Special Deferral Election Plan and Deferral Election Program for non-employee directors. Under these benefit plans, SJWC is committed to pay approximately $498 annually to former officers and directors. Future payments may fluctuate depending on the life span of the retirees and as current officers and executives retire.
CTWS’s other benefit obligations include employees’ postretirement benefits, supplemental executive retirement agreements and deferred compensation agreements and plan. Future payments may fluctuate depending on the contribution rates of employees into the deferred compensation plan and the life span of the retirees and as current officers and executives retire. Under these benefit plans, CTWS is committed to pay approximately $846 annually to former officers and directors.
Recently Adopted Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for a discussion of recently adopted accounting policies and new accounting pronouncements for the year ended December 31, 2021.