Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of Skillsoft (as defined below) should be read in conjunction with Skillsoft’s audited consolidated financial statements for the periods preceding and following the businsess combination in the year ended January 31, 2022 and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report and the related notes included in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on June 17, 2021. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Skillsoft’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this report. Unless otherwise noted, amounts referenced in this discussion, other than in reference to share numbers, are in thousands.
Significant Transactions
Business Combination with Global Knowledge
On June 11, 2021, the Company and Software Luxembourg Holding S.A., a global leader in digital learning and talent management solutions, completed a business combination and subsequent acquisition of Albert DE Holdings Inc. (“Global Knowledge” and such acquisition, the “Global Knowledge Merger”), a worldwide leader in IT and professional skills development. The combined company operates as Skillsoft Corp. (“Skillsoft”, “we”, “us”, “our”, and the “Company”) and is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the new ticker symbol “SKIL” beginning on June 14, 2021.
Codecademy Merger
On December 22, 2021, the Company announced a definitive agreement to acquire Codecademy (the “Codecademy Merger”), a leading online learning platform for technical skills, for approximately $525 million in cash and stock. Codecademy is an innovative and popular learning platform providing high-demand technical skills to approximately 40 million registered learners in nearly every country worldwide. The platform offers interactive, self-paced courses and hands-on learning in 14 programming languages across multiple domains such as application development, data science, cloud and cybersecurity. We believe the Codecademy acquisition will further enhance our Technology and Developer offerings and differentiate us from our competitors. The Codecademy Merger closed on April 4, 2022 for total consideration of approximately $390.3 million, consisting of the issuance of 30,374,427 common shares and a cash payment of $207.6 million.
Change in Fiscal Year
On June 21, 2021, our board of directors approved the adoption of a January 31 year-end for the Company’s financial reporting, effective immediately, to align Churchill Capital Corp II and Global Knowledge with the pre-business combination Skillsoft’s fiscal year end. As a result, this fiscal year ended on January 31, 2022 (fiscal 2022).
Company’s Business following the Business Combination
Skillsoft is a global leader in corporate digital learning, serving more than 75% of the Fortune 1000, customers in over 160 countries, and a community of learners of more than 90 million globally. Skillsoft’s primary learning solutions include: (i) Percipio, an intelligent and immersive digital learning platform; (ii) Global Knowledge, a global provider of authorized information technology & development training and professional skills; (iii) Codecademy, an online learning platform for technical skills that uses an innovative, scalable approach to online coding education; (iv) Pluma, which offers individualized coaching through a digital platform that provides executive-quality coaching that is personal yet scalable; and (v) SumTotal, a SaaS-based Human Capital Management (“HCM”) solution with a leading Talent Development platform.
The Company provides enterprise learning solutions designed to prepare organizations for the future of work, enable them to overcome critical skill gaps, drive demonstrable behavior-change, and unlock the potential in one of their most important assets: their people. The Company’s award-winning, AI-driven, immersive learning platform, Percipio, is purpose built to make learning easier, more accessible, and more effective. Percipio is an open, modern and extensible platform designed to meet the needs of the enterprise customer. Skillsoft offers a comprehensive suite of premium, original, and authorized partner content, including one of the broadest and deepest libraries of leadership & business, technology & developer, and compliance curricula. With access to a broad spectrum of learning options (including video, audio, books, bootcamps, live events, practice labs and individualized coaching), organizations can meaningfully increase learner engagement and retention. In addition, we believe our recent acquisition of Codecademy will further strengthen our content library, enhance the Percipio platform, broaden our customer reach and create significant cross selling opportunities, positioning us for faster growth.
The corporate digital learning industry is rapidly growing, driven by significant tailwinds as organizations focus on upskilling, reskilling, and future-proofing their workforces and the accelerated shift from in-person training to digital training due, in part, to the significant and likely permanent shift to largely remote and distributed workforces triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic and increased emphasis on talent driven by the “great resignation.” The war for talent, labor shortages, wage inflation, hybrid work, early retirements, and burnout among those who stay behind all contribute to this growing demand. According to a January 2021 report by McKinsey, 87% of companies worldwide either currently have skills gaps or believe they will within the next few years, and core skills are changing at an unprecedented pace. In a recent survey conducted by Deloitte, the vast majority of CEO’s cited labor and skills shortages as the number one threat to their business in the coming year - ahead of the pandemic, supply chain disruption, inflation and market instability, cybersecurity, and political instability. According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, technology will radically transform 1.1 billion jobs by 2030. CEOs, Chief People Officers, and the companies they and their teams lead need to transform their current workforce into one adapted for tomorrow’s demands. We believe these factors present a significant market opportunity for our solutions.
Results of Operations
Our financial results for the period from June 12, 2021 to January 31, 2022 are referred to as those of the “Successor” periods. Our financial results for the periods of August 28, 2020 to January 31, 2021 and February 1, 2021 to June 11, 2021 are referred to as those of the “Predecessor (SLH)” periods. Our financial results for the period of February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020 are referred to as those of the “Predecessor (PL)” periods. Our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements for these periods are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Although we are required by GAAP to report on our results for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 separately, for the periods from June 12, 2021 through January 31, 2022, February 1, 2021 through June 11, 2021, August 28, 2020 through January 31, 2021, and February 1, 2020 through August 27, 2020, management views the Company’s operating results for the fiscal
years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 by combining the results of the applicable Predecessor and Successor periods because such presentation provides better comparability of our results to prior periods.
We cannot adequately benchmark the operating results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 against any of the previous periods reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements without combining the applicable Predecessor and Successor periods and do not believe that reviewing the results of the periods in isolation would be useful in identifying trends in or reaching conclusions regarding our overall operating performance. Management believes that the key performance metrics such as revenue and operating (loss) income for the Successor periods when combined with the Predecessor periods provide more meaningful comparisons to other periods and are useful in identifying current business trends. Accordingly, in addition to presenting our results of operations as reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP, the tables and discussion below also present the combined results for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021. For a discussion of the combined results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, please refer to “Skillsoft’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” on Form S-4 filed with the SEC on May 27, 2021.
The table below presents the results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, which are the sum of the reported amounts for the Predecessor (SLH) period from February 1, 2021 through June 11, 2021 and the Successor period from June 12, 2021 through January 31, 2022. These combined results are not considered to be prepared in accordance with GAAP and have not been prepared as pro forma results, per applicable regulations. The combined operating results do not reflect the actual results we would have achieved absent the business combination and may not be indicative of future results.
The table below presents the results for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, which are the sum of the reported amounts for the Predecessor (SLH) period from August 28, 2020 through January 31, 2021 and the Predecessor (PL) period from February 1, 2020 through August 27, 2020. These combined results are not considered to be prepared in accordance with GAAP and have not been prepared as pro forma results per applicable regulations.
The table below presents the comparison of our historical results of operations for the periods presented:
The following table sets forth certain items from our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
Revenues
We provide, through our Skillsoft, Global Knowledge, and SumTotal brands, enterprise learning solutions designed to prepare organizations for the future of work, overcome critical skill gaps, drive demonstrable behavior-change, and unlock the potential in their people.
Skillsoft generates revenues from its comprehensive suite of premium, original, and authorized partner content, featuring one of the deepest libraries of leadership & business, technology & development, and compliance curricula. With access to a broad spectrum of learning options (including video, audio, books, bootcamps, live events, and practice labs), organizations can meaningfully increase learner engagement and retention. Skillsoft’s offerings are delivered through Percipio, our award-winning, AI-driven, immersive learning platform purpose built to make learning easier, more accessible, and more effective. These learning solutions are typically sold on a subscription basis for a fixed term.
Global Knowledge generates revenues from virtual, in-classroom, and on-demand training solutions in information technology geared at foundational, practitioner and expert information technology professionals. Global Knowledge’s digital and in-classroom learning solutions provide enterprises, government agencies, educational institutions, and individual customers a broad selection of customizable courses to meet their technology and development needs.
SumTotal generates revenues from its unified, comprehensive and configurable SaaS talent management solution that allows organizations to attract, develop and retain the best talent. SumTotal also sells professional services related to the talent management solution, and occasionally provide perpetual and term-based licenses for on-premise versions of the solution.
The following table sets forth the percentage of our revenues attributable to geographic regions for the periods indicated:
Subscription and Non-Subscription Revenue
SaaS and Subscription Revenue. Represents revenue generated from contracts specifying a minimum fixed fee for services delivered over the life of the contract. The initial term of these contracts is generally two to five years and is generally non-cancellable for the term of the subscription. The fixed fee is generally paid upfront. These contracts typically consist of subscriptions to our various offerings which provide continuous access to our SaaS platforms and associated content over the contract term. Subscription revenues are inclusive of maintenance revenue for SumTotal. Subscription revenue is usually recognized ratably over the contract term.
Non-Subscription Revenue. Primarily represents the sale of Global Knowledge classroom offerings in both in-person and virtual environments. Classroom training, including virtual offerings, are first scheduled, then delivered later, with revenue realized on the delivery date. Non-subscription revenue also includes professional services related to implementation of our offerings and subsequent, ongoing consulting engagements. Our non-subscription services complement our subscription business in creating strong and comprehensive customer relationships.
The following table sets forth (i) SaaS and subscription and (ii) non-subscription revenue for our business units for the periods indicated:
Revenue by Product and Service Type
The following is a summary of our revenues by product and service type for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021:
Revenues increased $184.8 million, or 48.3%, during fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021. The primary reason for the increase in GAAP revenue is due to the inclusion of Global Knowledge revenue for the period subsequent to its acquisition on June 11, 2021, which resulted in an increase of $132.6 million for fiscal 2022. Revenues in fiscal 2021 were also lower due to the application of fresh-start reporting in August 2020, which required deferred revenue as of August 28, 2020 to be reduced to its estimated fair value, which is derived from the estimated costs to fulfill contractual obligations at the time of a change in control rather than the value of contractual billings to customers. The application of fresh-start reporting resulted in a decrease in GAAP revenue of approximately $89.0 million in fiscal 2021. We adopted ASU 2021-08 - Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers (“ASU 2021-08”), effective at the beginning of the Successor period on June 11, 2021. ASU 2021-08 requires an acquirer in a business combination to recognize and measure deferred revenue from acquired contracts using the revenue recognition guidance in Topic 606, rather than the prior requirement to record deferred revenue at a lower fair value. As a result of the adoption of ASU 2021-08, we did not experience a decline in revenue subsequent to June 11, 2021 attributable to a fair value adjustment as we did with the application of fresh-start reporting in the prior year. After normalizing for the impact of the acquisition of Global Knowledge and fresh-start reporting, revenues for the Content and SumTotal business units were down slightly due to lower bookings in the prior year, as revenue from our subscription offerings is typically recognized over the twelve months that follow a booking.
Operating expenses
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of employee salaries and benefits for hosting operations, professional service and customer support personnel; royalties; hosting and software maintenance services; facilities and utilities costs; consulting services; instructor fees, course materials, logistics costs and overhead costs associated with virtual, in-classroom, and on-demand training solutions. The table below provides details regarding the changes in components of cost of revenues.
The increases in compensation and benefits, royalties, consulting and outside services, facilities and utilities, and depreciation expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, were primarily the result of the inclusion of Global Knowledge’s expenses incurred subsequent to its acquisition on June 11, 2021. The increase in hosting and software maintenance expenses was offset by the decrease in server licensing costs, which was the result of the migration of Percipio from our servers to cloud storage.
Content and software development
Content and software development expenses include costs associated with the development of new products and the enhancement of existing products, consisting primarily of employee salaries and benefits; development-related professional services; facilities costs; depreciation; and software maintenance costs. The table below provides details regarding the changes in components of content and software development expenses.
The increase in compensation and benefits in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was primarily due to the increase in incentive-based compensation accruals and the inclusion of Global Knowledge’s compensation and benefits expenses incurred subsequent to its acquisition on June 11, 2021. The decrease in consulting and outside services expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was primarily due to decreased third party software development costs as we shifted more software development to our offshore resources. The decrease in facilities and utilities expenses was primarily due to the cost savings from the Company’s mobile phone plan change and lower rent and utilities expenses attributable to content and software development in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing, or S&M, expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for selling, marketing and pre-sales support personnel; commissions; travel expenses; advertising and promotional expenses; consulting and outside services; facilities costs; depreciation; and software maintenance costs. The table below provides details regarding the changes in components of S&M expenses.
The increases in compensation and benefits expenses and advertising and promotions expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, were primarily the result of the inclusion of Global Knowledge’s S&M expenses incurred subsequent to its acquisition on June 11, 2021. The increase in compensation and benefits was partially offset by the decreases in commission expenses as a result of the application of fresh-start reporting in August 2020 and Topic 805 business combination guidance in June 2021, which required us to eliminate the balance of deferred commissions which otherwise would have been recognized as commission expense in the Successor period. The decrease in facilities and utilities
expenses was primarily due to the cost savings from the Company’s mobile phone plan change and less rent and utilities expenses attributable to S&M in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021.
General and administrative
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits for executive, finance, administrative, and legal personnel; audit, legal and consulting fees; insurance; franchise, sales and property taxes; facilities costs; and depreciation. The table below provides details regarding the changes in components of G&A expenses.
The increases in compensation and benefits, facilities and utilities, and software maintenance expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, were primarily the result of the inclusion of Global Knowledge’s G&A expenses incurred subsequent to its acquisition on June 11, 2021. Also contributing to the increase in compensation and benefits expenses was the stock-based compensation related to the stock options and restricted stock units granted to key employees. The increase was partially offset by one-time retention bonuses paid to key employees in connection with Skillsoft’s Chapter 11 filing and recapitalization efforts during fiscal 2021. The increase in consulting and outside services expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was primarily due to increased legal, audit and tax services attributable to the merger and public-company readiness as well as and business process improvement projects related consulting services. The increase in insurance expenses in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was due to the higher directors and officers insurance policies attributable to the Company now being publicly listed.
Amortization of intangible assets
Intangible assets arising from business combinations are developed technology, customer-related intangibles, trade names and other identifiable intangible assets with finite lives. These intangible assets are amortized over the estimated useful lives of such assets. We also capitalize certain internal use software development costs related to our SaaS platform incurred during the application development stage. The internal use software is amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life.
The increase in amortization of intangible assets in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was primarily due to the intangible assets that arose from the business combinations completed in June 2021.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets
During the Predecessor (PL) period for the three months ended April 30, 2020, the emergence of COVID-19 as a global pandemic had an adverse impact on our business. While the online learnings tools we offer have many advantages over traditional in person learning in the current environment, some of our customers have sought to temporarily reduce spending, resulting in reductions in contract sizes and in some cases cancellations when such contracts have come up for renewal. In addition, identifying and pursing opportunities for new customers became much more challenging in this environment. As a result of the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, management decreased its estimates of future cash flows. In addition to the uncertainty introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic, our over-leveraged capital structure continued to create headwinds. In April 2020, we received temporary forbearance from our lenders due to a default on
amounts owed under the Senior Credit Facility as a long-term consensual solution was being negotiated with lenders. The uncertainty around our capital structure and future ownership continued to hurt our business, as new and existing customers displayed apprehension about the ultimate resolution of our capital structure and its impact on operations, causing delays and sometimes losses in business. The uncertainty surrounding our capital structure combined with the potential impact that the COVID-19 pandemic would have on our company and the global economy, resulted in a significant decline in the fair value of our reporting units during the predecessor period ended August 27, 2020.
As part of our evaluation of impairment indicators based on the circumstances described above as of April 30, 2020, we determined the SumTotal long-lived asset group failed the undiscounted cash flow recoverability test. Accordingly, we estimated the fair value of our individual long-lived assets to determine if any impairment charges were present. Our estimation of the fair value of definite lived intangible assets included the use of discounted cash flow analyses which reflected estimates of future revenue, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, cash flows, and discount rates. Based on these analyses, we concluded the fair values of certain SumTotal intangible assets were lower than their current carrying values and, accordingly, impairment charges of $62.3 million were recognized for the Predecessor period from February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020.
In light of the circumstances above, we also concluded that a triggering event had occurred with respect to the Company’s indefinite-lived Skillsoft trade name as of April 30, 2020. Accordingly, we estimated the fair value of the Skillsoft trade name using a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis which reflected estimates of future revenue, royalty rates, cash flows, and discount rates. Based on this analysis, we concluded the carrying value of the Skillsoft trade name exceeded its fair value, resulting in an impairment charge of $92.2 million for the Predecessor period from February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020.
In accordance with ASC 350, for goodwill we determined triggering events had occurred and performed an impairment test as of April 30, 2020 that compared the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to their respective carrying values. We considered the results of a DCF analysis, which were also materially corroborated by an EBITDA multiple approach. The results of the impairment tests performed indicated that the carrying values of the Skillsoft and SumTotal reporting units exceeded their estimated fair values determined by the Company. Based on the results of the goodwill impairment testing procedures, the Company recorded a $107.9 million goodwill impairment for the Skillsoft reporting unit and a $70.0 million goodwill impairment for the SumTotal reporting unit.
In total, as described in detail above, we recorded $332.4 million of impairment charges for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, consisting of (i) $62.3 million of impairments of SumTotal definite-lived intangible assets, (ii) a $92.2 million impairment of the Skillsoft trade name, (iii) a $107.9 million goodwill impairment for the Skillsoft reporting unit and (iv) a $70.0 million goodwill impairment for the SumTotal reporting unit.
Recapitalization and acquisition-related costs
Recapitalization and acquisition-related costs consist of professional fees for legal, investment banking and other advisor costs incurred in connection with our recapitalization efforts, including the evaluation of strategic alternatives, preparation for the Chapter 11 filing and subsequent emergence in August 2020, activities related to the business combination completed in June 2021, and subsequent integration related activities.
Restructuring
In January 2021, we committed to a restructuring plan that encompassed a series of measures intended to improve our operating efficiency, competitiveness and business profitability. These included workforce reductions mainly within our SumTotal business, and consolidation of facilities as we are adopting new work arrangements for certain locations. During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, we recorded restructuring charges of $3.0 million for employee severance cost adjustments.
In connection with our strategic initiatives implemented during 2020, we approved and initiated plans to reduce our cost structure and better align operating expenses with existing economic conditions and our operating model. During the fiscal
year ended January 31, 2021, we recorded restructuring charges of $5.5 million for employee severance cost adjustments and lease termination related fees.
Interest and other expense
Interest and other expense, net, consists of gain and loss on derivative instruments, interest income, interest expense, and other expense and income.
The net other (expense) income was primarily the foreign exchange gains and losses (specifically, resulting from foreign currency denominated transactions and the revaluation of foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities) recognized during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, which fluctuate as the U.S. dollar appreciates or depreciates against other currencies. The decrease in interest expense for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, was the result of (i) our reorganization through voluntarily filed “pre-packaged” Chapter 11 cases completed in August 2020, which resulted in substantially less outstanding debt, and (ii) our refinancing completed in July 2021, which resulted in a lower interest rate.
Fair value adjustments to warrants
The gains attributable to warrants for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 are due to depreciation of our common stock during the period, which decreased the fair value of our liability classified warrants that are marked to market at each balance sheet date, with gains and losses being recorded in current period earnings.
Reorganization items, net
During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, we recognized Reorganization items, net of $3.3 billion related to our emergence from the Chapter 11, which consisted primarily of the net gain from the consummation of the Plan of Reorganization and the related extinguishment of certain debt obligations. In addition, Reorganization items, net included professional fees recognized between the June 14, 2020 Petition Date and the August 27, 2020 Effective Date in connection with our emergence from Chapter 11.
(Benefit from) provision for income taxes
The increase in benefit from income taxes in fiscal 2022, as compared to provision for income taxes in fiscal 2021, was primarily due to the impact of rate differential and nontaxable income in fiscal 2021 and the cancellation of indebtedness income (“CODI”) and changes to the tax basis in certain assets recognized upon the Company’s emergence from bankruptcy in the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022.
The effective income tax rate for fiscal 2022, differed from the United States federal statutory rate of 21.0% due primarily to the impact of non-deductible items, changes to unrecognized tax positions, foreign rate differential, and changes in the valuation allowance on the Company’s deferred tax assets.
The effective income tax rate for fiscal 2021, differed from the Ireland statutory rate of 12.5% due primarily to the impact of cancellation of indebtedness income (“CODI”) and changes to the tax basis in certain assets recognized upon the Company’s emergence from bankruptcy, as well as changes to valuation allowance on the Company’s deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Sources of Cash
As of January 31, 2022, we had $154.7 million of cash and cash equivalents on hand. We have funded operations primarily through the use of cash collected from our customers and the proceeds received from the Term Loan Facility (described below), supplemented from time to time with borrowings under our accounts receivable facility. Our cash requirements vary depending on factors such as the growth of the business, changes in working capital and capital expenditures. We expect to operate the business and execute our strategic initiatives principally with funds generated from operations and supplemented from borrowings up to a maximum of $75.0 million under our accounts receivable facility. We anticipate that we will have sufficient internal and external sources of liquidity to fund operations and anticipated working capital and other expected cash needs for at least the next 12 months as well as for the foreseeable future with capital sources currently available.
Term Loan
On July 16, 2021, Skillsoft Finance II, Inc. (“Skillsoft Finance II”), a subsidiary of Skillsoft Corp., entered into that certain Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), by and among Skillsoft Finance II, as borrower, Skillsoft Finance I, Inc., as holdings (“Holdings”), the lenders party thereto and Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent and collateral agent, pursuant to which the lenders provided a $480 million term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) to Skillsoft Finance II, the proceeds of which, together with cash on hand, were used to refinance the Senior Secured First Out Term Loan and Senior Secured Second Out Term Loans incurred by certain subsidiaries of Skillsoft Finance II. The Term Loan Facility is scheduled to mature on July 16, 2028 (the “Maturity Date”).
The Term Loan Facility is guaranteed by Holdings and certain material subsidiaries of Skillsoft Finance II (collectively, the “Loan Parties”). All obligations under the Credit Agreement, and the guarantees of those obligations, are secured by substantially all of the material assets of the Loan Parties.
Amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Facility bear interest, at the option of Skillsoft Finance II, at a rate equal to (a) LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.75%) plus 4.75% for Eurocurrency Loans or (b) the highest of (i) the Federal Funds Effective Rate plus ½ of 1%, (ii) the “prime rate” quoted by the Administrative Agent, (iii) LIBOR plus 1.00% and (iv) 1.75%, plus 3.75%.
Skillsoft Finance II is required to repay the Term Loan Facility in quarterly installments in the amount of 1% per annum, payable on the last business day of each fiscal quarter. The entire remaining outstanding balance of the Term Loan Facility is payable on the Maturity Date. Voluntary prepayment is permitted under the Term Loan Facility subject to a premium of 2% for any prepayments prior to the 12 month anniversary of the Term Loan Facility.
Loan Parties are subject to various affirmative and negative covenants and reporting obligations under the Credit Facility. These include, among others, limitations on indebtedness, liens, sale and leaseback transactions, investments, fundamental changes, assets sales, restricted payments, affiliate transactions, and restricted debt payments. Events of default under the Term Loan Facility include non-payment of amounts due to the lenders, violation of covenants, materially incorrect representations, defaults under other material indebtedness, judgments and specified insolvency-related events, certain ERISA events, and invalidity of loan or collateral documents, subject to, in certain instances, specified thresholds, cure periods and exceptions.
In connection with the closing of the Codecademy Merger, the Skillsoft Finance II entered into an Amendment to its Credit Agreement. See Note 25. Subsequent Events to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements for more detail.
Accounts Receivable Facility
We also have access to up to $75.0 million of borrowings under our accounts receivables facility, where borrowing can be made against eligible accounts receivable, with advance rates between 50.0% and 85.0%. Borrowings under the facility bear interest at 3.00% per annum plus the greater of (i) the prime rate or (ii) the sum of 0.5% per annum plus the federal funds rate. The maturity date of the accounts receivable facility is the earlier of (i) December 2024 or (ii) 90 days prior to the maturity of any corporate debt. The accounts receivable facility requires a minimum outstanding balance of $10 million at all times. Based on seasonality of billings and the characteristics of accounts receivable, some of which are not eligible for advances, we are not always able to access the full $75 million of capacity.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the period presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The improvement in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022, compared to fiscal 2021, was the result of lower recapitalization and transaction related costs. The significantly higher costs in the prior year were attributable to our preparation for a voluntary prepackaged Chapter 11 filing.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities include cash paid of $386.0 million related to the acquisition of Skillsoft, $156.9 million related to the acquisition of Global Knowledge, and $18.6 million related to the acquisition of Pluma. See Note 3 “Business Combinations” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more details. Our purchases of property and equipment largely consist of computer hardware and software, as well as capitalized software development costs, to support content and software development activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities consist of borrowings and repayments under our Predecessor and Successor debt facilities and our accounts receivable facility. We received $530 million of proceeds from PIPE equity investment and used most of the proceeds for the acquisition of Skillsoft on June 11, 2021.
Contractual and Commercial Obligations
The scheduled maturities of our debt and future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable lease agreements as of January 31, 2022 were as set forth in the table below.
From time to time, we are a party to or may be threatened with litigation in the ordinary course of our business. We regularly analyze then current information, including, as applicable, our defense and insurance coverage and, as necessary, provide accruals for probable and estimable liabilities for the eventual disposition of these matters. For information regarding legal proceedings see “Litigation” set forth under Note 14 - “Leases, Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10 K
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly reevaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to the following: business combinations, revenue recognition, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, stock-based compensation, accounting for warrants, income tax assets and liabilities; and restructuring charges and accruals. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the amounts of revenues and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations could be impacted.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates most significantly affect the portrayal of our financial condition and involve our most difficult and subjective estimates and judgments.
Fresh-Start Accounting
In connection with our emergence from the chapter 11 proceedings and in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 852, Reorganizations (“ASC 852”), we qualified for and adopted freshstart accounting as of August 28, 2020 as (i) the holders of existing voting shares of Pointwell Limited (“Predecessor (PL)”) received less than 50% of the voting shares of Software Luxembourg Holding S.A. (“Predecessor (SLH)”) and (ii) the reorganization value of our assets immediately prior to confirmation of the Plan of Reorganization was less than the post-petition liabilities and allowed claims.
In accordance with ASC 852, with the application of fresh-start accounting, we allocated our reorganization value to our individual assets based on our estimated fair values in conformity with ASC 805, Business Combinations. The reorganization value represents the fair value of the Successor’s assets before considering liabilities. The excess reorganization value over the fair value of identified tangible and intangible assets is reported as goodwill.
For information regarding fresh-start accounting, refer to Note 4, Fresh-Start Reporting to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Reorganization Value
As set forth in the Plan of Reorganization and the Disclosure Statement, the enterprise value of the Successor was estimated to be between $1.050 billion and $1.250 billion. Based on the estimates and assumptions discussed below, we estimated the enterprise value to be $1.150 billion, which was the midpoint of the range of enterprise values as of the effective date of our emergence from Chapter 11 on August 27, 2020.
Management and its valuation advisors estimated the enterprise value of the Successor, which was approved by the Bankruptcy Court. The selected publicly traded companies analysis approach, the DCF analysis approach and the selected transactions analysis approach were all utilized in estimating enterprise value. The use of each approach provides corroboration for the other approaches.
To estimate enterprise value utilizing the selected publicly traded companies analysis method, valuation multiples derived from the operating data of publicly-traded benchmark companies to the same operating data of the Company were applied. The selected publicly traded companies analysis identified a group of comparable companies giving consideration to lines of business and markets served, size and geography.
The valuation multiples were derived based on historical and projected financial measures of revenue and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization and applied to projected operating data of the Company.
To estimate enterprise value utilizing the discounted cash flow method, an estimate of future cash flows for the period 2021 to 2023 with a terminal value was determined and discounted to present value. The expected cash flows for the period 2021 to 2023 with a terminal value were based upon certain financial projections and assumptions provided to the Bankruptcy Court. The expected cash flows for the period 2021 to 2023 were derived from earnings forecasts and assumptions regarding growth and margin projections, as applicable. A terminal value was included, calculated using the terminal multiple method, which estimates a range of values at which the Successor will be valued at the end of the Projection Period based on applying a terminal multiple to final year Adjusted EBITDA, which is defined as consolidated operating income adjusted to exclude non-cash compensation expenses included within corporate expenses, as well as Depreciation and amortization, Impairment charges and Other operating income (expense), net. To estimate enterprise value utilizing the selected transactions analysis, valuation multiples were derived from an analysis of consideration paid and net debt assumed from publicly disclosed merger or acquisition transactions, and such multiples were applied to the cash flows of the Successor. The selected transactions analysis identified companies and assets involved in publicly disclosed merger and acquisition transactions for which the targets had operating and financial characteristics comparable in certain respects to the Successor.
Concentrations of Credit Risk and Off-Balance-Sheet Risk
For the periods from June 12, 2021 through January 31, 2022 (Successor), February 1, 2021 through June 11, 2021 (Predecessor SLH), August 28, 2020 through January 31, 2021 (Predecessor SLH), the period from February 1,2020 through August 27, 2020 (Predecessor (PL)) and for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 (Predecessor (PL)), no customer individually comprised greater than 10% of revenue or accounts receivable. We perform continuing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition and generally does not require collateral. We maintain a reserve for doubtful accounts and sales credits that is our best estimate of potentially uncollectible trade receivables. Provisions are made based upon a specific review of all significant outstanding invoices that are considered potentially uncollectible in whole or in part. For those invoices not specifically reviewed or considered uncollectible, provisions are provided at different rates, based upon the age of the receivable, historical experience, and other currently available evidence. The reserve estimates are adjusted as additional information becomes known or payments are made. We have no significant off-balance-sheet arrangements nor concentration of credit risks such as foreign exchange contracts, option contracts or other foreign hedging arrangements.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
We capitalize certain internal-use software development costs related to our SaaS platform incurred during the application development stage. Costs related to preliminary project activities and to postimplementation activities are expensed as incurred. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable that the expenditures will result in additional functionality. Internal-use software is amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful
life, which is generally five years. Management evaluates the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of the assets. Capitalized costs are recorded as intangible assets in the accompanying balance sheets.
Income Taxes
We provide for deferred income taxes resulting from temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes as compared to tax purposes, using rates expected to be in effect when such differences reverse. We record valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We follow the authoritative guidance on accounting for and disclosure of uncertainty in tax positions which requires us to determine whether a tax position of the Company is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals of litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the tax amount recognized in the financial statements is reduced to the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon the ultimate settlement with the relevant taxing authority. Interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions is included in the provision for income taxes in the consolidated statement of operations.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets arising from fresh-start accounting and business combinations are generally recorded based upon estimates of the future performance and cash flows from the acquired business. We use an income approach to determine the estimated fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets including customer relationships and trade names and use a cost approach for other identifiable intangible assets, including developed software/courseware. The income approach determines fair value by estimating the after-tax cash flows attributable to an identified asset over its useful life (Level 3 inputs) and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. The cost approach determines fair value by estimating the cost to replace or reproduce an asset at current prices and is reduced for functional and economic obsolescence. Developed technology represents patented and unpatented technology and know-how. Customer contracts and relationships represents established relationships with customers, which provide a ready channel for the sale of additional content and services. Trademarks and tradenames represent acquired product names and marks that we intend to continue to utilize.
We review intangible assets subject to amortization at least annually to determine if any adverse conditions exist or a change in circumstances has occurred that would indicate impairment or a change in remaining useful life. Conditions that would indicate impairment and trigger a more frequent impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal factors or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets, including goodwill and certain trademarks, during the fourth quarter of each year for impairment, or more frequently if certain indicators are present or changes in circumstances suggest that impairment may exist and reassesses their classification as indefinite-lived assets.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill in fresh-start accounting results when the reorganization value of the emerging entity exceeds what can be attributed to specific tangible or identified intangible assets. We test goodwill for impairment during the fourth quarter every year in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill (“ASC 350”). In connection with the impairment evaluation, the Company may first consider qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test is not necessary if an entity determines based on this assessment that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If the Company fails or elects to bypass the qualitative assessment, the goodwill impairment test must be performed. This test requires a comparison of the carrying value of the reporting unit to its estimated fair value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, an impairment loss equal to the difference is recorded, not to exceed the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. In determining reporting units, the
Company first identifies its operating segments, and then assesses whether any components of these segments constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and where segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component.
Goodwill Impairment for the year ended January 31, 2020
During the year ended January 31, 2020, we faced significant market competition. In addition, while we continued to make significant investments in contemporary products such as Percipio, attrition rates on legacy products like Skillport remained high. On top of market and competitive dynamics, our over leveraged capital structure also created additional headwinds. With significant debt maturities in 2021 and 2022, and related downgrades from rating agencies, concerns over the capital structure began to hurt our business, as new and existing customers displayed apprehension about the ultimate resolution of our capital structure and its impact on operations, causing delays and sometimes losses in business. The capital structure and heavy debt service also constrained investments in areas such as marketing, where spending was considerably lower than our competitors, resulting in additional pressure on retaining and attracting customers. The combination of these factors, which were particularly evident in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 due to normal seasonality and closer proximity to the debt maturities described above, resulted in lower bookings, revenue, profitability and free cash flow generation during year ended January 31, 2020. The lower customer base at the end of fiscal year 2020, combined with larger expenditures that will be necessary in marketing activities going forward, resulted in lower expected future cash flows and growth rates going forward.
In accordance with ASC 350, we performed an impairment test in the year ended January 31, 2020 that compared the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to their respective carrying values. We considered the results of both a DCF analysis and an EBITDA multiple approach, similar to prior periods. We also considered observable debt trading prices for the debt jointly borrowed by our parent entity and our subsidiary, Skillsoft Corporation, after adjusting for a control premium. The results of the impairment tests performed indicated that the carrying value of the Skillsoft and SumTotal reporting units exceeded their estimated fair values determined by the Company. Based on the results of our impairment testing, the Company recorded $440.6 million of goodwill impairment charges in the year ended January 31, 2020, including $321.3 million for the Skillsoft reporting unit and $119.3 million for the SumTotal reporting unit.
The determination of fair value that is used as a basis for calculating the amount of goodwill impairment of each reporting unit is a significant estimate. A 10% change in our estimate of fair value of reporting units, which could occur due to different judgments around (i) estimates of future cash flows, (ii) discount rates, (iii) estimated control premiums, (iv) use of different EBITDA multiples, (v) the weighting of valuation approaches or (vi) other assumptions, or a combination of these judgments, would result in an increase or decrease in our goodwill impairment by approximately $150 million.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Asset Impairment for the Predecessor Period ended August 27, 2020
During the Predecessor period ending August 27, 2020, the emergence of COVID-19 as a global pandemic had an adverse impact on our business. While the online learnings tools we offer have many advantages over traditional in person learning in the current environment, some of our customers in heavily impacted industries have sought to temporarily reduce spending, resulting in reductions in contract sizes and in some cases cancellations when such contracts have come up for renewal. In addition, identifying and pursing opportunities for new customers became much more challenging in this environment. As a result of the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, management decreased its estimates of future cash flows. In addition to the uncertainty introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic, our over leveraged capital structure continued to create headwinds. In April 2020, we received temporary forbearance from our lenders due to a default on amounts owed under the Senior Credit Facility as a long-term consensual solution was being negotiated with lenders. The uncertainty around our capital structure and future ownership continued to hurt our business, as new and existing customers displayed apprehension about the ultimate resolution of our capital structure and its impact on operations, causing delays and sometimes losses in business. The uncertainty surrounding our capital structure combined with the potential impact that the COVID-19 pandemic would have on our company and the global economy, resulted in a significant decline in the fair value of our reporting units during the predecessor period ended August 27, 2020.
As part of our evaluation of impairment indicators based on the circumstances described above as of April 30, 2020, we determined our SumTotal long-lived asset group failed the undiscounted cash flow recoverability test. Accordingly, we estimated the fair value of our individual long-lived assets to determine if any impairment charges were present. Our
estimation of the fair value of definite lived intangible assets included the use of discounted cash flow analyses which reflected estimates of future revenue, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, cash flows, and discount rates. Based on these analyses, we concluded the fair values of certain SumTotal intangible assets where lower their current carrying values and, accordingly, impairment charges of $62.3 million were recognized for the Predecessor period from February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020.
In light of the circumstances above, we also concluded that a triggering event had occurred with respect to the Company’s indefinite-lived Skillsoft trade name as of April 30, 2020. Accordingly, we estimated the fair value of the Skillsoft trade name using a DCF analysis which reflected estimates of future revenue, royalty rates, cash flows, and discount rates. Based on this analysis, we concluded the carrying value of the Skillsoft trade name exceeded its fair value, resulting in an impairment charge of $107.9 million for the Predecessor period from February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020.
In accordance with ASC 350, we determined triggering events had occurred and performed a goodwill impairment test as of April 30, 2020 that compared the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to their respective carrying values. We considered the results of a DCF analysis which were materially consistent with an EBITDA multiple approach. The results of the impairment tests performed indicated that the carrying values of the Skillsoft and SumTotal reporting units exceeded their estimated fair values determined by the Company. Based on the results of the goodwill impairment testing procedures, the Company recorded a $107.9 million goodwill impairment for the Skillsoft reporting unit and a $70.0 million goodwill impairment for the SumTotal reporting unit.
In total, as described in detail above, we recorded $332.4 million of impairment charges for the Predecessor period from February 1, 2020 to August 27, 2020, consisting of (i) $62.3 million of impairments of SumTotal definite-lived intangible assets, (ii) an $92.2 million impairment of the Skillsoft trade name, (iii) a $107.9 million goodwill impairment for the Skillsoft reporting unit and (iv) a $70.0 million goodwill impairment for the SumTotal reporting unit.
The determination of fair value that is used as a basis for calculating the amount of impairment of each reporting unit is a significant estimate. A 10% change in our estimate of fair value of reporting units, which could occur due to different judgments around (i) estimates of future cash flows, (ii) discount rates, (iii) estimated control premiums, (iv) use of different EBITDA multiples (v) the weighting of valuation approaches or (vi) other assumptions, or a combination of these judgments, would result in an increase or decrease in our goodwill impairment by approximately $115 million. Because goodwill impairment is measured after reducing the carrying value of reporting units for impairment of definite-lived and indefinite-lived assets, any increase or decrease in the estimate of fair value used to calculated impairments of definite-lived and indefinite-lived assets would result in an offsetting adjustment to the goodwill impairment by a similar amount.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense for stock options and time-based restricted stock units granted to employees on a straight-line basis over the service period that awards are expected to vest, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of the grant. For restricted-stock units that have market conditions, we recognize compensation expense using an accelerated attribution method. We recognize forfeitures as they occur. We estimate the fair value of options utilizing the Black-Scholes model, which is dependent on several subjective variables, such as the expected option term and expected volatility over the expected option term. We determine the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method sets the term to the average of the time to vesting and the contractual life of the options. Since we do not have a trading history of our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated by considering (i) the average historical stock volatilities of a peer group of public companies within our industry over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants and (ii) the implied volatility of warrants to purchase our common stock that are actively traded in public markets. The fair value of restricted stock units that vest based on market conditions are estimated using the Monte Carlo valuation method. These fair value estimates of stock related awards and assumptions inherent therein are estimates and, as a result, may not be reflective of future results or amounts ultimately realized by recipients of the grants.
Derivative Instruments
We account for debt and equity issuances as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the instruments specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”)
and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the instruments are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the instruments meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instruments are indexed to our own common stock and whether the holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the instruments and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the instruments are outstanding.
For issued or modified instruments that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the instruments are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified instruments that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the instruments are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the instruments are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our recently adopted and to be adopted accounting pronouncements are set forth in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022.