ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of Skillz Inc. (for purposes of this section, “Skillz,” “we,” “us” and “our”). MD&A is provided as a supplement and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 13, 2021.
Overview
We operate a marketplace that connects the world through competition, serving both developers and users. Our platform enables fair, fun and competitive gaming experiences and the trust we foster with users is the foundation upon which our community is built. We believe our marketplace benefits from a powerful network effect: compelling content attracts users to our platform, while the increasing size of our audience attracts more developers to create new interactive experiences on our platform.
Skillz was founded in 2012 by Andrew Paradise and Casey Chafkin with the vision to make eSports accessible to everyone possible. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the platform has over 2 million average MAUs and hosts an average of over 6 million daily tournaments, including over 2 million paid entry daily tournaments, offering over $164 million in prizes each month. As of December 31, 2021, we had over 10,000 registered game developers on our platform that have launched a game integration.
Our culture is built upon a set of values established by our founders, aligning the company and its employees in a common vision. Our seven values are: Honor; Mission; Collaboration; Productivity; Willingness; Frugality; and Balance. Our approach has focused on trust and fairness for users enabling game developers to focus on what they do best: build great content.
Our technology capabilities are industry-leading and provide the tools necessary for developers to compete with the largest and most sophisticated mobile game developers in the world. Our easy-to-integrate software development kit (“SDK”) and developer console allow our developers to monitor, integrate and update their games seamlessly over the air. We ingest and analyze over 300 data points from each game play session, enhancing our data-driven algorithms and LiveOps systems. Moreover, we have developed a robust platform enabling fun, fair and meaningful competitive gameplay.
Historically, our top games and related developers have accounted for a substantial portion of our revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the games Solitaire Cube, 21 Blitz (each developed by Tether Studios, LLC (“Tether”)) and Blackout Bingo (developed by Big Run Studios Inc. (“Big Run”)) combined accounted for 72%, 79%, and 72% of our revenue, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 Tether accounted for 42%, 59%, and 83% of our revenue, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 Big Run accounted for 39%, 28%, and 0% of our revenue, respectively.
Our top titles rotate over time as more games generate success on the Skillz platform. In the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of games that generated over $1 million of annualized GMV grew 22% from 36 to 44. GMV represents entry fees that may be paid using cash deposits, prior cash winnings that have not been withdrawn, and end-user incentives.
In addition to growing the number of games experiencing success on our platform, we have historically increased the number of users on our platform and improved the rate of conversion of such users to paying users. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we served 3 million, 2.6 million, and 1.6 million MAUs, respectively, and had ARPU of $10.90, $7.50 and $6.30, respectively. We monitor the conversion of users to paying users based on the ratio of Paying MAU to MAU. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our Paying MAU to MAU ratio was 17%, 13%, and 10%, respectively, our Paying MAU was 0.5 million, 0.3 million and 0.2 million, respectively and our monthly ARPPU was $62, $59 and $62, respectively.
On July 16, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of Aarki, Inc. (“Aarki”) and acquired 100% of the outstanding equity and voting interests of Aarki under the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger. The Company transferred $162.3 million in consideration comprised of $95.3 million in cash and $67.1 million comprised of 4.4 million of Skillz Class A common stock to the existing Aarki stockholders. We expect that the addition of Aarki’s technology-driven marketing platform will result in significant efficiencies in user acquisition costs, which can be reinvested to acquire more users to accelerate growth and provide a broader product offering, including media buying capabilities to better serve game developers. The financial results of Aarki have been included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements since the date of the acquisition.
Our Financial Model
Skillz’s financial model aligns the interests of gamers and developers, driving value for our stockholders. By monetizing through competition, our system eliminates friction that exists in traditional monetization models between the developer and the gamer. The more gamers enjoy our platform the longer they play, creating more value for Skillz and our developers. By generating higher player to payor conversion, retention and engagement, we are able to monetize users at more than five times higher what our developers would generate through advertisements or in-game purchases.
Our platform allows users to participate in fair competition, while rewarding developers who create games that keep players engaged. We generate revenue by receiving a percentage of player entry fees in paid contests, after deducting end-user prize money (i.e. winnings from the Competitions), end-user incentives accounted for as reduction of revenue and the profit share paid to developers (the “Take Rate”). GMV represents entry fees that may be paid using cash deposits, prior cash winnings that have not been withdrawn, and end-user incentives. Cash deposits represented approximately 10%, 11%, and 11% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Prior cash winnings that have not been withdrawn represented approximately 81%, 82% and 82% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. End-user incentives represented approximately 9%, 7%, and 7% of total entry fees for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Our model has allowed us to grow users, developers and revenue steadily while driving meaningful operating leverage.
The following are key elements of our financial model:
•The scale, growth and engagement of the users - As we continue to acquire users, our ability to match comparable players, on both skill level and tournament template, in a fair and timely manner improves. Better matching leads to stronger engagement and the ability to create larger tournaments with more profitable take rates. This creates a stickier, more engaging, and continuously improving experience for our players, which in turn attracts more players to our platform, creating a positively reinforcing cycle leading to ever-improving gaming experiences.
•The scale, growth and partnership of our developers - We have created a platform that drives economic success for our developers. Our end-to-end platform allows developers to focus on creating games by automating and optimizing integral parts of their businesses - from user acquisition and monetization to game optimization. Our built-in payments, analytics, customer support, and live operations platform enables our developers to consistently learn, grow, earn and share in our success.
•Product-first philosophy and data science capabilities - We have built a culture that puts product first, driving our impact with users and developers and then scaling marketing investment. In 2021, 42% of our salary costs were spent on product development. Our easy-to-integrate SDK contains over 200 features in a less than 16-MB package which allows for over-the-air upgrades. Our intuitive Developer Console dashboard enables our developers to rapidly integrate and monitor the performance of their games. Our LiveOps system enables us to manage and optimize the user experience across the thousands of games on our platform.
We collect over 300 data points during each gameplay session to feed our big data assets which augment all elements of our platform. Our key data science technologies drive our player rating and matching, anti-cheat and anti-fraud, and user experience personalization engine.
•Our unit economics - Our proprietary and highly scalable software platform produces revenue at a low direct cost, contributing to our gross margins. Once acquired, each user cohort contributes predictably to revenue over its life. A cohort is all the users acquired in the period presented. A user is considered part of a cohort based on the first time they make a deposit and enter a paid tournament. Once a user is considered part of a cohort, they are always counted in that cohort.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Skillz provides a service to the game developers aimed at improving the monetization of their game content. The monetization service provided by Skillz allows developers to offer multi-player competition to their end-users which increases end-user retention and engagement.
By utilizing the Skillz monetization services, game developers can enhance the player experience by enabling them to compete in head-to-head matches, live tournaments, leagues, and charity tournaments and increase player retention through referral bonus programs, loyalty perks, on-system achievements and bonus cash. Skillz provides developers with a SDK that they can download and integrate with their existing games. The SDK serves as a data interface between Skillz and the game developers that enables Skillz to provide monetization services to the developer. Specifically, these monetization services include end-user registration services, player matching, fraud and fair play monitoring, and billing and settlement services. The SDK and Skillz monetization services provide the following key benefits to the developers:
•Streamlined game and tournament management allowing players to register with the developer to compete in games for prizes while earning Skillz loyalty perks;
•Fair play in each tournament via the Skillz suite of fairness tools, including skill-based player matching and fraud monitoring;
•Improved end-user retention by rewarding the most loyal players with Ticketz which can be redeemed in the Skillz virtual store and are earned in every match and can be redeemed for prizes or credits to be used towards future paid entry fee tournaments;
•Marketing campaigns through main-stream online advertising networks and social media platforms to drive end-user traffic to developers’ games within the Skillz ecosystem;
•Systematic calls to end-user action via push notifications to users with game results, promotional offers, and time-sensitive actions; and
•Process end-user payments, billings and settlements on behalf of the developer to enable players to connect their preferred payment method to deposit and enter into the game developers’ multi-player competitions for cash prizes.
Generally, end-users are required to deposit funds into their Skillz account in order to be eligible to participate in games for prizes. As part of its monetization services, Skillz is responsible for processing all end-user payments, billings and settlements on behalf of the game developer, such that the game developer does not have to collect directly from or make payments directly to the end-users. When the end-users enter into cash games, the end-users pay an entry fee using cash deposits, prior cash winnings in the end-users’ accounts that have not been withdrawn, and end-user incentives (specifically Bonus Cash). Skillz recognizes revenue related to each game regardless of how entry fees are paid. Skillz is responsible for distributing the prize money to the winner on behalf of the game developer. Skillz typically withholds 16% to 20% of the total entry fees when distributing the prize money as a commission. That commission is shared between Skillz and the game developers; however, the game developers’ share is calculated solely based upon entry fees paid by net cash deposits received from end-users, adjusted for certain costs incurred by Skillz to provide monetization services.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists of variable costs. These include mainly (i) payment processing fees, (ii) customer support costs, (iii) direct software costs, (iv) amortization of internal use software, (v) amortization of intangible assets which include developed technology, and (vi) server costs.
We incur payment processing costs on user deposits. We also incur costs directly related to servicing end-user support tickets on behalf of the game developer that are logged by users directly within the Skillz SDK. These support costs include an allocation of the facilities expense, such as rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount, needed to service these tickets. We use a third party as our cloud computing service; we incur server and software costs as a direct result of running our SDK in our developers’ games.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of software development costs, comprised mainly of product and platform development, server and software costs that support research and development activities, and to a lesser extent, allocation of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect research and development expenses will fluctuate both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue in the future.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of direct advertising costs and end-user incentives that are not recorded as a reduction of revenue and amortization of intangible assets which include customer relationships. Sales and marketing also includes allocations of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect sales and marketing expenses will fluctuate both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue in the future.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses for our corporate, executive, finance, and other administrative functions, expenses for outside professional services, and allocation of rent, maintenance and utilities costs according to headcount. Personnel related expenses consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also includes expenses related to a loss contingency accrual.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Changes from Prior Period Reports
Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information
The SEC issued Release No. 33-10890 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, Supplementary Financial Information” which became fully effective on August 9, 2021. This release was adopted to simplify and enhance certain financial disclosure requirements in Regulation S-K. Specifically, the SEC eliminated the requirement for selected financial data, only requiring quarterly disclosure when there are retrospective changes affecting comprehensive income, and amending the matters required to be presented under Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) to, among other things, eliminate the requirement to include the contractual obligations table.
With our adoption of this release, we have eliminated from this document the items discussed above that are no longer required. Information on our contractual obligations is still disclosed in narrative form within the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth a summary of our results of operations for the periods indicated.
Revenue
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenue increased by $154.0 million, or 67%, to $384.1 million in 2021 from $230.1 million in 2020. The increase was attributable primarily to an increase in paying MAUs, driven by sales and marketing investment to acquire new paying users. ARPU increased 45% over the same period.
Cost of Revenue
2021 Compared to 2020
Cost of revenue increased by $12.4 million, or 101%, to $24.7 million in 2021 from $12.3 million in 2020. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily driven by amortization of acquired developed technology intangible assets, increase in server expense, and increase in payment processing costs. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue increased to 6% in 2021 from 5% in 2020.
Research and Development
2021 Compared to 2020
Research and development costs increased by $22.8 million, or 98%, to $46.0 million in 2021 from $23.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a $17.9 million increase in research and development headcount costs, a $2.5 million increase in server and software costs, a $0.3 million increase in facilities costs, a $0.4 million increase in allocation of related overhead costs, and a $1.4 million increase in capitalized internal-use software development costs, as certain projects entered the application development stage. Research and development expenses accounted for 12% of revenues in 2021 compared to 10% in 2020.
Sales and Marketing
2021 Compared to 2020
Sales and marketing costs increased by $213.5 million, or 85%, to $465.5 million in 2021 from $251.9 million in 2020. The increase was attributable primarily to a 77% increase in spend to acquire new paying users and an 88% increase in engagement marketing spend. User acquisition marketing costs were $242.2 million and $136.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase reflects higher digital advertising costs that resulted in an increase in our acquisition cost per user in 2021 compared to 2020. Engagement marketing costs were $187.6 million and $99.8 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Engagement marketing as a percentage of revenue increased to 49% in 2021 from 43% in 2020. This increase reflects investment in marketing programs that resulted in an increase in our engagement marketing cost per user in 2021 compared to 2020.
General and Administrative
2021 Compared to 2020
General and administrative costs increased by $92.7 million, or 219%, to $135.0 million in 2021 from $42.3 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a $42.7 million increase in headcount costs, of which a $31.0 million increase is related to stock-based compensation expense, a $7.3 million increase in professional fees related to the Company’s follow-on offering, a $15.0 million increase in professional fees driven by the Company’s acquisition of Aarki, a $16.4 million increase in public company-related insurance costs and legal costs, a $2.7 million increase in other public company costs and a $11.6 million increase in expense related to a loss contingency accrual, partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease in facilities expenses. General and administrative expenses accounted for 35% of revenues in 2021 compared to 18% in 2020.
Interest expense, net
2021 Compared to 2020
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.1 million, or 8%, to $1.2 million in 2021 from $1.3 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the repayment of a previously outstanding loan in 2020, partially offset by an increase in interest expense related to our senior secured notes issued in December 2021.
Change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities was due to the change in the estimated fair value of the Private Common Stock Warrants and redemption of Public Common Stock Warrants. Refer to Note 11, Common Stock Warrants, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Other income (expense), net
2021 Compared to 2020
Other income (expense), net increased by $21.4 million to $0.05 million in other income in 2021 from $(21.4) million in other expense in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by fair value adjustments of financial instruments in 2020.
(Benefit) provision for income taxes
2021 Compared to 2020
Provision for income taxes decreased by $19.1 million in 2021. The decrease was primarily driven by a discrete benefit related to the partial release of valuation allowance due to the acquisition of Aarki and a decrease in accrued state tax liabilities.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively with GAAP financial information, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as net income (loss), excluding interest income (expense); change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities; other income (expense), net; income tax provision; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense and related payroll tax expense; and certain other non-cash or non-recurring items impacting net income (loss) from time to time, including, but not limited to fair value adjustments for certain financial liabilities (including derivatives) associated with debt and equity transactions, impairment charges, acquisition related expenses for transaction costs and loss contingency accruals, as they are not indicative of business operations. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating this measure. In addition, our presentation of this measure should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated (in thousands):
(1)For the year ended 2020, other (income) expense, net is primarily attributed to a $21.7 million adjustment to the fair value of the redeemable convertible Series E preferred stock forward contract liability.
(2)For the year ended 2019, other (income) expense, net include a $3.6 million remeasurement gain for the bifurcated derivative liability related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes issued in 2018.
(3)For the year ended 2020, this represents an impairment charge of a lease deposit and prepayment in connection with a lease agreement related to our new corporate facilities in San Francisco.
(4)For the year ended 2021, this represents acquisition related expenses for our Aarki acquisition.
(5)For the year ended 2021, this amount represents a loss contingency accrual related to a litigation matter relating to a former employee as discussed in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies.
(6)For the year ended 2021, amounts represent one-time nonrecurring expenses related to the follow-on offering and executive severance expense.
(7)For the year ended 2020, amounts represent one-time transaction expenses related to the FEAC Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily from the sales of capital stock. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $241.3 million, which are primarily invested in money market funds and marketable securities with maturity less than three months.
In December 2021, the Company offered $300 million aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes due 2026 in a private offering. The notes were sold in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers. Annual interest started to accrue from December 20, 2021 at a stated rate of 10.25%, and will be payable semiannually on June 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning on June 15, 2022. The notes will mature on December 15, 2026. We intend to use the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, which may include potential investments in or acquisitions of other companies, products, or technologies that we may identify in the future. The notes contain customary covenants restricting our and certain of our subsidiaries’ ability to incur debt, incur liens, make distributions to holders of our stock, make certain transactions with our affiliates, as well as certain financial covenants specified in the indentures. We were in compliance with all covenants applicable to the notes as of December 31, 2021.
As of the date of this statement, our existing cash resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for at least one year past the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements. Our future cash requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth and the expansion of our sales and marketing activities. We also may invest in or acquire complementary businesses, applications or technologies.
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by the growth of our business primarily related to research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative activities. Our operating cash flows are also affected by our working capital needs to support growth in personnel-related expenditures and fluctuations in accounts payable and other current assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $180.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The most significant component of our cash used during this period was a net loss of $181.4 million, which included non-cash income of $87.9 million for the change in fair value related to Public and Private Common Stock Warrants, a $19.2 million deferred income tax benefit, non-cash expenses of $60.3 million related to stock-based compensation, $11.1 million related to depreciation and amortization, accretion of unamortized discounts and amortization of issuance costs, and net cash inflows of $36.1 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflows from changes of operating assets and liabilities were primarily the result of an increase in other liabilities of $27.0 million, primarily related to an increase in accrued sales and marketing costs.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $643.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the net cash used in investing activities included the $504.0 million purchases of marketable securities, $84.0 million used for acquisition of Aarki, net of cash acquired, and $54.8 million used for investments in non-marketable equity securities. In prior periods, the net cash used in investing activities related to purchases of investments and property and equipment, including internal-use software.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $802.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to $402.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the Company’s follow-on offering, $280.9 million of borrowings under debt agreements, net of issuance costs, and $130.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants, partially offset by $13.2 million in payments made towards offering costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Leases
We have operating lease arrangements for office space, equipment and other corporate assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had lease payment obligations of $27.8 million, with $6.5 million payable within 12 months.
Secured Notes and Term Loan
Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” under Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are exposed to a variety of market and other risks, including the effects of changes in interest rates, inflation, as well as risks to the availability of funding sources. Please refer to