ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our consolidated financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from period to period, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our consolidated financial statements. The discussion also provides information about the financial results of the various segments of our business to provide a better understanding of how those segments and their results affect the financial condition and results of operations of our company as a whole.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Part II-Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
OVERVIEW
We design and market Skechers-branded comfort footwear for men, women and children, performance footwear for men and women under the Skechers Performance brand name, and work footwear for men and women under Skechers Work brand name. We design and market Skechers branded lifestyle apparel, and license the Skechers brand to others for accessories, pet accessories, leather goods, eyewear and medical scrubs, among others. Skechers footwear reflects a combination of innovation, style, comfort, quality and value that appeals to a broad range of consumers. Our product offering is sold through wholesale distribution to department and specialty stores, athletic and independent retailers, and e-commerce retailers and directly to consumers through retail stores and digital sales.
Our objective is to profitably grow our operations worldwide by leveraging our recognizable Skechers brand through our diversified product lines, innovative advertising and various distribution channels. We are committed to achieving our objective by investing in our growth. Our current global infrastructure investments and technology projects include:
•
We upgraded our point of sale systems in North America and the United Kingdom, with Japan and Europe to follow.
•
We continued efforts to expand our e-commerce presence internationally.
•
Our new China and United Kingdom distribution centers are complete and fully operational.
•
We continued development on our North American LEED Gold Certified distribution center expansion, which we expect to be completed in 2022.
•
We opened 415, net company-owned and third-party Skechers stores globally this year, including our first stores in the Dominican Republic and Slovakia.
COVID-19 UPDATE
We continued to be impacted by COVID-19 related operating restrictions, store closures and supply chain disruptions throughout fiscal year 2021. Most notably, manufacturing delays, shipping container shortages, extended transit times, port congestion, and elevated freight rates contributed to a year-over-year increase of $325.1 million in inventory in-transit. Although we started to see supply chain improvements in December 2021 with more goods moving through our distribution centers than in previous months, we expect supply chain challenges to remain through at least the first half of fiscal year 2022.
Despite these challenges, we achieved record sales of $6.3 billion for fiscal year 2021, reflecting the continued global demand for our product. Sales increased across all segments compared to 2020 and surpassed pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels with growth of over 20% compared to 2019. Our core product philosophy of comfort, style, innovation, and quality at the right price continued to resonate with consumers during the pandemic, and we remain focused on delivering our products as quickly as possible to meet the consumer demand.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Selected information from our results of operations follows:
Sales
Sales increased $1.7 billion, or 36.7% to $6.3 billion as compared to $4.6 billion, reflecting a 33.4% domestic increase and a 39.0% increase internationally, with the largest contribution derived from International Wholesale growth. Sales grew across all segments with increases to Domestic Wholesale of 27.6%, International Wholesale of 34.0% and Direct-to-Consumer of 50.2%. Sales increased overall due to improved sales volume, higher average selling prices and less significant impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross margin
Gross margin increased 170 basis points to 49.3% driven by higher average selling prices in Direct-to-Consumer, partially offset by declines in Domestic Wholesale and International Wholesale, due to higher average costs per unit.
Operating expenses
Selling expenses increased by $141.5 million, or 44.5%, to $459.6 million from $318.1 million primarily due to higher demand creation expenditures. Worldwide spending on advertising and marketing was lower in the prior year due to pandemic-related store and market closures. General and administrative expenses increased by $312.6 million, or 17.8%, primarily driven by higher labor costs of $77.0 million, volume-driven global distribution expenses of $76.7 million, incentive compensation of $50.2 million, and rent of $34.8 million. As a percentage of sales, operating expenses improved 490 basis points to 40.2% compared to 45.1%.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) changed $49.5 million to $28.4 million expense from $21.0 income primarily as a result of foreign currency losses in the current year and a $13.9 million gain related to the acquisition of our Mexico joint venture in the prior year.
Income taxes
Income tax expense (benefit) and the effective tax rate were as follows:
Income tax benefit was $245.9 million as compared to an income tax expense of $8.5 million due to the establishment of deferred tax assets from an intra-entity transfer of certain intellectual property rights of $346.8 million in 2021. Our effective tax rate was negative 43.2%, which included a 60.9% impact from the intellectual property rights transfer.
Our income tax expense (benefit) and effective income tax rate are significantly impacted by the mix of our domestic and foreign earnings (losses) before income taxes. In the foreign jurisdictions in which we have operations, the applicable statutory rates range from 0.0% to 34.0%, which on average are generally significantly lower than the U.S. federal and state combined statutory rate of approximately 25%.
See Note 10 - Income Taxes of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Noncontrolling interest in net earnings of consolidated subsidiaries
Noncontrolling interest represents the share of net earnings or loss that is attributable to our joint venture partners. Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interest increased $26.5 million to $74.1 million as compared to $47.7 million, primarily due to increased profitability by our joint ventures, predominantly China, due to reduced impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
RESULTS OF SEGMENT OPERATIONS
Domestic Wholesale
Domestic Wholesale sales increased $0.3 billion, or 27.6%, to $1.4 billion due to a 26.3% increase in the number of units sold and 1.1% increase in average selling price per unit.
Domestic Wholesale gross margin decreased 190 basis points to 36.4% due to higher average cost per unit, partially offset by the increase in the average selling price per unit.
International Wholesale
International Wholesale sales increased $0.8 billion, or 34.0%, to $3.0 billion primarily driven by growth in China of 35%, Europe of 23.6% and distributor sales of 62.0%. Volume increased 27.9% in the number of units sold and the average selling price per unit increased 4.8%.
International Wholesale gross margin decreased 20 basis points to 45.1%, primarily due to higher average cost per unit and a higher proportion of distributor sales which were offset by the increase in the average selling price per unit.
Direct-to-Consumer
Direct-to-Consumer sales increased $0.6 billion, or 50.2%, to $1.8 billion as compared to sales of $1.2 billion primarily driven by growth in domestic and international retail store sales of 50.7%. Direct-to-Consumer comparable store sales increased 38.0% driven by an increase of 39.5% domestically and 34.1% internationally. Average selling price per unit increased 19.1% and volume increased 26.0% in the number of units sold.
Direct-to-Consumer gross margin increased 590 basis points to 66.5%, primarily driven by reduced promotional activity and the increase in average selling price per unit.
Comparable store sales mentioned above includes stores that have been opened for at least thirteen calendar months as well as sales on our company-owned websites. We did not make any adjustments for the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related impacts of store closures and reduced operating hours. Definitions and calculations of comparable store sales differ among companies in the retail industry, and therefore comparable store sales disclosed by us may not be comparable to the metrics disclosed by other companies.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity outlook
Our liquidity remains strong with $796.3 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021. Amounts held outside the U.S. were $638.7 million, or 80.2%, and approximately $241.9 million was available for repatriation to the U.S. as of December 31, 2021 without incurring additional U.S. federal income taxes and applicable non-U.S. income and withholding taxes.
We finance our production activities in part through the use of interest-bearing open purchase arrangements with certain of our contract manufacturers. These facilities currently bear interest at a rate between 0.0% and 0.4% for 30- to 60-day financing, depending on the factory. We believe that the use of these arrangements affords us additional liquidity and flexibility. We do not have any long-term contracts with any of our manufacturers. However, we have long-standing relationships with many of our contract manufacturers and believe our relationships to be good.
We fully repaid the $452.5 million balance on our revolving credit facility in the second quarter and amended the agreement in the fourth quarter of 2021 to expand our credit capacity to $750.0 million with an additional $250.0 million available through an accordion feature. We believe that anticipated cash flows from operations, existing cash and investments balances, available borrowings under our revolving credit facility, and current financing arrangements will be sufficient to provide us with the liquidity necessary to fund our anticipated working capital and capital requirements for the next twelve months.
Cash Flows
Our working capital at December 31, 2021 was $1.9 billion, a decrease of $0.2 billion from working capital of $2.1 billion at December 31, 2020. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 were $0.8 billion, compared to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2020. Our primary source of operating cash is collections from customers. Our primary uses of cash are inventory purchases, selling, general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $212.2 million for 2021 and $331.5 million for 2020. The $119.3 million decrease in cash flows from operating activities in 2021 resulted from increased inventory and merchandise in-transit, offset by increased earnings.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $344.7 million for 2021 as compared to $312.5 million for 2020. The $32.2 million increase was due to increased net investment activity of $32.4 million.
Our capital investments remain focused on supporting our strategic growth priorities, growing our Direct-to-Consumer business, as well as expanding the presence of our brand internationally. Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $309.7 million, which included $110.9 million for the expansion of our joint-venture owned domestic distribution center, $75.7 million for investments in our new corporate offices and other real estate, and $56.5 million of investments in our direct-to-consumer technology and retail stores. We expect our capital expenditures for 2022 to be approximately $250.0 million to $300.0 million, which is primarily related to the expansion of our worldwide distribution capabilities, continued investments in retail and e-commerce technologies and stores, and our new corporate offices in Southern California. We expect to fund ongoing capital expenses through a combination of borrowings and available cash.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $433.9 million during 2021 compared to $533.3 million in net cash provided by financing activities during 2020. The change is primarily the result of repaying $452.5 on our revolving credit facility in the current year and receiving $490.0 million in proceeds from our revolving credit facility in the prior year.
Capital Resources and Prospective Capital Requirements
Share Repurchase Program
On January 31, 2022, the Company's Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program (the “Share Repurchase Program”), pursuant to which the Company may, from time to time, purchase shares of its Class A common stock, par value $0.001 per share, for an aggregate repurchase price not to exceed $500 million. The Share Repurchase Program expires on January 31, 2025 and does not obligate the Company to acquire any particular amount of shares.
Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, outstanding short-term and long-term borrowings were $341.6 million, of which, $262.4 million relates to loans for our domestic and China distribution centers, $69.8 million relates to our operations in China and the remainder relates to our international operations. Our long-term debt obligations contain both financial and non-financial covenants, including cross-default provisions. We were in compliance with all debt covenants related to our short-term and long-term borrowings as of the date of this annual report. See Note 6 - Financial Commitments of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Commitments
Our material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021 which are not reflected as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets include open purchase commitments with our foreign manufacturers of approximately $2.0 billion, and a building purchase commitment in India of approximately $20 million.
We are required to provide standby letters of credit to support certain obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business and may choose to provide letters of credit in place of posting cash collateral. Although the letters of credit are off-balance sheet, the majority of the obligations to which they relate are reflected as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates are affected by significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Reserves for returns and chargebacks. Revenue is recorded net of estimates for returns from our customers and potential disputed amounts or chargebacks. We accrue a liability for product returns at the time of sale based on our historical experience. Our chargeback reserve is based on a collectability percentage based on factors such as historical trends, current economic conditions, and nature of the chargeback receivables.
Allowance for bad debts. Accounts receivable is recorded net of estimated losses from our customers’ inability to pay. To minimize the likelihood of uncollectibility, customers’ credit-worthiness is reviewed and adjusted periodically in accordance with external credit reporting services, financial statements issued by the customer and our experience with the account. We determine the amount of the reserve by analyzing known uncollectible accounts, aged receivables, economic conditions in the customers’ countries or industries, historical losses and our customers’ credit-worthiness. Amounts later determined and specifically identified to be uncollectible are charged or written off against this reserve. Allowances for bad debts are recorded to general and administrative expenses.
The likelihood of a material loss on an uncollectible account would be mainly dependent on deterioration in the overall economic conditions in a particular country or region. Reserves are fully provided for all probable losses of this nature. For receivables that are not specifically identified as high risk, we provide a reserve based upon our historical loss rate as a percentage of sales.
Inventory write-downs. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value). Inventory reserves are recorded for excess and slow-moving inventory. Our analysis includes a review of inventory quantities on hand at period-end in relation to year-to-date sales, existing orders from customers and projections for sales in the foreseeable future. The net realizable value is determined based on historical sales experience on a style-by-style basis. The valuation of inventory could be impacted by changes in public and consumer preferences, demand for product, changes in the buying patterns of both retailers and consumers and inventory management of customers.
Litigation reserves. Estimated amounts for claims that are probable and can be reasonably estimated are recorded as liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. The likelihood of a material change in these estimated reserves would depend on additional information or new claims as they may arise as well as the favorable or unfavorable outcome of particular litigation. Both the likelihood and amount (or range of loss) on a large portion of our remaining pending litigation is uncertain. As such, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the liability that could result from unfavorable outcomes in our remaining pending litigation. As additional information becomes available, we will assess the potential liability related to our pending litigation and revise our estimates. Such revisions in our estimates of potential liability could materially impact our results of operations and financial position.
Tax estimates. The establishment of deferred tax assets from intra-entity transfers of certain intellectual property rights requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of such intellectual property rights. The valuation of deferred tax assets requires significant estimates and assumptions including, but not limited to, future revenue growth, discount rates and the expected life of the assets, which by their nature are inherently uncertain and may ultimately differ materially from our actual results. We record a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The likelihood of a material change in our expected realization of our deferred tax assets depends on future taxable income and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies amongst the various domestic and international tax jurisdictions in which we operate. We evaluate our projections of taxable income to determine the recoverability of our deferred tax assets and the need for a valuation allowance.
EXCHANGE RATES
We receive U.S. dollars for substantially all of our domestic and a portion of our international product sales, as well as our royalty income. Inventory purchases from offshore contract manufacturers are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. However, purchase prices for our products may be impacted by fluctuations in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the local currencies of the contract manufacturers, which may impact our cost of goods in the future. During 2021 and 2020, exchange rate fluctuations did not have a material impact on our inventory costs. We do not engage in hedging activities with respect to such exchange rate risk.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Refer to Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards.