Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 together with notes thereto. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited, to those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise provided in this Annual Report, references to “we,” “us,” “our” and “Skye Bioscience” in this discussion and analysis refer to Skye Bioscience, Inc., a Nevada corporation formerly known as Emerald Bioscience, Inc., together with its wholly owned subsidiaries, Nemus, a California corporation, and SKYE Bioscience Pty Ltd ("SKYE Bioscience Australia"), an Australian proprietary limited company formerly known as EMBI Australia Pty Ltd.
About Skye Bioscience, Inc.
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 16, 2011. We are a preclinical pharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of a novel class of cannabinoid derivatives to modulate the endocannabinoid system, which has been shown to play a vital role in overall human health and, notably, in multiple ocular indications. We are developing novel cannabinoid derivatives through our own directed research efforts and multiple license agreements.
Effective March 25, 2019, we changed our name from Nemus Bioscience, Inc. to Emerald Bioscience, Inc. and effective January 19, 2021, we changed our name to Skye Bioscience, Inc. Our common stock is quoted on the OTCQB, under the symbol "SKYE". Previously, it traded under the symbol "EMBI".
In August 2019, we formed a new subsidiary in Australia, SKYE Bioscience Australia, in order to qualify for the Australian government’s research and development tax credit for research and development dollars spent in Australia. The primary purpose of SKYE Bioscience Australia is to conduct clinical trials for our drug product candidates.
Our Product Candidates and Significant Contracts.
UM 5050 and UM 8930 License Agreements
In May 2019, we executed amended and restated license agreements with University of Mississippi ("UM") which expanded our use of UM 5050 and UM 8930 from ocular delivery only to "all fields of use" (collectively, the “License Agreements”). Pursuant to the License Agreements, UM granted us an exclusive perpetual license including, with the prior written consent of UM, the right to sublicense the intellectual property related to UM 5050 and UM 8930 for all fields of use. All fields of use means that we may develop UM 5050 and UM 8930 to treat any disease through any form of delivery under the License Agreements.
The exclusive license for SBI-100, a cannabinoid receptor type 1 ("CBR1") agonist, under UM 5050 is expected to allow us to explore related uses for the active moiety of SBI-100. Independent in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated the potential use of SBI-100 in a variety of potential indications based on the ability of CBR1 agonists to act as an anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, and/or inhibitor of neovascularization. The Company has generated data related to these effects using an ex vivo human tissue model of the eye. SBI-100 is designed to enhance the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the active part of the molecule once introduced into the body through various routes of administration being considered by the development team.
The exclusive license of SBI-200, a novel cannabinoid receptor ("CBR") modulator, under UM 8930, is expected to allow us to explore uses in ophthalmic disorders as well as expanded research and development into organ systems outside of ophthalmology. Potential therapeutic areas beyond ophthalmic indications for SBI-200 may include the central nervous system, the gastrointestinal tract, the endocrine/metabolic system, reproductive system diseases, or as yet unrecognized opportunities. We have developed strategic collaborations to identify and advance these applications.
SBI-100
Our lead compound, SBI-100, is initially being developed to treat ocular disease. The first-in-human Phase 1 trials are expected to be conducted in healthy volunteers in Australia (the “Clinical Trial”) to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of SBI-100. We are eligible under the AusIndustry research and development tax incentive program to obtain a cash incentive from the Australian Taxation Office. The tax incentive is available to us based on specific criteria with which we must comply and is based on our eligible research and development spend in Australia. The Company may be eligible for either a 43.5% refundable tax offset if it has aggregate turnover of less than $20 million per annum or a 38.5% non-refundable tax offset of eligible research and development expenditure up to $100 million if it has annual turnover of $20 million or more per annum. Prior to August 2020, we executed several agreements and the work underlying those agreements was subsequently delayed to the second quarter of 2022. Since August 2020, we have been focused on clinical enabling activities, notably:
• formulation and manufacturing of drug product to supply for our first-in-human Phase 1 clinical trial;
• initiating and completing GLP toxicology studies to support our first-in-human Phase 1 clinical trial;
• initiating and completing validation of a pharmacokinetic assay for both animal and human samples to support our pre-clinical and clinical studies; and
• engaging our vendors and contractors to support the finalization of study-related materials for our Phase 1 study, including the finalization of the clinical study protocol and investigator's brochure.
The manufacturing of SBI-100 ophthalmic emulsion is conducted in the United States. Formulation of the eye drop for testing is also performed in the United States but we rely on compendial excipients that can be sourced from countries outside the United States, such as China. Due to the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, there could possibly be a negative impact on our ability to source materials that are part of the eye drop formulation, as well as negative impacts to our volunteer and/or patient recruitment in Australia for clinical studies.
Subsequent to the initiation of the Phase 1 study, we intend to file an investigational new drug ("IND") application with the United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") to study SBI-100 ophthalmic emulsion in a Phase 2 randomized, controlled, double-masked clinical trial in patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension to obtain additional data to determine whether the topical delivery of SBI-100 ophthalmic emulsion is safe and well-tolerated, and whether the IOP is markedly different between SBI-100 and placebo. Design of the Phase 2 clinical trial will be dependent upon the advice of our clinical advisory board, the FDA and other regulatory bodies.
SBI-200
We have initiated research activities to explore the utility of different formulations of SBI-200. Early studies of SBI-200 demonstrated analgesic, anti-inflammation, anti-fibrotic and anti-seizure properties, including the potential treatment and management of several eye diseases, such as uveitis, dry eye syndrome, macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy. Data we presented at the American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists ("AAPS") meeting held in November 2017 revealed that an ocular formulation of SBI-200 was able to penetrate multiple compartments of the eye, including reaching the retina and the optic nerve. Further testing will need to be conducted to further evaluate the possible utility of this compound as a therapeutic agent and we continue to advance our research studies related to SBI-200 to explore different therapeutic applications.
General Trends and Outlook
COVID-19 related
The evolving COVID-19 pandemic has prompted governments and businesses to take unprecedented measures, such as restrictions on travel and business operations, temporary closures of business, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly curtailed global economic activity and caused significant volatility and disruption in global financial markets. The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken by many countries in response have affected, and could in the future, materially impact the Company's business, results of operations, financial condition and stock price.
As we approach the start of our Phase 1 Clinical study in Australia, the ultimate impact on us is unknown. However, we expect that our contract research organizations ("CROs") could experience setbacks during clinical trials from reduced capacity for safety monitoring due to on site social distancing, reductions in the participant pool or staffing due to vaccination requirements or patients testing positive for COVID-19 prior to enrollment or dosing in the study. To mitigate operational risk our CRO has a COVID Emergency Management Committee in place to assess the various health and government recommendations, advice, potential risks, and impacts so that proactive measures may be taken, as needed, such as remote patient monitoring.
The majority of our workforce continues to be and was remote prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, and therefore our employees have seen little disruption as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, employee safety and well-being is of paramount importance to us in any year and continued to be of particular focus in 2021 in light of the continuing and evolving COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the pandemic, we have supported our employees and government efforts to curb the COVID-19 pandemic through safety and communication efforts and investments, which include:
•Aligning onsite policies to local guidelines and regulation;
•Continuing to provide and promote flexibility for onsite employees to reduce density at our facility;
•Implementing weekly COVID-19 testing for all onsite employees;
•Increased cleaning protocols;
•Provision of masks to all onsite employees and masking requirements aligned to state and local guidelines; and
•Limited domestic and international non-essential travel for all employees.
The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's operational and financial performance is currently uncertain and will depend on many factors outside of our control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory, and the duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution, acceptance and effectiveness of vaccines, particularly against new variants; the imposition of protecting public safety measures, and the impact of the pandemic on any local operations across the United States, European Union, and Australia, where we have operations and conduct laboratory research and clinical studies.
The overall delay in our drug product research and development, is unknown, but our operations and financial condition will likely continue to suffer in the event of continued business interruptions, supply chain issues, delayed clinical trials, production or a lack of laboratory resources due to the pandemic. As of the date of this filing, we are aware of the impact on our business as a result of COVID-19 but uncertain as to the extent of this impact on our consolidated financial statements. There is uncertainty as to the duration and hence the ultimate impact. As a result, we are unable to estimate the potential impact on our business as of the date of this filing.
Financial Overview
We have incurred net losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception and expect to incur losses in the future as we continue development activities to support our product candidates through clinical trials. As a result, we expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows until our product candidates gain market acceptance and generate significant revenues.
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,522,182, as compared to a net loss of $6,560,699, for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $47,256,163 and negative cash flows from operations of $6,474,888. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash of $8,983,007 as compared to $2,469,410 as of December 31, 2020.
On February 5, 2021, we increased our authorized shares of common and preferred stock to 5,000,000,000 and 50,000,000, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses, financing operations, contingencies, and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources. These accounting policies are described at relevant sections in this discussion and analysis and in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Fair Value Measurements
Certain assets and liabilities are carried at fair value under GAAP. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (the “exit price”) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Valuation techniques used to measure fair value must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. A fair value hierarchy based on three levels of inputs, of which the first two are considered observable, and the last is considered unobservable, is used to measure fair value:
Level 1: Valuations for assets and liabilities traded in active markets from readily available pricing sources such as quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable inputs (other than Level 1 quoted prices) such as quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active for identical or similar assets or liabilities, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to determining the fair value of the assets or liabilities, including pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies and similar techniques.
The carrying values of our financial instruments, with the exception of the Amended Credit Agreement and derivative liabilities, approximate their fair value due to their short maturities. The derivative liabilities are valued on a recurring basis utilizing Level 3 inputs.
As of December 31, 2020, we estimated that the fair value of the Amended Credit Agreement was materially consistent with the fair value estimate as of December 31, 2019 of $1,877,938, plus the non-convertible advances made in 2020. This determination was based on the following considerations: (i) we had not experienced any significant change in our credit worthiness or operations year over year, (ii) there have been no repayments or convertible draws, (iii) the facility is closer to maturity, and (iv) the embedded conversion feature on the convertible advances is out-of-the-money at the reporting date. As of December 31, 2021, we estimated that the fair value of the Amended Credit Agreement, including the non-convertible advances was $2,484,768. Information pertinent to estimating the fair value of the Amended Credit Agreement includes valuing the embedded conversion feature using Level 3 inputs and considering the discounted cash flows of the interest and principal payments through maturity.
Convertible Instruments
We account for hybrid contracts with embedded conversion features in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities ("ASC 815") which requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria includes circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
We account for convertible debt instruments with embedded conversion features in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options ("ASC 470-20") if it is determined that the conversion feature should not be bifurcated from their host instruments. Under ASC 470-20, we record, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the difference between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date and the embedded effective conversion price. When we determine that the embedded conversion option should be bifurcated from its host instrument, the embedded feature is accounted for in accordance with ASC 815. Under ASC 815, a portion of the proceeds received upon the issuance of the hybrid contract is allocated to the fair value of the derivative. The derivative is subsequently recorded at fair value at each reporting date based on current fair value, with the changes in fair value reported in the results of operations.
We also follow ASC 480-10, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity ("ASC 480-10") when evaluating the accounting for our hybrid instruments. A financial instrument that embodies an unconditional obligation, or a financial instrument other than an outstanding share that embodies a conditional obligation, that the issuer must or may settle by issuing a variable number of its equity shares shall be classified as a liability (or an asset in some circumstances) if, at inception, the monetary value of the obligation is based solely or predominantly on any one of the following: (a) a fixed monetary amount known at inception (for example, a payable settled with a variable number of the issuer’s equity shares); (b) variations in something other than the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares (for example, a financial instrument indexed to the Standard and Poor’s S&P 500 Index and settled with a variable number of the issuer’s equity shares); or (c) variations inversely related to changes in the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares (for example, a written put option that could be net share settled). Hybrid instruments meeting these criteria are not further evaluated for any embedded derivatives and are carried as a liability at fair value at each balance sheet date with a re-measurement reported in other expense (income), net in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
When determining the short-term vs. long-term classification of derivative liabilities, we first evaluate the instruments’ exercise provisions. Generally, if a derivative is a liability and exercisable within one year, it will be classified as short-term. However, because of the unique provisions and circumstances that may impact the accounting for derivative instruments, we carefully evaluate all factors that could potentially restrict the instrument from being exercised or create a situation where exercise would be considered remote. We re-evaluate our derivative liabilities at each reporting period end and make updates for any changes in facts and circumstances that may impact classification.
Warrants Issued in Connection with Financings
We generally account for warrants issued in connection with debt and equity financings as a component of equity, unless the warrants include a conditional obligation to issue a variable number of shares or there is a deemed possibility that we may need to settle the warrants in cash. For warrants issued with a conditional obligation to issue a variable number of shares or the deemed possibility of a cash settlement, we record the fair value of the warrants as a liability at each balance sheet date and record changes in fair value in other expense (income), net in our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award, and the fair value is recognized as expense ratably over the vesting period with forfeitures accounted for as they occur. We use the Black-Scholes valuation method for estimating the grant date fair value of stock options using the following assumptions:
•Volatility - Expected volatility is estimated using the historical stock price performance over the expected term of the award.
•Expected term - The expected term is based on a simplified method which defines the life as the weighted average of the contractual term of the options and the vesting period for each award.
•Risk-free rate - The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the option is based on the average market rate on U.S. Treasury securities in effect during the period in which the awards were granted.
•Dividends - The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of paying no dividends in the foreseeable future.
Loss Per Common Share
We apply ASC No. 260, Earnings per Share in calculating its basic and diluted loss per common share. Basic loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The diluted loss per share of common stock is computed by giving effect to all potential common stock equivalents outstanding for the period determined using the treasury stock method. For purposes of this calculation, options to purchase common stock, restricted stock subject to vesting, warrants to purchase common stock and common shares underlying convertible debt instruments are considered to be common stock equivalents.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on recently issued accounting pronouncements and recently adopted accounting pronouncements. While we expect certain recently adopted accounting pronouncements to impact our estimates in future periods, the impact upon adoption was not significant to our current estimates and operations.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations have fluctuated from period to period and may continue to fluctuate in the future, based upon the progress of our clinical trials, our research and development efforts, variations in the level of expenditures related to investor relations and seeking new sources of capital, debt service obligations during any given period, and the uncertainty as to the extent and magnitude of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Results of operations for any period may be unrelated to results of operations for any other period. In addition, historical results should not be viewed as indicative of future operating results.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses included the following:
• license fees;
• employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
• payments to third party contract research organizations and investigative sites; and
• payments to third party manufacturing organizations and consultants.
We expect to incur future research and development expenditures to support our preclinical and clinical studies. Preclinical activities include, laboratory evaluation of product chemistry, toxicity and formulation, as well as animal studies to assess safety and efficacy. Subject to the submission and approval by the FDA of our IND, clinical trials may commence and will involve the administration of the investigational new drug candidate to human subjects.
Below is a summary of our research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase in contract research and development activities of approximately $765,000, an increase in our use of specialized consultants of approximately $215,000 and an increase in compensation cost of approximately $122,000 due to additional headcount from the addition of regulatory and development personnel. These increases were offset by a decrease of $200,000 from reduced license fees due to the milestone payment related to the notice of patent allowance for SBI-200, which was paid to UM in the prior year.
General and Administrative Expenses
Below is a summary of general and administrative expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in employee headcount of approximately $487,000 which included a one-time stock compensation charge from the modification of option awards, an increase in recruiting fees of approximately $72,000, an increase in dues and subscriptions of approximately $79,000, an increase in facilities and rent expense of approximately $52,000, and an increase in investor relations expenses of approximately $441,000. The aggregate increase was partially offset by a decrease of approximately $589,000 in professional fees from lower legal and accounting costs, and a decrease of approximately $87,000 in insurance premiums incurred during the period.
Other Expense (Income)
Below is a summary of other expense (income) during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net other expense of $672,368 primarily related to interest expense and a loss from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities. The primary reason for the increase in the loss on the change in fair value of our derivative liabilities was due to the increase in our stock price and volatility, for the period ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the period ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the Amended Credit Agreement was amended in the prior period which resulted in the extinguishment of the compound derivative liability. The increase in interest expense was due to a higher average outstanding principal balance from non-convertible advances on the Amended Credit Agreement for the period ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the period ended December 31, 2020. Other expenses during the period were offset by the gain on debt forgiveness realized from the PPP Loan.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had other expense of $270,086 related primarily to interest expense under the Amended Credit Agreement, which was offset by a gain from the decrease in the fair value of our derivative liabilities.
Our results of operations have fluctuated from period to period and may continue to fluctuate in the future, based upon the progress of our clinical trials, our research and development efforts, variations in the level of expenditures related to investor relations and seeking new sources of capital, debt service obligations during any given period, and the uncertainty as to the extent and magnitude of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Results of operations for any period may be unrelated to results of operations for any other period. In addition, historical results should not be viewed as indicative of future operating results. In particular, to the extent our medical affairs personnel and clinical trial subjects are subject to varying levels of restriction on accessing clinical trial sites due to COVID-19, we expect our progress towards executing our clinical trials to be adversely affected.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. We expect to continue to incur significant losses and negative cash flows from operations through 2022 and into the foreseeable future. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses in order to advance and develop potential drug candidates into preclinical and clinical development activities and support our corporate infrastructure, which includes the costs associated with being a public company. Historically, we have funded our operations primarily through issuance of equity securities and borrowings from a related party.
On October 5, 2018, we secured a Credit Agreement with Sciences, that provided us with a credit facility of up to $20,000,000. On April 29, 2020, we entered into the first amendment to the Credit Agreement with Sciences, which amended and restated the Credit Agreement. On March 29, 2021, we entered the second amendment to the Amended Credit Agreement to defer interest payments until the earlier of maturity or prepayment of the principal balance. Effective September 15, 2021, the disbursement line under the credit facility was closed and the Amended Credit Agreement no longer serves as a potential source of liquidity to the Company. The outstanding principal advances of $2,464,500 under the Amended Credit Agreement bear interest at 7% per annum and mature on October 5, 2022.
On April 22, 2020, we received a principal amount of $116,700 from City National Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. We used the proceeds of the PPP loan for the payment of payroll and rent for our office space. On May 20, 2021, the principal amount plus interest was forgiven in full and we recognized a gain of $117,953 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
On July 21, 2021, we entered into the July 2021 Inducement with certain institutional investors to exercise 21,166,667 existing warrants in exchange for the issuance of 21,166,667 new warrants with an exercise price of $0.15 per share. The existing warrants had an exercise price of $0.06 and we received gross proceeds of $1,270,000 from the exercise. Wainwright acted as the placement agent in the transaction and upon the issuance of the Inducement Warrants, we issued 1,481,667 placement agent warrants with an exercise price of $0.19 and paid $132,950 in fees to Wainwright.
On September 27, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional investors for the issuance and sale of securities, with Wainwright acting as the placement agent, pursuant to which we sold 58,111,112 shares of common stock and 19,666,667 pre-funded warrants, and issued 77,777,779 common stock warrants, in a registered direct public offering which closed on September 29, 2021. The common stock and pre-funded warrants were sold at a price per share of $0.09 and $0.0899, respectively, for gross aggregate proceeds of $6,998,034. The common stock warrants and pre-funded warrants have an exercise price of $0.09 and $0.0001, respectively. The common stock warrants have a term of five years, and the pre-funded warrants are exercisable indefinitely.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $47,256,163, stockholders’ equity of $5,864,166 and working capital of $5,699,875. We had unrestricted cash of $8,983,007 as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $2,469,410 as of December 31, 2020. The net increase was primarily attributable to the exercise of 116,666,668 common stock warrants and 11,800,000 pre-funded warrants for cash proceeds of $6,999,999 and $11,800, respectively, net cash proceeds of $6,062,774 from the sale of our common stock, pre-funded warrants, and common stock warrants, as described above, offset by operating cash burn during the year ended December 31, 2021. Without additional funding, management believes that we will not have enough funds to meet our obligations and continue our pre-clinical and clinical studies beyond one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued. These conditions indicate it is probable that there is substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern, unless we are able to raise sufficient capital to continue our operations.
Our independent registered public accounting firm has issued a report on our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 that included an explanatory paragraph referring to our recurring operating losses and expressing substantial doubt in our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profitable operations in the future and/or to obtain the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities arising from normal business operations when they become due. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted with any certainty at this time and raise substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amount and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated and has been derived from our consolidated financial statements which are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The primary use of cash for our operating activities during these periods was to fund research development activities for our pre-clinical product candidates and general and administrative activities. Our cash used in operating activities also reflected changes in our working capital, net of adjustments for non-cash charges, such as stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense related to the amortization of our debt discounts on our related party Amended Credit Agreement, fair value adjustments related to our warrant liability and the gain realized from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
Cash used in operating activities of $6,474,888 during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflected a net loss of $8,522,182, partially offset by aggregate non-cash charges of $1,400,351 and included a $646,943 net change in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges included $869,206 for stock-based compensation expense, $593,802 non-cash interest expense from the amortization of the debt discount on the Amended Credit Agreement, a $21,165 loss from the increase in fair value of our warrant liability, depreciation and amortization of $34,131, and a $117,953 gain from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities included a $434,110 increase in our prepaid expense and other current assets, an increase in accounts payable of $518,638, and a $580,258 increase in our accrued expense and other current liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of our capital expenditures in relation to the purchase of property plant and equipment. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company purchased $90,866 and $7,230, respectively, in machinery and office equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities primarily reflect proceeds from the sale of our securities and debt financings.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by financing activities included $7,011,799 and $48,533 in proceeds received in connection with the exercise of warrants, $6,062,774 and $6,085,589 in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, pre-funded warrants and common stock warrants, respectively, and $4,783 received from employee stock option exercises in 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.