ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless otherwise indicated, references in this section to the terms “YAC,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to Yellowstone Acquisition Company prior to the Business Combination. The term “Sky” refers to Sky Harbour LLC. The financial information included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is that of YAC prior to the Business Combination because the Business Combination was consummated after the period covered by the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, the historical financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, unless otherwise indicated or as the context otherwise requires, is that of YAC prior to the Business Combination.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are an aviation infrastructure development company building the first nationwide network of Home-Basing Solutions (“HBS”) for business aircraft. We develop, lease and manage general aviation hangars across the United States, targeting airfields in markets with significant aircraft populations and high hangar demand. Our HBS campuses feature exclusive private hangars and a full suite of dedicated services specifically designed for home-based aircraft.
As the fleet of private jets in the United States continues to grow, with recent new aircraft deliveries exceeding retirements, demand for hangar space is at a premium in part because new jets require more square footage of hangar space and the pace of new hangar construction has lagged behind the demand. The cumulative square footage of the business aircraft fleet in the United States increased 42% between 2010 and 2020. Moreover, over that same period, there was a 70% increase in the square footage of larger private jets - those with greater than a 24-foot tail height. The larger footprint aircraft impose stacking challenges and constraints in the traditional shared or community hangars operated by fixed-base operators (“FBO”). The addition of winglets (the vertical extensions on aircraft wingtips) on most modern business jets inhibits wing-over-wing storage. Aircraft hangars are in high demand and short supply, with some airports compiling waiting lists that can exceed several years.
Our scalable business strategy addresses the increased imbalance between the supply and demand for private jet storage, including the lack of hangar facilities able to accommodate larger aircraft, by growing our portfolio of HBS campuses at key airports across the United States. We target airports with excess demand for private hangar space, typically near metropolitan areas, which include both established and growing markets. We intend to capitalize on the existing hangar supply constraints, particularly for high-end tenants.
We were a former blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. We completed our initial public offering on October 26, 2020 and Business Combination on January 25, 2022. We had no substantive operations prior to the completion of the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
Prior to the completion of the Business Combination on January 25, 2022, we neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination and the completion of the Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, and for the period from August 25, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net income/(loss) of $2,946,919 and ($3,024,804), respectively. We recognized $6,095,170 and ($2,070,328) of income/(loss) related to the change in fair value of our warrants liabilities for the calendar year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from August 25, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, fund the construction of new assets, fund working capital and other general business needs. Our primary sources of cash include the issuance of equity and debt securities and operating cash flows. Our long-term liquidity requirements include lease payments under our ground leases with airport authorities, repaying principal and interest on outstanding borrowings, funding our operations and paying accrued expenses. Yellowstone did not have any long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
We believe that following the Business Combination, as a publicly traded company, we will have access to multiple sources of capital to fund our long-term liquidity requirements, including the incurrence of additional debt and the issuance of additional equity securities. However, as a new public company, we cannot assure you that we will have access to these sources of capital or that, even if such sources of capital are available, that these sources of capital will be available on favorable terms. Our ability to incur additional debt will depend on multiple factors, including our degree of leverage, the value of our unencumbered assets and borrowing restrictions that are or may be imposed by future lenders. Our ability to access the equity and debt capital markets will depend on multiple factors as well, including general market conditions for real estate companies, our degree of leverage, the trading price of our common stock and market perceptions about our company.
Yellowstone Activity and Business Combination
The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on October 21, 2020. On October 26, 2020, we consummated our IPO of 12,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $125.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7.3 million (including $6.9 million in underwriters' fees). The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the October 21, 2020 IPO to purchase up to 1,875,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On December 1, 2020, the underwriters' over-allotment option was exercised resulting in the purchase of an additional 1,098,898 Units.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 7,500,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $7.5 million. In connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter's over-allotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 219,779 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $219,779.
Upon the closing of the IPO, $127,500,000 ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO, including proceeds of the sale of the private placement warrants, were placed in a trust account located in the United States at JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and are invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us (or our management), until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds in the trust account to our stockholders, as described below. Upon the closing of the underwriter's over-allotment option, an additional $11,208,760 in proceeds from the exercise of the over-allotment and the sale of the additional private placement warrants were placed in the trust account, resulting in total funds held in the trust account of $138,716,226, inclusive of earned interest on investments held in the trust account.
On September 27, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $1,000,000 to cover expenses related to the Proposed Business Combination pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan bears interest at the Federal Short Term Rate published pursuant to Section 1274(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, compounded annually. The loan is payable on the earlier of the date on which the Company consummates its Business Combination or the date that the Company’s winding up is effective. The principal balance, together with all accrued interest thereon, may be prepaid at any time at the election of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, there was $1,000,000 outstanding under the Note. The Note was fully repaid in connection with the Business Combination.
As of December 31, 2021, we had assets held in the trust account of $138,760,121 consisting of $69,378,000 in U.S. treasury securities with a maturity of 185 days or less as well as $69,382,121 of money market funds . Investment income on the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any funds from the investment income on the trust account. In addition, $114,626 of cash was held outside of the trust account and is available for working capital purposes as of December 31, 2021. At the closing of the Business Combination, we received an aggregate of $46 million of net proceeds to us, consisting primarily of the BOC PIPE, and the amount held in the Yellowstone trust account, net of redemptions and transaction costs, including $4,759,615 paid to the underwriters of the Yellowstone IPO as a deferred underwriting commission. Following the Business Combination, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $53.2 million and restricted cash and cash equivalents of approximately $197.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, and for the period from August 25, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,965,292 and $708,213, respectively, consisting of formation and operating costs.
Private Activity Bonds
On September 14, 2021, a subsidiary of Sky completed an issuance through the Public Finance Authority (Wisconsin) of $166,340,000 of Senior Special Facility Revenue Bonds (Aviation Facilities Project), Series 2021 (the “PABs”). The PABs are comprised of three maturities: $21,085,000 bearing interest at 4.00%, due July 1, 2036; $30,435,000 bearing interest at 4.00%, due July 1, 2041; and $114,820,000 bearing interest at 4.25%, due July 1, 2054. The Series 2021 Bond that has a maturity date of July 1, 2036 was issued at a premium, and Sky received bond proceeds that were $249,436 above its face value. The net proceeds from the issuance of the PABs proceeds are being used to (a) finance or refinance the construction of various aviation facilities consisting of general aviation aircraft hangars and storage facilities located and to be located on the SGR site, the OPF site, the BNA site, the APA site, and the DVT site; (b) fund debt service and other operating expenses such as ground lease expense during the initial construction period; (c) fund deposits to the Debt Service Reserve Fund; and (d) pay certain costs of issuance related to the PABs.
Debt Covenants
The PABs contain financial and non-financial covenants, including a debt service coverage ratio, a restricted payments test and limitations on the sale, lease, or distribution of assets. To the extent that SHC does not comply with these covenants, an event of default or cross-default may occur under one or more agreements, and we or our subsidiaries may be restricted in our ability to pay dividends, issue new debt or access our leased facilities. The PABs are collateralized on a joint and several basis with the property and revenues of all SHC subsidiaries and their assets financed or to be financed from the proceeds of the PABs.
Covenants in the PABs require SHC to maintain a debt service coverage ratio (as defined in the relevant documents) of at least 1.25 for each applicable test period, commencing with the quarter ending December 31, 2024. The PABs are subject to a Continuing Disclosure Agreement whereby SHC is obligated to provide electronic copies of (i) monthly construction reports, (ii) quarterly reports containing quarterly financial information of SHC and (iii) annual reports containing audited consolidated financial statements of SHC to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.
Lease Commitments
The table below sets forth certain information with respect to Sky’s future minimum lease payments required under operating leases as of December 31, 2021 (all of which were assumed by us in connection with the Business Combination):
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth the contractual obligations of Sky as of December 31, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
Interest payments due on the Series 2021 PABs is held in reserve as restricted cash for the first three years.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net (loss) income per share of common stock is computed by dividing net (loss) income by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had outstanding warrants to purchase up to 14,519,228 shares of Class A common stock. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net (loss) income per share of common stock since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted net (loss) income per common share is the same as basic net (loss) income per common share for the periods presented.
Redeemable Shares of Class A Common Stock
All of the 13,598,898 shares of Class A common stock sold as parts of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature. In accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification 480-10-S99-3A (“ASC 480”), “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. The Company classifies all shares of Class A common stock as redeemable.
Warrants Liability
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification 815 (“ASC 815”), “Derivatives and Hedging”, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as derivative liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering have been measured based on the listed market price of such Warrants.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements based on current operations of the Company. The impact of any recently issued accounting standards will be re-evaluated on a regular basis or if a Business Combination is completed where the impact could be material.