ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those discussed or implied in our forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those described in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere herein.
Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to the end of the twelfth calendar month. We refer to the fiscal years ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021 as fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Fiscal years 2021 and 2020 include 52 and 53 weeks, respectively. All percentage amounts and ratios presented in this management’s discussion and analysis were calculated using the underlying data in thousands. Unless otherwise indicated, all changes identified for the current period results represent comparisons to results for the prior corresponding period.
For purposes of this section, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” “CMI Acquisition” and “SkyWater” refer to CMI Acquisition, LLC and its subsidiaries collectively before the corporate conversion discussed below and to SkyWater Technology, Inc. and its subsidiaries collectively after the corporate conversion.
Corporate Conversion and Initial Public Offering
On April 14, 2021, in connection with the IPO of our common stock, CMI Acquisition, LLC filed a certificate of conversion, whereby CMI Acquisition, LLC effected a corporate conversion from a Delaware limited liability company to a Delaware corporation and changed its name to SkyWater Technology, Inc., which we refer to as the corporate conversion. As part of the corporate conversion, holders of Class B preferred units and common units of CMI Acquisition, LLC received shares of our common stock for each unit held immediately prior to the corporate conversion using an approximate one-to-1.56 conversion ratio for Class B preferred units and one-to-1.45 conversion ratio for common units.
On April 23, 2021, we completed our IPO and issued 8,004,000 shares of common stock, including the underwriter’s exercise of their right to purchase additional shares, at an initial offering price to the public of $14.00 per share. Shares of our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market on April 21, 2021 under the symbol “SKYT”.
We received net proceeds from the IPO of approximately $100.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of approximately $11.9 million. We estimate that we have utilized approximately $45 million of our IPO proceeds to pay down our revolving credit agreement, approximately $28 million of our IPO proceeds to fund capital expenditures, and approximately $27 million of our IPO proceeds to fund our operating activities.
Overview
We are a U.S. investor-owned, independent, pure-play technology foundry that offers advanced semiconductor development and manufacturing services from our fabrication facility, or fab, in Minnesota and advanced packaging services from our Florida facility. In our technology-as-a-service model, we leverage a strong foundation of proprietary technology to co-develop process technology IP with our customers that enables disruptive concepts through our Advanced Technology Services for diverse microelectronics (ICs) and related micro- and nanotechnology applications. In addition to differentiated technology development services, we support customers with volume production of ICs for high-growth markets through our Wafer Services.
The combination of semiconductor development and manufacturing services we provide our customers is not available to them from a conventional fab. In addition, our status as a publicly-traded, U.S.- based, U.S. investor-owned pure-play technology foundry with DMEA Category 1A accreditation from the DoD, is expected to position us well to provide distinct, competitive advantages to our customers. These advantages include the benefits of enhanced IP security and easy access to a U.S. domestic supply chain. In September 2019, we entered into a contract with the DoD to receive up to $170 million to expand and upgrade our manufacturing capabilities, specifically to build next-generation rad-hard wafer solutions for the aerospace and defense sector which will have significant benefits for other commercial markets. Our fab expansion supporting this project began operations in October 2020. In January 2021, we entered into an agreement with Osceola County, Florida to take over operation of the Center for NeoVation facility in Kissimmee, Florida to accelerate pure-play advanced packaging services for differentiated technologies.
We primarily focus on serving diversified, high-growth, end users in numerous vertical markets, including (1) advanced computation, (2) A&D, (3) automotive and transportation, (4) bio-health, (5) consumer and (6) industrial/ IoT. By housing both development and manufacturing in a single operation, we rapidly and efficiently transition newly-developed processes to high-yielding volume production, eliminating the time it would otherwise take to transfer production to a third-party fab. Through our Advanced Technology Services, we specialize in co-creating with our customers advanced solutions that directly serve our end markets, such as superconducting ICs for quantum computing, integrated photonics, CNTs, MEMS, technologies for biomedical and imaging applications, and advanced packaging. Our Wafer Services include the manufacture of silicon-based analog and mixed-signal ICs for our end markets. Our focus on the differentiated analog and CMOS markets supports long product life-cycles and requirements that value performance over cost-efficiencies, and leverages our portfolio IP.
Before we began independent operations, our fab was owned and operated by Cypress as a captive manufacturing facility for 20 years. We have leveraged the Cypress system, manufacturing technology and process development capabilities to advance our product offerings. We became an independent company in March 2017 when we were acquired by Oxbow, as part of a divestiture from Cypress. Our multi-year foundry services agreement with Cypress, which ended in June 2020, created a runway for us to operate the foundry at a high utilization rate while continuing to expand and diversify the customer base transferred by Cypress. Cypress was acquired in April 2020 by Infineon.
Factors and Trends Affecting our Business and Results of Operations
The following trends and uncertainties either affected our financial performance in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 or are reasonably likely to impact our results in the future.
•Macroeconomic and competitive conditions, including cyclicality and consolidation, affecting the semiconductor industry.
•The global economic climate, including the impact on the economy from geopolitical issues and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Our business has been adversely affected by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We implemented modifications to employee travel and employee work locations, as required in some cases by federal, state and local authorities, which has had a negative impact on our employee productivity. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, one customer reduced its research and development expenditures with us, and a second customer experienced facility shutdowns which resulted in delays in project milestones, in each case negatively
affecting our revenues. Because we have a manufacturing facility, we may be vulnerable to an outbreak of a new coronavirus or other contagious diseases. The effects of such an outbreak could include the temporary shutdown of our facilities, disruptions or restrictions on the ability to ship our products to our customers, as well as disruptions that may affect our suppliers. Any disruption of our ability to manufacture or distribute our products or of the ability of our suppliers to delivery key components on a timely basis could have material adverse effect on our revenue and operating results. See “Risk Factors-The effects of the COVID-19 outbreak could adversely affect our business, results of operations, and financial condition” and our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
•The impact of vaccine mandates on our workforce. In the U.S., the Food and Drug Administration issued emergency use authorization for COVID-19 vaccines and the government began extensive efforts to administer them. We have taken various steps to encourage and facilitate vaccination access for our employees, in accordance with federal guidance. We have provided flexibility for employees to get vaccinated, and strongly encouraged our workforce to take care of themselves and their colleagues. In September 2021, the White House issued an executive order and guidance from the Safer Federal Workforce Task Force broadly requiring many U.S.-based federal contractors to be fully vaccinated by December 8, 2021 (or to have an approved accommodation). In early November 2021, the federal government extended that deadline to January 18, 2022. On December 7, 2021, a federal district judge issued an order, temporarily suspending the government from enforcing the federal contractor mandate. That order is on appeal. State and local governments are also taking actions related to the pandemic, imposing additional and varying requirements on industry. We have taken, and are continuing to take, steps to encourage our employees to be fully vaccinated (or to have an approved accommodation) to protect our workplace and to position us to comply with the executive order, guidance, and related contract terms, if and as necessary, as we continue to evaluate the evolving situation and our customers’ requirements. Evolving government requirements, including regarding a vaccine mandate, along with the broader impacts of the continuing pandemic, could significantly impact our workforce and performance, as well as those of our suppliers, and result in costs that we may not be able to recover fully. We continue to take robust actions to protect the health, safety and well-being of our employees, and to serve our customers with continued performance. See “Risk Factors-Vaccination or testing mandates could have a material adverse impact on our business and results of operations” for discussion of risks associated with the potential adverse effects on our business.
•On April 18, 2020, we received proceeds of $6.5 million pursuant to a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, under the terms of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. On June 10, 2021, our PPP loan was forgiven.
•The Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors, or CHIPS, for America Act, in which the United States has committed to a renewed focus on providing incentives and funding for onshore companies to develop and advance the latest semiconductor technologies, supporting onshore manufacturing capabilities, and on strengthening key onshore supply chains. The U.S. Senate passed broad competitiveness legislation on June 8, 2021, through the U.S. Innovation and Competition Act, which includes $52 billion in federal investments for the domestic semiconductor research, design and manufacturing provisions in the CHIPS Act. The U.S. House of Representatives passed competitiveness legislation on February 4, 2022, through the America COMPETES Act, which also includes $52 billion in CHIPS Act investments. Both legislative chambers must reach agreement on, and pass, the joint competitiveness legislation before it can be signed into law by the President.
•Our overall level of indebtedness from our revolving credit agreement for up to $65 million, which we refer to as the Revolver, and a $39 million financing from the sale of the land and building representing our headquarters in Minnesota, which we refer to as the Financing, the corresponding interest rates charged to us by our lenders and our ability to access borrowings under the Revolver.
•Identification and pursuit of specific product and geographic market opportunities that we find attractive both within and outside the United States. We will continue to more effectively address these opportunities through research and development and allocation of additional revenue and marketing resources.
•Material and other cost inflation. We strive for productivity improvements, and we implement increases in selling prices to help mitigate inflation. We expect the current economic environment will result in continuing price volatility and inflation for many of our raw materials. In addition, the labor market for skilled manufacturing remains tight as the United States continues to restart the economy after the COVID-19 pandemic and our labor costs have increased as a result.
•Supply chain disruptions impacting our business. We have experienced, and may continue to experience, supply chain disruption for substrates, chemicals and spare parts in addition to customer supply chain constraints that have negatively impacted our revenue.
Financial Performance Metrics
Our senior management team regularly reviews certain key financial performance metrics within our business, including:
•revenue and gross profit; and
•earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as adjusted, or adjusted EBITDA, which is a financial measure not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP, that excludes certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results, as well as items
that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. For information regarding our non-GAAP financial measure, see the section entitled “-Non-GAAP Financial Measure” below.
Results of Operations
This section contains an analysis of our results of operations presented in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. Discussions of fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 can be found in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Registration Statement on Form S-1, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 12, 2021.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to our operating results for the years ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021.
__________________
(1)The consolidated statements of operations are for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. Our fiscal year ends on the Sunday closest to the end of the calendar year. Fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 contained 52 and 53 weeks, respectively.
(2)See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for the definition of adjusted EBITDA and reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Revenue
Revenue increased $22.4 million, or 16%, to $162.8 million for fiscal 2021, from $140.4 million for fiscal 2020. The increase for fiscal 2021 was driven by continued momentum in revenue for our Advanced Technology Services, primarily in the aerospace and defense industry.
The following table shows revenue by services type for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020:
The Wafer Services revenue increase for fiscal 2021 reflected the continued rebound from 2020 levels, driven primarily by demand in the IoT and automotive industries. The Advanced Technology Services revenue increase during fiscal 2021 was driven by continued program expansion with existing customers and new program additions. Additionally, fiscal 2021 included $19.2 million of revenue recognized related to services we provide to qualify customer funded tool technologies as our customers invest in our capabilities to expand our technology platforms. During the third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, our Advanced Technology Services experienced supply chain challenges, hiring constraints, and continued delays in the funding of existing United States government programs. This resulted in delayed revenue for certain Advanced Technology Services and Wafer Services programs in the amount of approximately $15 million for the third and fourth quarter of 2021. This included a revised schedule for a significant complex multi-year Advanced Technology Services program originally estimated to be completed in 2021 to early 2022, causing revenue to be pushed from 2021 into 2022.
Gross profit (loss)
Gross profit (loss) decreased $30.2 million, or 133%, to $(7.5) million for fiscal 2021, from $22.7 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease was due to increased cost of revenue. The cost of revenue increase was driven by an inventory charge of $13.4 million for inventory which we were contracted by a customer to manufacture (see below for more information); increased labor costs as we ramped up our Minnesota and Florida facilities; increased wafer output which typically has a lower margin than Advanced Technology Services; increased utility and freight costs; the supply chain challenges related to supply chain disruption for substrates, chemicals, and spare parts; and investments made for long-term growth to build out our rad-hard and advanced packaging capabilities. The labor market for skilled manufacturing remained tight as the United States continued to restart the economy after the COVID-19 pandemic and we increased our average starting wage in our fabs to attract the best talent in the market. The cost of revenue increases for fiscal 2021 also reflect the additional depreciation expense related to our foundry expansion in Minnesota.
Inventory Write-down
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we recorded a full inventory write-down of $13.4 million to cost of revenue for inventory which we were contracted to manufacture for a customer. The customer's financing for its COVID-19-related business was not obtained and the customer was unable to meet it contractual payment obligations. We have filed a claim against the customer for full payment. We explored alternative sales channels, such as partnering with a customer, to sell the inventory. However, our sales efforts have not progressed and it is not probable we will recover the value of the inventory.
Research and development
Research and development costs increased to $8.7 million for fiscal 2021, from $4.2 million for the fiscal 2020. The increase of $4.5 million, or 108%, was attributable to increased personnel expense of $2.4 million; increased equity-based compensation expense of $1.1 million; and increased equipment, parts and supplies expense of $0.7 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $43.6 million for the first twelve months of 2021, from $25.0 million for fiscal 2020. The increase of $18.6 million, or 74%, was attributable to increased equity-based compensation expense of $7.4 million; increased personnel expense of $4.7 million due to the increase in headcount due to public company requirements and build out of strategic sales and business leadership during fiscal 2021; increased insurance expense of $2.6 million; corporate conversion and IPO related costs of $1.9 million, which includes bonus awards granted to employees upon the completion of the IPO; increased information technology expense of $1.4 million; and executive transition expense of $0.4 million.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration was $(2.7) million for fiscal 2021, compared to $2.1 million for fiscal 2020. The contingent consideration is based on estimated royalties owed on Advanced Technology Services revenues, with respect to which we pay a quarterly royalty through 2022. In connection with our acquisition of the business from Cypress, we recorded a contingent consideration liability for the future estimated earn-out/royalties owed on Advanced Technology Services revenues. For each reporting period thereafter, we revalued future estimated earn-out payments and record the changes in fair value of the liability in our consolidated statements of operations. The decrease for fiscal 2021 was driven by lower revenue than previously forecasted.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability was $0.8 million for fiscal 2020. We had no similar expense during 2021 as the related warrants were repurchased in December 2020.
Loss on debt extinguishment
In fiscal 2020, we expensed $1.4 million of unamortized debt issuance costs and fees in connection with the extinguishment of a term loan in September and December 2020. There were no such charges in fiscal 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased to $3.5 million for fiscal 2021, from $5.5 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in interest expense were a result of lower debt balances and lower interest rates on our Revolver and the Financing during the fiscal 2021 compared to the interest rates charged on our previous line of credit and term loan during fiscal 2020.
Income tax expense (benefit)
Income tax expense decreased to a benefit of $6.8 million for fiscal 2021 from an expense of $4.9 million for fiscal 2020. The effective income tax rate was 12.5% for fiscal 2021 compared to (33.2)% for fiscal 2020. The effective income tax rate applied to our pre-tax loss was lower for fiscal 2021 than our statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to a deferred tax asset valuation allowance. The income tax benefit for fiscal 2021 included the tax impact from the gain on the PPP Loan forgiveness, which is exempt from federal income taxation. The effective income tax rate applied to our pre-tax loss for fiscal 2020 differed from our statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to the disallowed loss from the sale-leaseback transaction with Oxbow Realty and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, partially offset by an income tax benefit for excess tax benefits recorded for stock-based compensation vesting. Refer to Note 7 - Income Taxes in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of income taxes.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests increased to $3.3 million for fiscal 2021 from $0.9 million for fiscal 2020. Net income attributable to non-controlling interests reflects the net income of the variable interest entity, or VIE, that we consolidate, representing the economic interest in the profits and losses of Oxbow Realty that the owners of our shareholders’ equity do not legally have rights or obligations to. Since we began consolidating Oxbow Realty in the fourth quarter of 2020, fiscal 2020 included one quarter of financial results compared to four quarters for fiscal 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $17.0 million, or 118%, to $(2.6) million for fiscal 2021 from $14.4 million for fiscal 2020. The decrease in adjusted EBITDA primarily reflects decreased gross profit due to increased labor and infrastructure costs as we continue to scale our business to meet the increased demands of our customers and the requirements of being a public company. For a discussion of adjusted EBITDA as well as a reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measure.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We measure liquidity in terms of our ability to fund the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital and capital expenditure needs, contractual obligations and other commitments, with cash flows from operations and other sources of funding. Our current working capital needs relate mainly to the expansion of our operations, payment of amounts due under our contingent consideration liability, lease obligations and the normal operation of our business. Our ability to meet these working capital needs and grow our business will depend on many factors, including our future working capital needs, the evolution of our operating cash flows and our ability to secure additional sources of financing.
We had $12.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, not including cash held by a variable interest entity that we consolidate, and availability under our Revolver of $38.6 million as of January 2, 2022. However, we must maintain availability under the Revolver of at least $15 million in order to not have to comply with the leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenants contained in the Revolver with respect to the fiscal quarters ending on or prior to July 2, 2023. In fiscal 2022, we expect to use cash in operations but anticipate the use of cash to decrease as revenue grows and realize a return from the capital investments made in fiscal 2021. We believe our operating cash flows, together with our cash on hand and current availability under the Revolver will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We may, however, need additional cash resources due to changed business conditions or other developments, including significant acquisitions and competitive pressures. We expect our capital expenditures and working capital requirements to continue to increase in the immediate future, as we seek to expand our business. To the extent that our current resources, including our ability to generate operating cash flows, are insufficient to satisfy our cash requirements, we may need to seek additional equity or debt financing. Our ability to do so depends on prevailing economic conditions and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. If the needed financing is not available, or if the terms of financing are less desirable than we expect, we may be forced to decrease our level of investment in new products and technologies, discontinue further
expansion of our business, or scale back our existing operations, which could have an adverse impact on our business and financial prospects.
Initial Public Offering
On April 23, 2021, we completed our IPO and issued 8,004,000 shares of common stock, including the underwriter’s exercise of their right to purchase additional shares, at an initial offering price to the public of $14.00 per share. We received net proceeds from the IPO of approximately $100.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of approximately $11.9 million. We estimate that we have utilized approximately $45 million of our IPO proceeds to pay down our revolving credit agreement, approximately $28 million of our IPO proceeds to fund capital expenditures, and approximately $27 million of our IPO proceeds to fund our operating activities.
Capital Expenditures
On July 26, 2021, we announced that our board of directors approved $56 million in strategic capital investments for expanding manufacturing capacity and technology capabilities at our Minnesota facility. The majority of this investment is targeted to expand capacity and capabilities at our Minnesota fab which is expected to increase overall output by at least 40% and to enable accelerated revenue growth. The remainder is focused on expediting our entry into the gallium nitride, or GaN, market, a promising technology for electric vehicles, 5G and consumer electronics, among others due to its properties that enable higher charging efficiencies, smaller ship size, and lighter weight for many applications. We believe SkyWater can fill the need for a US-based 200 mm foundry to offer technology services for GaN-based solutions expanding the serviceable market for our technology-as-a-serviceSM model. The strategic capital investment is a multi-year strategy and we invested approximately $13.8 million during fiscal 2021.
For fiscal 2021 and 2020, we spent approximately $32.0 million and $89.9 million, respectively, on capital expenditures, including purchases of property, equipment and software. The majority of these capital expenditures relate to our foundry expansion in Minnesota, as discussed below, and the development of our advanced packaging capabilities at the Center for NeoVation in Florida. We anticipate our cash on hand and the availability under the Revolver will provide the funds needed to meet our customer demand and anticipated capital expenditures in fiscal 2022.
We have various contracts outstanding with third parties in connection with the completion of a building expansion project to increase manufacturing capacity at our Minnesota facility. We have approximately $8.2 million of contractual commitments outstanding as of January 2, 2022 that we expect to be paid in fiscal 2022 through cash on hand and operating cash flows. As of January 2, 2022, the Company had executed a capital lease, which had not yet commenced, to replace the existing nitrogen plant with a larger and more modern nitrogen generator. The capital lease has a lease term of 15 years for total payments of $14 million and is expected to commence during the first half of 2022.
Contingent Consideration
For fiscal 2021 and 2020, we made cash payments of $7.4 million and $11.3 million, respectively, related to our contingent consideration royalty liability. We expect total future cash payments to be approximately $0.8 million for contingent consideration related to this liability in the future. We anticipate our cash on hand and cash flows from operations will provide the funds necessary to settle the contingent consideration royalty liability.
Working Capital
Historically, we have depended on cash on hand, funds available under our Revolver, funds from the sale of our land and building in Minnesota, cash flows from operations, and in the future may depend on additional debt and equity financings, similar to our IPO, to finance our expansion strategy, working capital needs and capital expenditures. We believe that these sources of funds will be adequate to provide cash, as required, to support our strategy, ongoing operations, capital expenditures, lease obligations and working capital for at least the next 12 months. However, we cannot be certain that we will be able to obtain future debt or equity financings adequate for our cash requirements on commercially reasonable terms or at all.
As of January 2, 2022, we had available aggregate undrawn borrowing capacity of approximately $38.6 million under our Revolver. However, we must maintain availability under the Revolver of at least $15 million in order to not have to comply with the leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenants contained in the Revolver with respect to the fiscal quarters ending on or prior to July 2, 2023. For the periods presented, our use of cash was primarily driven by our investing activities, and specifically by our investments in capital expenditures.
The following table sets forth general information derived from our statement of cash flows for fiscal 2021 and 2020:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
At January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, we had $12.9 million and $7.4 million of cash and cash equivalents, respectively, including cash of $0.5 million and $0.9 million held by a variable interest entity that we consolidate.
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operations is driven by changes in the working capital needs associated with the various goods and services we provide, and expenses related to the infrastructure in place to support revenue generation. Working capital is primarily affected by changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and deferred revenue, all of which tend to be related and are affected by changes in the timing and volume of work performed and our increased expenditures as a public company. Net cash used in operating activities was $55.7 million during fiscal 2021, a decrease of $151.9 million from $96.2 million of net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 was driven primarily by the change in our working capital accounts, specifically deferred revenue and accounts receivable, and our increased net loss, reflecting higher post-IPO costs as a public company. During the fiscal 2021, we recognized revenue from customers who funded our building expansion during fiscal 2020, which resulted in lower operating cash inflows in the current year. Additionally, accounts receivable increased during fiscal 2021 due to the timing of cash collected from customers, which also resulted in lower operating cash inflows compared to the prior year.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures are a significant use of our capital resources. These investments are intended to enable sales growth in new and expanding markets, help us meet product demand and increase our manufacturing efficiencies and capacity. We had various contracts outstanding with third parties in connection with the construction of a building expansion project to increase manufacturing capacity at our Minnesota fab.
Net cash used in investing activities was $29.8 million during fiscal 2021, a decrease of $58.4 million from $88.2 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in cash used in fiscal 2021 reflects decreased capital spending on property and equipment as we fully complete our foundry expansion project to increase manufacturing capacity at our Minnesota facility and decreased capital spending on software.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $91.0 million during fiscal 2021, an increase of $96.2 million from net cash used in financing activities of $5.2 million during fiscal 2020. The increase in fiscal 2021 was driven by the proceeds from the IPO. The increase was partially offset by net repayments on the Revolver of $6.1 million and cash paid for offering costs and distributions to our VIE of $2.9 million.
Indebtedness
Sale Leaseback Transaction
On September 29, 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell the land and building representing our primary operating location in Bloomington, Minnesota to Oxbow Realty for $39 million, less applicable transaction costs of $1.5 million and transaction services fees paid to Oxbow Realty of $2.0 million, and paid a guarantee fee to our principal stockholder of $2.0 million. We subsequently entered into an agreement to lease the land and building from Oxbow Realty for initial payments of $0.4 million per month over 20 years. The monthly payments are subject to a 2% increase each year during the term of the lease. We are also required to make certain customary payments constituting “additional rent,” including certain monthly reserve, insurance and tax payments, in accordance with the terms of the lease. Due to our continuing involvement in the property, we are accounting for the transactions as a failed sale leaseback (a financing transaction). Under failed sale leaseback accounting, we are deemed the owner of the property with the proceeds received recorded as a financial obligation.
Revolving Credit Agreement
On December 28, 2020, we entered into our Revolver with Wells Fargo of up to $65 million that replaced our previous line of credit and term loan. Under the agreement, the facility is available on a revolving basis, subject to availability under a borrowing base consisting of a percentage of eligible accounts receivable, inventory and owned equipment. The Revolver can be repaid and borrowed again at any time without penalty or premium until the maturity date of December 28, 2025. The Revolver is available for issuance of letters of credit to a specified limit of $10 million.
Under the Revolver, we can elect the base rate (greatest of the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, LIBOR for a one-month period plus 1%, or the institution’s prime rate) or LIBOR for a period of one, two, three or six months as selected by us, plus a margin depending on the amount of borrowings outstanding. We will also pay a commitment fee equal to 0.25% to 0.375% of the average commitment not utilized, depending on the amount not utilized. Interest payments are due monthly.
On November 3, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the Revolver, effective as of October 1, 2021, to eliminate the requirement for us to comply with the leverage ratio financial covenant contained therein with respect to the fiscal quarters ending on or prior to July 2, 2023, so long as the remaining availability under the Revolver has equaled or
exceeded $15 million. Certain financial covenants, including a fixed charge coverage ratio and leverage ratio, become applicable only if unused remaining availability falls below $15 million. As of January 2, 2022, our unused remaining availability was $38.6 million and we were in compliance with applicable financial covenants of the Revolver and expect to be in compliance with applicable financial covenants over the next twelve months. The fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenant requires us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.1 to 1.0 on a rolling twelve-month basis. The fixed charge coverage ratio included in our credit agreement is defined as (A) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), less unfinanced capital expenditures, divided by (B) fixed charges, which are generally defined as cash interest and income taxes, scheduled principal payments on loans and contingent consideration arrangements, and restricted payments such as dividends. EBITDA, as defined, includes adjustments for such items as unusual gains or losses, equity-based compensation and management fees, as well as other adjustments. The leverage ratio financial covenant requires us to maintain a leverage ratio of no greater than 3.0 to 1.0 on a rolling twelve-month basis measured quarterly. The leverage ratio included in our credit agreement is defined as our funded indebtedness as of the measurement date divided by our EBITDA for the twelve-month period as of the measurement date.
The Revolver contains covenants, including restrictions on indebtedness, liens, mergers, consolidations, investments, acquisitions, disposition of assets, and transactions with affiliates. Dividends, redemptions and other payments on equity (restricted payments) are limited to (1) restricted payments to the loan parties, and (2) declaring and making dividend payments or other distributions payable solely in capital stock. Customary events of default (with customary grace periods, notice and cure periods and thresholds) include payment default, breach of representation in any material respect, breach of certain covenants, default to material indebtedness, bankruptcy, ERISA violations, material judgments, change in control and termination or invalidity of guaranty or security documents.
The Revolver is secured by a security interest in substantially all of our accounts receivable, inventory and equipment. In connection with the Revolver, we repaid all outstanding amounts owed under our Term Loan totaling $28.2 million of principal, accrued interest and prepayment penalties. Amounts owed under our Line of Credit totaling $2.8 million of principal and accrued interest were rolled over into the Revolver and our Line of Credit was discontinued.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations primarily relate to following, for which information on both a short-term and long-term basis is provided in the indicated notes to the consolidated financial statements:
•Debt-Refer to Note 6.
•Capital expenditure commitments-Refer to Note 13.
•Capital lease commitments-Refer to Note 13.
•Sale leaseback obligation-Refer to Note 15.
•Tax obligations-Refer to Note 7.
•Other commitments and contingencies-Refer to Note 13.
Recent Accounting Developments
For information on new accounting pronouncements, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In connection with preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expense, and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time we prepare our consolidated financial statements. On a regular basis, management
reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, valuation of long-lived assets and inventory, share-based compensation and income taxes. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized either over time as work progresses using an output measure or at a point-in-time, depending upon contract-specific terms and the pattern of transfer of control of the product or service to the customer. Due to the nature of our contracts, there can be judgment involved in determining the performance obligations that are included in the related contract. We analyze each contract to conclude what enforceable rights and obligations exist between us and our customers. In doing so, we determine our unit of account by identifying the promises within the contract that are both (1) considered to be distinct and (2) distinct within the context of each contract.
Our performance obligations generally result in a custom product with no alternative use. This could result in over time revenue recognition to the extent there is an enforceable right to payment for work completed plus a reasonable margin. In some cases, our contracts may require judgment to conclude if this enforceable right to payment plus a reasonable margin is present and thus would result in over time revenue recognition. Generally, our contracts to provide wafers do not have an enforceable right to payment for cost plus a reasonable margin and therefore revenue from such contracts are recognized at a point in time. For a significant wafer services customer due to a change in contract terms, we began recognizing revenue under a bill and hold arrangement in fiscal 2021, whereby the customer requested and agreed to purchase product to be delivered at a later date. Under this arrangement, control transfers to the customer when the product is ready for delivery, which occurs upon completion of electrical testing, but prior to shipment to the location, and at the timing, designated by the customer. The product is separately identified as belonging to the customer, the product is ready for shipment to the customer in its current form, and we do not have the ability to direct the product to a different customer. Upon completion of electrical testing, we have the right to invoice the customer, the customer obtains legal title, and the customer has the significant risks and rewards of ownership. Our fixed price and time-and-materials contracts generally do not create an asset with alternative use, but we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date plus a reasonable profit margin. For certain of our fixed price and time-and-materials contracts, the customer receives the benefits provided by our performance as we complete it. In both cases, the revenue from our fixed price and time-and-materials contracts are recognized over time as we perform.
For the majority of our fixed price contracts, revenue is recognized over time using an output method based on surveys of performance completed to date to satisfy our performance obligation. This can require judgment to determine the related measure of progress that will be assigned to the respective contract.
The terms of a contract and historical business practices can, but generally do not, give rise to variable consideration. We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount we will receive from customers. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized for such transaction will not occur, or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. In general, variable consideration in our contracts relates to the entire contract. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us at contract inception and require judgment. We have no significant instances where variable consideration is constrained and not recorded at the initial time of sale. In addition, we have not experienced significant changes to our estimates and judgments related to variable consideration in our contracts.
If we make material changes to our assumptions, we may have cumulative catch-up adjustments to make in the financial statements related to revenue previously recognized. No material gross favorable or unfavorable changes to our material long-term contracts existed for fiscal 2021 or fiscal 2020.
Inventory
We produce inventory against specific customer purchase orders. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, cost being determined under the first-in, first-out method. The total carrying value of our inventory is reduced for any difference between cost and estimated net realizable value, calculated as the estimated selling price less estimated costs of completion. Determining net realizable value of inventories involves significant judgments, including projecting future average selling price, future sales volumes, and estimated costs of completion.
When estimated net realizable values are below our manufacturing costs or excess, obsolete or unsellable inventory exists, we record a write-down to cost of revenue in advance of when inventories are actually sold. As a result, the timing of when product costs are charged to costs of goods sold can vary significantly. Once the carrying value of inventory is reduced, it is maintained until the product to which it relates to is sold or otherwise disposed of.
We also regularly review inventory quantities on hand to determine whether we are holding inventory that is excess, obsolete or unsellable based upon assumptions about future demand.
Although we manufacture against specific purchase orders, our customers may not be able to fulfill their contractual obligations. In fiscal 2021, we recorded a full inventory write-down of $13.4 million for inventory which we were contracted to manufacture for a specific customer. The customer's financing for its COVID-19 related business was not obtained and the customer was unable to meet it contractual payment obligations. We filed a claim against the customer for full payment and explored alternative sales channels, such as partnering with a customer, to sell the inventory. However, our sales efforts have not progressed. Given the nature of this arrangement and type of inventory, the valuation is uncertain and it is not probable we will recover the value of the inventory. The write-down of inventory manufactured for this specific customer is recorded separately in our consolidated statement of operations within cost of revenue. All other write-downs of our inventory are recorded within the caption Cost of revenue.
Income Taxes
In determining taxable income for financial statement purposes, we must make certain estimates and judgments. These estimates and judgments affect the calculation of certain tax liabilities and the determination of the recoverability of certain of the deferred tax assets, which arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expenses. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we develop assumptions regarding the reversal of temporary differences. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business.
We currently have recorded a valuation allowance that we will maintain until, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our income tax expense recorded in the future may be reduced to the extent of a decrease in our valuation allowance. The realization of our remaining deferred tax assets is primarily dependent on future taxable income. Any reduction in future taxable income may require that we record an additional valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. An increase in the valuation allowance could result in additional income tax expense in such period and could have a significant impact on our future earnings. Because the determination of the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized is based, in part, on our forecast of future profitability, it is inherently uncertain and subjective. Changes in market conditions and our assumptions may cause the actual future profitability to differ materially from our current expectation, which may require us to increase or decrease the valuation allowance. As of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, our net deferred tax assets (liabilities) prior to the valuation allowance were $8.8 million and $(6.4) million, respectively. The increase in the net deferred tax asset in fiscal 2021 was mainly due to additional temporary differences involving revenue recognition, inventory valuation and our generation of net operating loss carryforwards. Our valuation allowance as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, was $9.8 million and $1.6 million, respectively, and increased primarily due to the increase in the net deferred tax asset.
Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. Management records the effect of a tax rate or law change on our deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period of enactment. Future tax rate or law changes could have a material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Long-lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets with definite lives, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances, known as triggering events, indicate that the asset's carrying amount may not be recoverable. Triggering events include, but are not limited to, reduced or expected sustained decreases in cash flows generated by an asset or asset group, negative changes in industry conditions, a significant change in a long-lived asset's use or physical condition and the introduction of competing technologies. For purposes of impairment testing, we group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and evaluate the asset group against the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows. If the undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the long-lived asset or asset group, the asset group is not recoverable and impairment is recognized to the extent the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group. The undiscounted cash flow analysis consists of estimating the future cash flows that are directly associated with, and are expected to arise from, the use and eventual disposition of the asset over its remaining useful life. These estimated discounted cash flows are inherently subjective and include significant assumptions, specifically the forecasted revenue, forecasted operating margins, and require estimates based upon historical experience and future expectations. Due to our history of operating losses and uncertainty with forecasts, we utilized third party appraisers to assess the estimated fair value of our long-lived asset group. The estimated fair value of our long-lived assets exceeded the carrying value. As such, we did not experience an impairment of our long-lived assets despite having triggering events during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
Appraisals utilize various approaches to determine fair value, including the income approach, the sales comparison approach and the cost approach. Each appraisal approach is inherently subjective and includes significant assumptions, specifically the comparability of similar properties or equipment, the potential income and expenses that would be derived or incurred to rent those long-lived assets, obsolescence factors, and capitalization and discount rates.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Our audited consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, an additional non-GAAP financial measure is provided and reconciled in the following table.
We provide supplemental non-GAAP financial information that our management utilizes to evaluate our ongoing financial performance and provide additional insight to investors as supplemental information to our U.S. GAAP results. We use adjusted EBITDA to provide a baseline for analyzing trends in our business and to exclude certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results. The use of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, the comparable U.S. GAAP measure. In addition, because our non-GAAP measure is not determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, it is susceptible to differing calculations, and not all comparable or peer companies may calculate their non-GAAP measures in the same manner. As a result, the non-GAAP financial measure presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
This non-GAAP financial measure should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is not a financial measure determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We define adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, income tax provision (benefit), depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation and certain other items that we do not view as indicative of our ongoing performance, including fair value changes in contingent consideration, fair value changes in warrants and management fees, inventory write-down, corporate conversion and IPO related costs, Paycheck Protection Program Loan forgiveness, SkyWater Florida start-up costs, net income attributable to non-controlling interests, and management transition expense.
We believe adjusted EBITDA is a useful performance measure because it allows for an effective evaluation of our operating performance when compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income in arriving at adjusted EBITDA because these amounts can vary substantially within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain items excluded from adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that our results will be unaffected by the items excluded from adjusted EBITDA. In future fiscal periods, we may exclude such items and may incur income and expenses similar to these excluded items. Accordingly, the exclusion of these items and other similar items in our non-GAAP presentation should not be interpreted as implying that these items are non-recurring, infrequent or unusual, unless otherwise expressly indicated.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA, our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
__________________
(1)Represents a full write-down for inventory which we were contracted to manufacture for a specific customer. See Note 16 - Inventory Write-down in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(2)Represents expenses directly associated with the corporate conversion and IPO, such as professional, consulting, legal and accounting services. This also includes bonus awards granted to employees upon the completion of the IPO. These expenses are not indicative of our ongoing costs and were discontinued following the completion of our initial public offering.
(3)Represents start-up costs associated with our 200 mm advanced packaging facility in Kissimmee, Florida, which includes legal fees, recruiting expenses, retention awards and facility start-up expenses. These expenses are not indicative of our ongoing costs and will be discontinued following completion of the start-up of SkyWater Florida.
(4)Represents expense for the departure of our former Chief Administrative Officer, which includes primarily severance benefits.
(5)Represents non-cash valuation adjustment of contingent consideration to fair market value during the period.
(6)Represents non-cash equity-based compensation expense.
(7)Represents non-cash valuation adjustment of warrants to fair market value during the period.
(8)Represents a related party transaction with Oxbow, our principal stockholder. As these fees are not part of the core business, will not continue after our IPO and are excluded from management’s assessment of the business, we believe it is useful to investors to view our results excluding these fees.
(9)Represents net income attributable to our VIE, which was formed for the purpose of purchasing our land and building with the proceeds of a bank loan. Since depreciation and interest expense are excluded from net loss in our adjusted EBITDA financial measure, we also exclude the net income attributable to the VIE.