ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, strategy, expectations, outlook, intentions and projections. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We have a series of advanced-safe-smart platform technologies. Our first-generation technologies enable light fixtures, ceiling fans and other electrically wired products to be installed safely and plugged-in into a ceiling’s electrical outlet box within seconds, and without the need to touch hazardous wires. The plug and play technology method is a universal power-plug device that has a matching receptacle that is simply connected to the electrical outlet box on the ceiling, enabling a safe and quick plug and play installation of light fixtures and ceiling fans in just seconds. The plug and play power-plug technology eliminates the need of touching hazardous electrical wires while installing light fixtures, ceiling fans and other hard wired electrical products. In recent years, we have expanded the capabilities of our power-plug product to include advanced safe and quick universal installation methods, as well as advanced smart capabilities. The smart features include control of light fixtures and ceiling fans by the SkyHome App, through WIFI, BLE and voice control. It allows scheduling, energy savings eco mode, dimming, back-up emergency light, night light, light color changing and much more. Our second-generation technology is an all-in-one safe and smart advanced platform that is designed to enhance all-around safety and lifestyle of homes and other buildings. Our products are designed to improve all around home and building safety and lifestyle. While we have developed and created working prototypes of our advanced and smart products, we are continuing to refine the product prototypes and expect to begin commercial manufacturing and marketing in the first half of 2022 for the advanced products and the smart universal power-plug, ceiling fans and lighting products and the second half of 2022 for the Smart Sky Platform. We hold over 60 U.S. and global patents and patent applications and have received a variety of final electrical code approvals, including UL, United Laboratories of Canada (cUL) and Conformité Européenne (CE), and 2017 and 2020 inclusion in the NEC Code Book.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption in the international and United States economies and financial markets. We have been following the recommendations of local health authorities to minimize exposure risk for our employees, including the temporary closures of our offices and having employees work remotely to the extent possible, which has to an extent adversely affected their efficiency. In addition, the cancellation of in-person meetings and conferences has had an adverse impact on our business and financial condition and has hampered our ability to meet with customers to promote products, generate revenue and access usual sources of liquidity on reasonable terms, which in turn has negatively impacted our financial performance. As the situation continues to evolve, we will continue to closely monitor market conditions and respond accordingly.
In March 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. Among other things, the CARES Act established the PPP, which funded eligible businesses through federally guaranteed loans. Under the PPP, companies are eligible for forgiveness of principal and accrued interest if the proceeds are used for eligible costs, which include, but are not limited to, payroll, benefits, mortgage, lease, and utility expenses. We have applied for and received certain financial assistance under the CARES Act, as described further below.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
NM: Not meaningful
Revenue
The decrease in revenues was directly related to the planned reduction of discontinued inventory as we continued to shift our focus to the development of our new patented “Smart” platforms and technologies. During 2021 and 2020, we opted to sell through our existing inventory of discontinued products to facilitate our planned transition into our new patented product lines.
Cost of Revenues
The reduction in cost of revenues was related to the decrease in sales, which resulted from our decision to discontinue our old products and transition to our patented “Smart” platforms and technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of an allocation of product development, sales, finance, legal, human resources, including salaries, wages, and benefits, and depreciation and amortization, including non-cash equity-based compensation
The decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses during 2021 when compared to the prior period was primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation of $3.6 million during 2021. The decrease in stock-based compensation during 2021 was primarily due to fewer options and shares of common stock granted during 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
The increase in interest expense in 2021 when compared to the prior period was primarily due to higher weighted-average interest-bearing obligations during 2021, resulting from the compounding of accrued interest.
The decrease in other income loan forgiveness during 2021 when compared to 2020 was primarily due to a non-recurring forgiveness of a PPP loan during 2020, which did not occur during 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $10,426,249 and $2,308,871 in cash and cash equivalents, respectively. As we develop our revenue base, we have raised additional funds through the sale of our common stock and issuance of debt, including completing our initial public offering in February 2022 for gross proceeds of $23.1 million. We believe that our sources of liquidity and capital will be sufficient to finance our continued operations for at least the next 12 months. Our debt previously included a $10,000,000 secured loan, arranged in April 2016 pursuant to a promissory note between us and NBG, to support our working capital needs. As of December 31, 2020, we had $5,458,642 outstanding under the note (exclusive of interest). On December 14, 2021, we entered into a new secured promissory note with NBG, in the amount of approximately $5.9 million, which amended and replaced the April 2016 promissory note. The unpaid principal accrues interest at the Wall Street Journal prime rate plus 1.75% per year. The amended note will mature sixty months following the date of issuance. The Company agreed to make the following payments to NBG: on the date of issuance, $243,000; on December 30, 2021, an amount equal to all accrued and unpaid interest as of such date, plus $100,000; and on each of July 1, 2022, December 30, 2022, July 1, 2023 and December 30, 2023, an installment payment in an amount equal to all accrued and unpaid interest as of the respective date, plus $200,000. Commencing January 15, 2024, the Company will begin paying equal monthly installments of $144,176 in principal, plus all accrued and unpaid interest as of the payment date. The Company may prepay the amounts due under the amended note at any time and from time to time. The note contains customary events of default and, in the event that an event of default occurs, the amended note and all accrued interest will become immediately due and payable. The amended note is secured by the existing pledge and security agreement and by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the Company’s assets.
In addition, we have agreed to pay GE certain minimum royalty payments under the License Agreement. In December 2020, we agreed to pay a total of approximately $5.1 million to GE in quarterly installments through December 2023. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of such royalty payments was approximately $3.8 million.
The following is a summary of our cash balances and cash flows as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Fiscal
During 2021, we used $4.6 million in our operating activities, which consisted of our net loss of $5.7 million adjusted for non-cash equity compensation of $1.5 million and a decrease of accounts payable and other obligations of approximately $600,000. We also incurred approximately $179,000 in payments related to our patents pursuant to our investing activities. There were no changes to our inventory carrying values at December 31, 2021 when compared to the prior year measurement date. Our inventory consists primarily of analog components that we intend to use in the manufacturing of our products upon launch in 2022.
We generated $12.9 million in financing activities, of which $13.2 million was generated from the issuance of our shares of common stock and approximately $178,000 from the issuance of a note payable pursuant to the PPP, offset by principal repayments of a note payable of $343,000.
Fiscal
During 2020, we used $3.1 million in our operating activities, which consisted of our net loss of $9.2 million adjusted for non-cash equity compensation of $5.1 million, as well as a decrease in accounts receivable and inventory of approximately $418,000 and $325,000, respectively, and an increase of accounts payable and other obligations of approximately $376,000.
We also incurred approximately $95,000 in payments related to our patents pursuant to our investing activities.
We generated $3.7 million in financing activities, of which $2.1 million and $1.3 million were generated from the issuance of our shares of common stock and convertible notes, respectively, and approximately $280,000 from the issuance of a note payable pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program.
Working capital
We had working capital of $8,751,934 as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $1,018,361 as of December 31, 2020. Working capital improved by approximately $7.7 million, which was primarily attributable to an increase in cash proceeds from stock issuances, which was offset, in part, by an increase in accrued expenses and the current portion of notes payable.
A majority of our sales do not require us to take delivery of inventory. Production of the Sky technology and products will be originated upon receipt of FOB (free on board) purchase contracts from customers. Upon the completion of each purchase contract, the finished products will be transported from the manufacturer directly to the ports and loaded on vessels secured by the customer, upon which the products become the property of the customer. Our sales were impacted during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as we executed the liquidation of discontinued inventory as we continued the development of our new patented “Smart” platforms and technologies.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”), management uses adjusted net income (loss) to evaluate operating and financial performance and believes the measure is useful to investors because it eliminates the impact of certain noncash and/or other items that management does not consider to be indicative of our performance from period to period. Management also believes this non-GAAP measure is useful to investors to evaluate and compare our operating and financial performance across periods, as well as facilitating comparisons to others in our industry, although other companies may calculate this non-GAAP measure differently, which may limit the usefulness of this measures for comparative purposes.
We use the non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA, which is defined as net income (loss), plus interest income; interest expense; depreciation and amortization; unrealized derivative gains and losses; non-recurring income and expenses; and stock-based compensation expense. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in Adjusted EBITDA.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements and are subject to inherent limitations. Investors should review the reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the comparable GAAP financial measures that are included below. Investors should not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented:
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Future Impact of COVID-19
The negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on companies continues and we are currently unable to assess with certainty the broad effects of COVID-19 on our future business. As of December 31, 2021, we had no material assets that would be subject to impairment or change in valuation due to COVID-19.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. The following is a summary of those accounting policies that involve significant estimates and judgment of management.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes.
Such estimates and assumptions impact both assets and liabilities, including but not limited to: net realizable value of accounts receivable and inventory, estimated useful lives and potential impairment of property and equipment, the valuation of intangible assets, estimate of fair value of share based payments and derivative liabilities, estimates of fair value of warrants issued and recorded as debt discount, estimates of tax liabilities and estimates of the probability and potential magnitude of contingent liabilities.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate could change in the near term due to one or more future non-conforming events. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Disclosures about fair value of financial instruments require disclosure of the fair value information, whether or not recognized in the balance sheet, where it is practicable to estimate that value. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we believe the amounts reported for cash, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accounts payable - related party, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, accrued interest, notes payable and convertible note payable approximate fair value because of their short maturities.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. ASC Topic 820 established a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation-Stock Compensation”, which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee, non-employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award granted using the Black- Scholes option pricing model based on projections of various potential future outcomes and recognized over the period in which the award vests. For stock awards no longer expected to vest, any previously recognized stock compensation expense is reversed in the period of termination. The stock-based compensation expense is included in general and administrative expenses.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenues in accordance with Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (Topic 606).
Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
● identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
● identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
● determination of the transaction price;
● allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Although there are several new accounting pronouncements issued or proposed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which we have adopted or will adopt, as applicable, we do not believe any of these accounting pronouncements has had or will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
See the notes to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for additional discussion regarding recent accounting pronouncements.