ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with Item 6. Selected Financial Data, the description of the business appearing in Item 1. Business and the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements, as discussed under "Forward-Looking Statements". These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly under "Forward-Looking Statements" and in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA and segment contribution margin as used herein are non-GAAP measures. For a detailed description of Adjusted EBITDA and segment contribution margin and reconciliations to their most comparable GAAP measures, please see the discussion below under “How We Evaluate Our Business.”
Overview
We are a global performance materials company and a leading producer of commercial silica used in the oil and gas industry and in a wide range of industrial applications. In addition, through our subsidiary EP Minerals, LLC ("EPM") we are an industry leader in the production of industrial minerals, including diatomaceous earth, clay (calcium bentonite and calcium montmorillonite), and perlite.
During our 122-year history, we have developed core competencies in mining, processing, logistics and materials science that enable us to produce and cost-effectively deliver over 600 diversified product types to customers across our end markets. As of December 31, 2021, we operated 24 production facilities across the United States. We control 487 million tons of reserves of commercial silica, which can be processed to make 194 million tons of finished products that meet API frac sand specifications, and 82 million tons of reserves of diatomaceous earth, perlite, and clays.
Our operations are organized into two reportable segments based on end markets served and the manner in which we analyze our operating and financial performance: (1) Oil & Gas Proppants and (2) Industrial & Specialty Products. We believe our segments are complementary because our ability to sell to a wide range of customers across end markets in these segments allows us to maximize recovery rates in our mining operations and optimize our asset utilization.
Acquisitions
For a description of our key business acquisitions during the past three years, see the discussion under Note E - Business Combinations to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Trends and Outlook
Oil and gas proppants end market trends
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions coupled with an inadequate supply response and exacerbated by the lack of global storage capacity, resulted in a precipitous decline in crude oil prices. In response to the effects of the pandemic on our Oil & Gas Proppants segment, we took a number of steps to reduce our costs of operations. We dramatically reduced all discretionary spending, reduced officer salaries for several months, lowered headcount, and closed or idled facilities as appropriate.
These events negatively affected, and could continue to negatively affect, our Oil & Gas Proppants segment in the future. The extent to which our business will continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on various factors and consequences beyond our control, including the possibility of a resurgence in cases or new variants to the virus, the rate and effectiveness of vaccinations, additional actions by businesses and governments in response to the pandemic, and consumer sentiment and its effect on oil prices on the global economy generally. In addition, our operations and those of our customers have been negatively affected by global logistical and supply chain constraints related to the pandemic. While we believe these conditions are temporary, prolonged constraints or increased costs related to the transportation of goods could have a material
effect on our results of operations. These factors could also aggravate the risk factors identified in Part I, Item IA. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, vaccinations have become more prevalent and businesses are continuing to re-open.
During the three months ended December 31, 2021, frac sand demand, average selling price and tons sold increased sequentially compared to the three months ended September 30, 2021, as summarized below. Sales decreased by 27% or $51.5 million in our Oil & Gas Proppants segment during the three months ended September 30, 2021 compared to the three months ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to shortfall fees recognized in the second quarter which did not recur. Sales increased by 59% or $71.6 million during the three months ended June 30, 2021 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2021 primarily due to approximately $49.0 million of shortfall fees recognized.
If oil and gas drilling and completion activity does not grow, or if frac sand supply remains greater than demand, then we may sell fewer tons, sell tons at lower prices, or both. If we sell less frac sand or sell frac sand at lower prices, our revenue, net income, cash generated from operating activities, and liquidity would be adversely affected, and we could incur material asset impairments. If these events occur, we may evaluate actions to reduce costs and improve liquidity.
Industrial and specialty products end market trends
Demand in the industrial and specialty products end markets has been relatively stable in recent years and is primarily influenced by key macroeconomic drivers such as housing starts, population growth, light vehicle sales, beer and wine production, repair and remodel activity and industrial production. The primary end markets served by our Industrial & Specialty Products segment are building and construction products, fillers and extenders, filtration, glassmaking, absorbents, foundry, and sports and recreation. We have been increasing our value-added product offerings in the industrial and specialty products end markets organically as well as through acquisitions, such as White Armor and EPM. Additionally, we have increased our focus on the alternative energy markets and products necessary for the supply chains of solar panels, green diesel and wind turbines. Sales of these new higher margin products have increased our Industrial & Specialty Products segment's profitability.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused severe economic, market and other disruptions worldwide, which began to affect our Industrial & Specialty Products segment in the second quarter of 2020. After the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts in this segment as a result of any long-term impacts resulting from the pandemic in the relevant markets.
Review of Strategic Alternatives
On October 6, 2021, we announced that we had initiated a review of strategic alternatives for our Industrial & Specialty Products ("ISP") segment to maximize value for shareholders and other stakeholders. We stated that a "range of options are under consideration, including a potential sale or separation of the ISP segment." There can be no assurance the review of strategic alternatives will result in any transaction, and the process of exploring strategic alternatives will involve the dedication of significant resources and the incurrence of significant costs and expenses.
Our Business Strategy
The key drivers of our strategy include:
•increasing our presence and product offerings in specialty products end markets;
•optimizing our product mix and further developing value-added capabilities to maximize margins;
•effectively positioning our Oil & Gas Proppants facilities to optimally serve our customers;
•optimizing our supply chain network and leveraging our logistics capabilities to meet our customers’ needs;
•evaluating both Greenfield and Brownfield expansion opportunities and other acquisitions;
•maintaining financial strength and flexibility; and
•pursuing strategic alternatives including, but not limited to, a sale or separation of the ISP business.
For additional information about our key business strategies, see the discussion under “Our Company-Our Business Strategy” in Item 1. Business of this Annual Report on Form 10-K..
How We Generate Our Sales
Products
We derive our product sales by mining and processing minerals that our customers purchase for various uses. Our product sales are primarily a function of the price per ton and the number of tons sold. We primarily sell our products through individual purchase orders executed under short-term price agreements or at prevailing market rates. The amount invoiced reflects the price of the product, transportation, surcharges, and additional handling services as applicable, such as storage, transloading the product from railcars to trucks and last mile logistics to the customer site. We invoice most of our product customers on a per shipment basis, although for some larger customers, we consolidate invoices weekly or monthly. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Services
We derive our service sales primarily through the provision of transportation, equipment rental, and contract labor services to companies in the oil and gas industry. Transportation services typically consist of transporting customer proppant from storage facilities to proximal well-sites and are contracted through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amount invoiced reflects transportation services rendered. Equipment rental services provide customers with use of either dedicated or nonspecific wellhead proppant delivery equipment solutions for contractual periods defined either through formal lease agreements or executed work orders under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the length of time the equipment set was utilized in the billing period. Contract labor services provide customers with proppant delivery equipment operators through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the amount of time our labor services were utilized in the billing period. We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Our ten largest customers accounted for approximately 40%, 34% and 43% of total sales during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total sales during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Sales to one of our customers accounted for 11% of our total sales during the year ended December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2021, none of our customers' accounts receivable represented 10% or more of our total trade accounts receivable. At December 31, 2020, one of our customer's accounts receivable represented 24% of our total trade accounts receivable.
For a limited number of customers, we sell under long-term, minimum purchase supply agreements. These agreements define, among other commitments, the volume of product that our customers must purchase, the volume of product that we must provide, and the price that we will charge and that our customers will pay for each product. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to certain contractual adjustments. Sometimes these agreements may undergo negotiations regarding pricing and volume requirements, particularly in volatile market conditions. When these negotiations occur, we may deliver sand at prices or at volumes below the requirements in our existing supply agreements. We do not consider these agreements solely representative of contracts with customers. An executed order specifying the type and quantity of product to be delivered, in combination with the noted agreements, comprise our contracts in these arrangements. Selling more tons under supply contracts enables us to be more efficient from a production, supply chain, and logistics standpoint. As discussed in Part I, Item 1A., Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, these customers may not continue to purchase the same levels of product in the future due to a variety of reasons, contract requirements notwithstanding.
As of December 31, 2021, we have eight minimum purchase supply agreements in the Oil & Gas Proppants segment with initial terms expiring between 2022 and 2034. As of December 31, 2020, we had 11 minimum purchase supply agreements in the Oil & Gas Proppants segment with initial terms expiring between 2021 and 2034. Collectively, sales to customers with minimum purchase supply agreements accounted for 38% and 61% of Oil & Gas Proppants segment sales during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In the industrial and specialty products end markets we have not historically entered into long-term minimum purchase supply agreements with our customers because of the high cost to our customers of switching providers. We may periodically
do so when capital or other investment is required to meet customer needs. Instead, we often enter into supply agreements with our customers with targeted volumes and terms of one to five years. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to annual increases.
The Costs of Conducting Our Business
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business are transportation costs, labor costs, electricity and drying fuel costs, and maintenance and repair costs for our mining and processing equipment and facilities. Transportation and related costs include freight charges, fuel surcharges, transloading fees, switching fees, railcar lease costs, demurrage costs, storage fees and labor costs. Our operating costs can vary significantly based on the volume of product produced and current economic conditions. We benefit from owning the majority of the mineral deposits that we mine and having long-term mineral rights leases or supply agreements for our other primary sources of raw material, which limits royalty payments.
Additionally, we incur expenses related to our corporate operations, including costs for sales and marketing; research and development; and the finance, legal, human resources, information technology, and environmental, health and safety functions of our organization. These costs are principally driven by personnel expenses.
How We Evaluate Our Business
Our management team evaluates our business using a variety of financial and operating metrics. We evaluate the performance of our two segments based on their tons sold, average selling price and contribution margin earned. Additionally, we consider a number of factors in evaluating the performance of our business as a whole, including total tons sold, average selling price, total segment contribution margin, and Adjusted EBITDA. We view these metrics as important factors in evaluating our profitability and review these measurements frequently to analyze trends and make decisions, and we believe the presentation of these metrics provides useful information to our investors regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the same reasons.
Segment Contribution Margin
Segment contribution margin, a non-GAAP measure, is a key metric that management uses to evaluate our operating performance and to determine resource allocation between segments. Segment contribution margin excludes selling, general, and administrative costs, corporate costs, plant capacity expansion expenses, and facility closure costs.
Segment contribution margin is not a measure of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered an alternative measure or superior to measures derived in accordance with GAAP. Our measure of segment contribution margin is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the methods of calculation. For more information about segment contribution margin, including a reconciliation of this measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net income (loss), see Note U - Segment Reporting to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, is included in this report because it is a key metric used by management to assess our operating performance and by our lenders to evaluate our covenant compliance. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain income and/or costs, the removal of which improves comparability of operating results across reporting periods. Our target performance goals under our incentive compensation plan are tied, in part, to our Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of our financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative or superior to net income (loss) as a measure of operating performance, cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of free cash flow for management’s discretionary use, as it does not consider certain cash requirements such as interest payments, tax payments and debt service requirements. Adjusted EBITDA contains certain other limitations, including the failure to reflect our cash expenditures, cash requirements for working capital needs and cash costs to replace assets being depreciated and amortized, and excludes certain charges that may recur in the future. Management compensates for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and by using Adjusted EBITDA only supplementally. Our measure of Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to potential inconsistencies in the methods of calculation.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA.
(1)
Reflects equity-based, non-cash compensation expense.
(2)
Includes net pension cost and net post-retirement cost relating to pension and other post-retirement benefit obligations during the applicable period, but in each case excluding the service cost relating to benefits earned during such period. Non-service net periodic benefit costs are not considered reflective of our operating performance because these costs do not exclusively originate from employee services during the applicable period and may experience periodic fluctuations as a result of changes in non-operating factors, including changes in discount rates, changes in expected returns on benefit plan assets, and other demographic actuarial assumptions. See Note P - Pension and Post-Retirement Benefits to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
(3)
Merger and acquisition related expenses include legal fees, consulting fees, bank fees, severance costs, purchase-related costs such as the amortization of inventory fair value step-up, information technology integration costs and similar charges. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular transaction on an ongoing basis, similar types of costs, expenses and charges have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future as we continue to integrate prior acquisitions and pursue any future acquisitions.
(4)
Plant capacity expansion expenses include expenses that are not inventoriable or capitalizable as related to plant expansion projects greater than $5 million in capital expenditures or plant start up projects. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular project on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future.
(5)
Reflects contract termination expenses related to strategically exiting service contracts. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future as we continue to strategically evaluate our contracts.
(6)
See Note W - Impairments to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. While these expenses are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses have occurred in prior periods and may recur in the future.
(7)
Reflects costs incurred related to business optimization projects mainly within our corporate center, which aim to measure and improve the efficiency, productivity and performance of our organization. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular project on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses may recur in the future.
(8)
Reflects costs incurred mainly related to idled sand facilities and closed corporate offices, including severance costs and remaining contracted costs such as office lease costs, and common area maintenance fees. While these costs are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis, similar types of expenses may recur in the future.
(9)
Gains on valuation change of royalty note payable due to a change in estimate of future tonnages and sales related to the sand shipped from our Tyler, Texas facility. These gains are not operational in nature and are not expected to continue for any singular event on an ongoing basis. See Note K - Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(10)
Reflects miscellaneous adjustments permitted under the Credit Agreement. For 2021, included $3.4 million of transload shortfall and exit fees, $2.1 million related to expenses incurred with severe winter storms during the first quarter, $0.7 million of costs related to a power interruption at a plant location, partially offset by $0.1 million for a measurement period adjustment related to the Arrows Up bargain purchase. For 2020, included $1.6 million in transload shortfalls and exit fees, $4.6 million in inventory adjustments, $6.0 million in severance costs, and $11.8 million in legal expense due to the unsuccessful defense of a small number of our patents, offset by $15.2 million related to the gain attributable to the bargain purchase of Arrows Up. For 2019, included $6.2 million of loss contingencies reserve as well as restructuring costs for actions that will provide future savings, storm damage costs, recruiting fees, relocation costs and a loss on sale of assets, partially offset by insurance proceeds of $2.2 million.
Adjusted EBITDA-Trailing Twelve Months
Our Revolver contains a covenant that we maintain a consolidated total net leverage ratio of no more than 3.75:1.00 that, unless we have the consent of our lenders, we must meet as of the last day of any fiscal quarter whenever usage of the Revolver (other than certain undrawn letters of credit) exceeds 30% of the Revolver commitment. This ratio is calculated based on our Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve months. Noncompliance with this financial ratio covenant could result in the acceleration of our obligations to repay all amounts outstanding under the Revolver and the term loan (the "Term Loan") (collectively the "Credit Facility"). Moreover, the Revolver and the Term Loan contain covenants that restrict, subject to certain exceptions, our ability to make permitted acquisitions, incur additional indebtedness, make restricted payments (including dividends) and retain excess cash flow based, in some cases, on our ability to meet leverage ratios calculated based on our Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve months.
See the description under “Adjusted EBITDA” above for certain important information about Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months, including certain limitations and management’s use of this metric in light of its status as a non-GAAP measure.
As of December 31, 2021, we are in compliance with all covenants under our Credit Facility, and our Revolver usage was zero (other than certain undrawn letters of credit). Since the Revolver usage did not exceed 30% of the Revolver commitment, the consolidated leverage ratio covenant did not apply. Based on our consolidated leverage ratio of 5.41:1.00 as of December 31, 2021, we may draw up to $30.0 million without the consent of our lenders. With the consent of our lenders, we have access to the full availability of the Revolver. The calculation of the consolidated leverage ratio incorporates the Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months as follows:
(1)
Covenant calculation allows for the Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months to include the impact of acquisitions on a pro forma basis.
(2)
Covenant calculation excludes activity at legal entities above the operating company, which is mainly interest income offset by public company operating expenses.
(3)
Calculated by dividing Total consolidated debt by Total Adjusted EBITDA-trailing twelve months for covenant calculation.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Sales
Total sales increased 30% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a 42% increase in total tons sold, partially offset by an 8% decrease in overall average selling price.
The increase in total sales was mainly driven by Oil & Gas Proppants sales, which increased 48% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Oil & Gas Proppants average selling price decreased 4% and tons sold increased 55%. This overall increase is due to overall improved economic conditions in addition to recognition of approximately $49.0 million of shortfall fees during the second quarter.
The increase in total sales was also partially driven by Industrial & Specialty Products sales, which increased 13% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Industrial & Specialty Products average selling price decreased 3% and tons sold increased 16%. The overall increase is due to overall improved economic conditions.
Cost of Sales (excluding depreciation, depletion and amortization)
Cost of sales increased by $219.9 million, or 38%, to $795.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $575.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These changes result from the main components of cost of sales as discussed below. As a percentage of sales, cost of sales represented 72% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 68% for the same period in 2020.
We incurred $351.6 million and $191.0 million of transportation and related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was mainly due to increased volumes, increased carrier costs for SandBox and increased rail car and barge rates. As a percentage of sales, transportation and related costs increased to 32% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 23% for the same period in 2020.
We incurred $148.0 million and $117.3 million of operating labor costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $30.7 million increase in labor costs incurred was mainly due to increased headcount to support increased production and cost of living and merit increases. As a percentage of sales, operating labor costs represented 13% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 14% for the same period in 2020.
We incurred $56.2 million and $33.6 million of electricity and drying fuel (principally natural gas) costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $22.6 million increase in electricity and drying fuel costs incurred was
mainly due to increased volumes produced and increased natural gas prices. As a percentage of sales, electricity and drying fuel costs represented 5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 4% for the same period in 2020.
We incurred $66.0 million and $46.3 million of maintenance and repair costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in maintenance and repair costs incurred was mainly due to an increase in maintenance projects as production increased. As a percentage of sales, maintenance and repair costs represented 6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 5% for the same period in 2020.
Segment Contribution Margin
Oil & Gas Proppants contribution margin increased by $18.1 million to $160.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $142.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a $200.6 million increase in sales, partially offset by $182.5 million in increased cost of sales. The increase in segment contribution margin was mainly driven by increased production, overall improved economic conditions, and recognition of shortfall fees.
Industrial & Specialty Products contribution margin increased by $9.3 million, or 6%, to $168.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $159.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a $57.4 million increase in revenue, partially offset by $48.1 million in increased cost of sales. The increase in segment contribution margin was due to overall improved economic conditions.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $4.6 million, or 4%, to $119.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $124.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to $11.8 million of capitalized legal fees expensed during 2020, which did not recur during 2021, partially offset by increased stock compensation and other legal fees. In total, our selling, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 11% and 15% of our sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased by $5.5 million, or 4%, to $161.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $155.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was mainly driven by accelerated depreciation of certain assets offset by reduced capital spending. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense represented approximately 15% and 18% of our sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill and Other Asset Impairments
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $0.2 million in asset impairments. During 2020, we recorded $110.7 million, which primarily related to our Oil & Gas Proppants segment due to an unprecedented drop in global demand combined with the breakdown of the OPEC+ agreement to restrict oil production that led to one of the largest annual crude builds in history, which also led to a sharp reduction in global crude oil prices. Additionally, containment measures and other economic, travel, and business disruptions caused by COVID-19 also affected refinery activity and future demand for crude oil, and consequently, the services and products of our Oil & Gas Proppants segment.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income was $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an operating loss of $119.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by a 30% increase in total sales, a 4% decrease in selling, general and administrative expense, and a 100% decrease in asset impairments, offset by a 4% increase in depreciation, depletion and amortization expense and a 38% increase in cost of sales.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $8.7 million, or 11%, to $71.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly due to expiration of the derivatives and a decrease in interest expense due to payoff of the Revolver balance.
Other Income (Expense), net, including interest income
Other income decreased by $18.3 million to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $24.4 million in other income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year ended December 31, 2020 included a gain attributable
to the bargain purchase of a business of $15.2 million and a gain on the valuation change of a royalty note payable of $8.3 million which did not recur in 2021, offset by an adjustment in non-service pension costs in 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax benefits decreased by $57.2 million to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $60.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was mainly due to the decreased loss before income tax during the year ended December 31, 2021. The effective tax rates were 7% and 34% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note R - Income Taxes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual report on Form 10-K for more information.
Historically, our actual effective tax rates have differed from the statutory effective rate primarily due to the benefit received from statutory percentage depletion allowances. The deduction for statutory percentage depletion does not necessarily change proportionately to changes in income before income taxes. However, for the year ended 2020, we recorded a permanent tax benefit of $22.3 million related to tax legislation enacted during 2020, which represents the largest permanent item in computing our effective tax rate for 2020.
Net (loss) income
Net losses attributable to U.S. Silica Holdings, Inc., were $33.8 million and $114.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year over year changes were due to the factors noted above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Liquidity and Capital Resources” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which is incorporated by reference herein.
Overview
Our principal liquidity requirements have historically been to service our debt, to meet our working capital, capital expenditure and mine development expenditure needs, to return cash to our stockholders, and to pay for acquisitions. We have historically met our liquidity and capital investment needs with funds generated through operations. We have historically funded our acquisitions through cash on hand, borrowings under our credit facilities, or equity issuances. Our working capital is the amount by which current assets exceed current liabilities and is a measure of our ability to pay our liabilities as they become due. As of December 31, 2021, our working capital was $370.0 million and we had $77.8 million of availability under the Revolver. Based on our consolidated leverage ratio of 5.41:1.00 as of December 31, 2021, we may draw up to $30.0 million without the consent of our lenders. With the consent of our lenders, we have access to the full availability of the Revolver. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, other receivables included $21.5 million of refunds related to NOL carryback claims filed for various tax years in accordance with certain provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES" Act), which we expect to receive during 2022.
In connection with the EPM acquisition, on May 1, 2018, we entered into the Credit Agreement with BNP Paribas, as administrative agent, and the lenders named therein. The Credit Agreement increased our existing senior debt by creating a new $1.380 billion senior secured Credit Facility, consisting of a $1.280 billion Term Loan and a $100 million Revolver that may also be used for swingline loans or letters of credit, and we may elect to increase the Term Loan in accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement. The amounts owed under the Credit Agreement use LIBOR as a benchmark for establishing the rate at which interest accrues. LIBOR is the subject of recent national, international and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. These reforms and other pressures may cause LIBOR to disappear entirely or to perform differently than in the past. The consequences of these developments cannot be entirely predicted but could include an increase in the cost to us of this indebtedness.
Management and our Board remain committed to evaluating additional ways of creating shareholder value. Any determination to pay dividends or other distributions in cash, stock, or property in the future or otherwise return capital to our stockholders, including decisions about existing or new share repurchase programs, will be at the discretion of our Board and will be dependent on then-existing conditions, including industry and market conditions, our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital requirements, contractual restrictions including restrictive covenants contained in debt agreements, and other factors. Additionally, because we are a holding company, our ability to pay dividends on our common stock may be limited by restrictions on the ability of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or make distributions to us, including restrictions under the terms of the agreements governing our indebtedness. During 2020, our Board of Directors determined that it was not in the best interest of our shareholders to issue a dividend subsequent to the second quarter and for the remainder of the year. We do not have plans to resume issuing dividends in the near term.
Net Debt (non-GAAP measure)
Net debt is a non-GAAP measure and is included in this report because we believe net debt is meaningful to investors as we consider net debt and its components to be important indicators of liquidity and financial position. Net debt may not be computed the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. We define net debt as total debt less cash and cash equivalents. Net debt should not be considered as an alternative or superior to other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP. The following table provides net debt (in thousands):
Total Debt:
Total debt was $1.21 billion and $1.24 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the payoff of the Revolver balance and principal payments of the Term Loan, offset partially by increases in insurance financing notes payable and finance leases.
Cash and Cash Equivalents:
Cash and cash equivalents were $239.4 million and $150.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to receipt of $90 million during the second and third quarters of 2021 related to the settlement of a customer dispute.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands) is shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided by / Used in Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash and working capital items. Adjustments to net income for non-cash items include depreciation, depletion and amortization, deferred revenue, deferred income taxes, equity-based compensation and allowance for credit losses. In addition, operating cash flows include the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities, principally accounts receivable, inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, income taxes payable and receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $169.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to a $34.3 million net loss adjusted for non-cash items, including $161.1 million in depreciation, depletion and amortization, $0.2 million in goodwill and other asset impairments, $7.5 million in deferred income taxes, $18.8 million in equity-based compensation, $18.2 million in deferred revenue, $0.1 million related to the gain on sales of property, plant and equipment, and $34.3 million in other miscellaneous non-cash items. Also contributing to the change was a $5.0 million decrease in accounts receivable, an $11.0 million increase in inventories, a $12.4 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $1.8 million decrease in income taxes, a $48.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, a $24.5 million increase in operating lease liabilities, and $17.4 million in other operating assets and liabilities.
Net Cash Used in / Provided by Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of cash consideration paid to acquire businesses and capital expenditures for growth and maintenance.
Net cash used in investing activities was $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to capital expenditures of $30.3 million and capitalized intellectual property costs of $0.2 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $0.7 million. Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily related to improvements and expansions at our industrial facility in Millen, Georgia, equipment associated with new aggregate production, facility improvement and maintenance projects, and other environmental and health and safety projects.
Subject to our continuing evaluation of market conditions, we anticipate that our capital expenditures in 2022 will be in the range of approximately $40 million to $60 million, which is primarily associated with maintenance, cost improvement capital projects and various growth projects. We expect to fund our capital expenditures through cash on our balance sheet, cash generated from our operations and cash generated from financing activities.
Net Cash Used in / Provided by Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of equity issuances, dividend payments, share repurchases, borrowings and repayments related to the Revolver and Term Loan, as well as fees and expenses paid in connection with our credit facilities.
Net cash used in financing activities was $51.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was mainly due to a $25.0 million payoff of our Revolver, $12.8 million of long-term debt payments, $6.4 million of short term debt payments, $5.0 million of tax payments related to shares withheld for vested restricted stock and stock units, and a $1.1 million distribution to a non-controlling interest.
Share Repurchase Program
We did not make any repurchases of our common stock under our stock repurchase program in 2021. See Purchase of Equity Securities by the Issuer in Part II, Item 5. to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to our share repurchase program.
Credit Facilities
See Note K - Debt to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to our credit facilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a current material effect or are reasonably likely to have a future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, the total of our future contractual cash commitments, including the repayment of our debt obligations under the Term Loan, is summarized as follows:
(1)Excludes the unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discount.
(2)Includes estimated future minimum purchase obligations related to transload service agreements and transportation service agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we accrued $0.5 million in shortfall fees under these service agreements.
(3)The above table excludes discounted asset retirement obligations in the amount of $32.0 million at December 31, 2021, the majority of which have a settlement date beyond 2026, as well as indemnification for surety bonds issued on our behalf discussed in Note O - Commitments and Contingencies to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)Estimated interest payment amounts are computed using forecasted three-month LIBOR rates as of December 31, 2021.
(5)Includes interest and other operating costs. See Note Q - Leases to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on interest costs.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations governing, among other things, hazardous materials, air and water emissions, environmental contamination and reclamation and the protection of the environment and natural resources. We have made, and expect to make in the future, expenditures to comply with such laws and regulations, but we cannot estimate or predict the full amount of such future expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, we had $32.0 million accrued for future reclamation costs, as compared to $24.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
We discuss certain environmental matters relating to our various production and other facilities, certain regulatory requirements relating to human exposure to crystalline silica and our mining activity and how such matters may affect our business in the future under Item 1. Business, Item 1A. Risk Factors and Item 3. Legal Proceedings of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and base our estimates on historical experience, current conditions and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities as well as identifying and assessing the accounting treatment with respect to commitments and contingencies. Our actual results may materially differ from these estimates.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note B - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables us to provide the users of the Consolidated Financial Statements with useful and reliable information about our operating results and financial condition.
Described below are the accounting policies we believe are critical to our financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates or assumptions involved, and that we believe are critical to the understanding of our operations and our performance.
Revenue Recognition
Products
We derive our product sales by mining and processing minerals that our customers purchase for various uses. Our product sales are primarily a function of the price per ton and the number of tons sold. We primarily sell our products through individual purchase orders executed under short-term price agreements or at prevailing market rates. The amount invoiced reflects product, transportation and additional handling services as applicable, such as storage, transloading the product from railcars to trucks and last mile logistics to the customer site. We invoice most of our product customers on a per shipment basis, although for some larger customers, we consolidate invoices weekly or monthly. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
We recognize revenue for products and materials at a point in time following the transfer of control of such items to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. We account for shipping and handling activities related to product and material sales contracts with customers as costs to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products pursuant to the accounting policy election allowed under ASC 606-10-25-10b. Accordingly, we record amounts billed for shipping and handling costs as a component of net sales and accrue and classify related costs as a component of cost of sales at the time revenue is recognized.
For a limited number of customers, we sell under long-term, minimum purchase supply agreements. These agreements define, among other commitments, the volume of product that our customers must purchase, the volume of product that we must provide and the price that we will charge and that our customers will pay for each product. Prices under these agreements are generally fixed and subject to certain contractual adjustments. Sometimes these agreements may undergo negotiations regarding pricing and volume requirements, which may often occur in volatile market conditions. While these negotiations continue, we may deliver sand at prices or at volumes below the requirements in our existing supply agreements. An executed order specifying the type and quantity of product to be delivered, in combination with the noted agreements, comprise our contracts in these arrangements.
Service
We derive our service revenues primarily through the provision of transportation, equipment rental, and contract labor services to companies in the oil and gas industry. Transportation services typically consist of transporting customer proppant from storage facilities to proximal well-sites and are contracted through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amount invoiced reflects the transportation services rendered. Equipment rental services provide customers with use of either dedicated or nonspecific wellhead proppant delivery equipment solutions for contractual periods defined either through formal lease agreements or executed work orders under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the length of time the equipment set was utilized in the billing period. Contract labor services provide customers with proppant delivery equipment operators through work orders executed under established pricing agreements. The amounts invoiced reflect the amount of time our labor services were utilized in the billing period.
We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations. We typically recognize revenue for specific, dedicated equipment set rental arrangements under ASC 842, Leases. For the remaining components of service revenue, we have applied the practical expedient allowed under ASC 606-10-55-18 to recognize transportation revenues in proportion to the amount we have the right to invoice.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
From time to time, we may enter into contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, such as work orders containing a combination of product, transportation, equipment rentals, and contract labor services. For these arrangements, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation identified in the contract based on relative standalone selling prices, or estimates of such prices, and recognize the related revenue as control of each individual product or service is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations. We typically invoice our customers on a weekly or monthly basis; however, some customers receive invoices upon well-site operation completion. Standard collection terms are net 30 days, although extended terms are offered in competitive situations.
Taxes Collected from Customers and Remitted to Governmental Authorities
We exclude from our measurement of transaction prices all taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are both (i) imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and (ii) collected from customers. Accordingly, such tax amounts are not included as a component of net sales or cost of sales.
Deferred Revenues
For a limited number of customers, we enter into supply agreements which give customers the right to make advanced payments toward the purchase of certain products at specified volumes over an average initial period of one to fifteen years. These payments represent consideration that is unconditional and for which we have yet to transfer the related product. These payments are recorded as contract liabilities referred to as “deferred revenues” upon receipt and recognized as revenue upon delivery of the related product.
Unbilled Receivables
Revenues recognized in advance of invoice issuance create assets referred to as “unbilled receivables.” Any portion of our unbilled receivables for which our right to consideration is conditional on a factor other than the passage of time is considered a contract asset. These assets are presented on a combined basis with accounts receivable and are converted to accounts receivable once billed.
Impairment or Disposal of Property, Plant and Mine Development
We periodically evaluate whether current events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of our property, plant and equipment assets may not be recoverable. If circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable, we estimate future undiscounted net cash flows using estimates of proven and probable sand reserves, estimated future sales prices (considering historical and current prices, price trends and related factors) and operating costs and anticipated capital expenditures. If the undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, we recognize an impairment loss equal to the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets.
The recoverability of the carrying value of our mineral properties is dependent upon the successful development, start-up and commercial production of our mineral deposit and the related processing facilities. Our evaluation of mineral properties for potential impairment primarily includes assessing the existence or availability of required permits and evaluating changes in our mineral reserves, or the underlying estimates and assumptions, including estimated production costs. Assessing the economic feasibility requires certain estimates including the prices of products to be produced and processing recovery rates, as well as operating and capital costs.
Gains on the sale of property, plant and mine development are included in income when the assets are disposed of provided there is more than reasonable certainty of the collectability of the sales price and any future activities required to be performed by us relating to the disposal of the assets are complete or insignificant. Upon retirement or disposal of assets all costs and related accumulated depreciation or amortization are written-off.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets and Related Impairment
Our intangible assets consist of goodwill, which is not amortized, indefinite-lived intangibles, which consist of certain trade names that are not subject to amortization, intellectual property and customer relationships.
Intellectual property mainly consists of patents and technology, and it is amortized on a straight-line basis over an average useful life of 15 years. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful life of 13 - 20 years.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of business combinations over the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill and trade names are reviewed for impairment annually as of October 31, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist. An impairment exists if the fair value of a reporting unit to which goodwill has been allocated, or the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets, is less than their respective carrying values. Prior to conducting a formal impairment test we have an option to assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Such qualitative factors may include the following: macroeconomic conditions; industry and market considerations; cost factors; overall financial performance; and other relevant entity-specific events. If the qualitative assessment determines that an impairment is more likely than not, or if we choose to bypass the qualitative assessment, we perform a quantitative assessment
by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
A trade name is a legally protected trade or similar mark. Acquired trade names are valued using an income method approach, generally the relief-from-royalty valuation method. The method uses a royalty rate based on comparable marketplace royalty agreements for similar types of trade names and applies it to the after-tax discounted free cash flow attributed to the trade name. The discount rate used is based on an estimated weighted average cost of capital and the anticipated risk for intangible assets. The valued trade names have an indefinite life based on our plans and expectations for the trade names going forward and are reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist.
Intellectual property and technology (“IP”) is a design, work or invention that is the result of creativity to which one has ownership rights that may be protected through a patent, copyright, trademark or service mark. IP is valued using the relief-from-royalty valuation method. The method uses a royalty rate based on comparable marketplace royalty agreements for similar types of IP and applies it to the after-tax discounted free cash flow attributed to the IP. The discount rate used is based on an estimated weighted average cost of capital and the anticipated risk for intangible assets. The IP is amortized following the pattern in which the expected benefits will be consumed or otherwise used up over each component’s useful life, based on our plans and expectations for the IP going forward, which is generally the underlying IP’s legal expiration dates. IP is reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist.
Customer relationships are intangible assets that consist of historical and factual information about customers and contacts collected from repeat transactions with customers, with or without any underlying contracts. The information is generally organized as customer lists or customer databases. We have the expectation of repeat patronage from these customers based on the customers’ historical purchase activity, which creates the intrinsic value over a finite period of time and translates into the expectation of future revenue, income, and cash flow. Customer relationships are valued using projected operating income, adjusted for estimated future existing customer growth less estimated future customer attrition, net of charges for net tangible assets, IP charge, trade name charge and work force. The concluded value is the after-tax discounted free cash flow. Customer relationships are reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist.
Income Taxes
Deferred taxes are recognized on the liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. This approach requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based upon the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the expenses are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize a tax benefit associated with an uncertain tax position when, in management’s judgment, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. For a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we initially and subsequently measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that we judge to have a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority. The liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted periodically due to changing circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, case law developments and new or emerging legislation. Such adjustments are recognized entirely in the period in which they are identified. The effective tax rate includes the net impact of changes in the liability for unrecognized tax benefits and subsequent adjustments as considered appropriate by management.
Generally, the largest permanent item in computing both our effective tax rate and taxable income is the deduction allowed for statutory depletion. The deduction for statutory depletion does not necessarily change proportionately to changes in income before income taxes. However, for the year ended 2020, we recorded a permanent tax benefit related to tax legislation enacted during 2020, which represents the largest permanent item in computing our effective tax rate for 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
New accounting guidance that has been recently issued is described in Note B - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.