Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1A: “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
SHI currently conducts our businesses through our two wholly owned subsidiaries, SCI and MTI Instruments. SCI is presently engaged in the mining of cryptocurrency through data centers that can be powered by renewable energy sources. MTI Instruments is engaged in the design, manufacture, and sale of vibration measurement and system balancing solutions, precision linear displacement sensors, instruments and system solutions, and wafer inspection tools. Recently, SCI has built, and intends to continue to develop and build, modular data centers that are currently used for cryptocurrency mining and that in the future can be used for computing intensive, batchable applications, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning, with the goal of providing a cost-effective alternative to battery storage or transmission lines. Headquartered in Albany, New York, the Company uses technology and intentional design to solve complex, real-world challenges.
SCI was incorporated in Delaware on January 8, 2020 as EcoChain, Inc., which has a cryptocurrency mining facility that integrates with the cryptocurrency blockchain network in the State of Washington. Through the October 2021 acquisition by EcoChain, Inc. of an entity at the time named Soluna Computing, Inc., SCI also has a pipeline of certain cryptocurrency mining projects previously owned by HEL, a Canadian corporation incorporated under the laws of the Province of British Colombia that develops vertically-integrated, utility-scale computing facilities focused on cryptocurrency mining and cutting-edge blockchain applications. We earn revenue from this business as the mined cryptocurrencies are converted into U.S. dollars.
MTI Instruments was incorporated in New York on March 8, 2000 and is a supplier of vibration measurement and balancing systems, precision linear displacement solutions, and wafer inspection tools. MTI Instruments’ products consist of engine vibration analysis systems for both military and commercial aircraft and electronic gauging instruments for position, displacement and vibration application within the industrial manufacturing markets, as well as in the research, design and process development markets. These systems, tools and solutions are developed for markets and applications that require consistent operation of complex machinery and the precise measurements and control of products, processes, the development and implementation of automated manufacturing and assembly. On December 17, 2021, we announced that we had entered into the LOI to an unrelated third party with respect to the Sale. The LOI only represents a mutual indication of interest regarding the Sale and the terms of the Sale are subject to a number of contingencies, including the completion of customary due diligence and the negotiation and execution of definitive agreements. If the Sale is completed, the Company expects that we will exit the instrumentation business and that we will be focused on developing and monetizing green, zero-carbon computing and cryptocurrency mining facilities. As a result of the foregoing, the MTI Instruments business is being held as discontinued operations in our financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and prior periods included in this Annual Report and until it is sold, we will continue to operate the MTI Instruments business.
Recent Developments and Trends
We have used the net proceeds of our recent common stock and preferred stock offerings primarily for the acquisition, development and growth of our cryptocurrency mining facilities in Kentucky, which expanded SCI’s cryptocurrency business for fiscal year 2021, and into the future with an additional facility in Texas planned to launch in in fiscal year 2022 and additional pipelines for the future. We expect to develop and implement a capital strategy consisting of debt and equity to finance new projects, equipment purchases and upgrades in fiscal year 2022.
Miner Purchases and Deployments
At December 31, 2021, we had purchased, received and/or deployed the following miners:
During 2021, we received 18,499 additional miners, and, as of December 31, 2021, we had deployed a total of 13,240 miners in our mining operations. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.4 million payable to KUZU of ASIC miners, which arrived January 2022.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes changes in the various components of our net (loss) income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cryptocurrency Mining Revenue: Cryptocurrency revenue consists of revenue recognized from SCI’s cryptocurrency mining operations.
Cryptocurrency revenue was approximately $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $595 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. SCI did not commence its cryptocurrency mining operations until the second quarter of 2020. The Company maintained its facility in Washington and in 2021 added two new mining site operations in Murray, Kentucky and Calvert City, Kentucky. Megawatts deployed increased from approximately 2 megawatts at the end of 2020 to approximately 25 megawatts at the end of 2021. This growth in capacity contributed to the growth in the business in fiscal year 2021.
Data Hosting Revenue: In August 2021, SCI began cryptocurrency hosting services in which SCI provides energized space and operating services to third-party mining companies who locate their mining hardware at one of SCI’s mining locations, in which they may receive a fee per miner installed, revenue share and if additional services are rendered, an additional service fee is charged to the outside parties. The Company’s revenue was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, with no comparable services noted for the year ended December 31, 2020, in which are all attributed to the Kentucky data center location.
Cost of Cryptocurrency Revenue: Cost of cryptocurrency revenue includes direct utility costs, site overhead expenses, depreciation expenses, as well as overhead costs that relate to the operations of SCI’s cryptocurrency mining facilities in Washington and facilities in Kentucky. Going forward, cost of cryptocurrency revenue will include any additional SCI cryptocurrency mining facilities that are part of the Company’s future pipeline.
Cost of cryptocurrency revenue was approximately $5.6 million and $405 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, approximately a $5.2 million increase. As noted above, SCI did not commence cryptocurrency mining operations until the second quarter of 2020, and therefore there was no material cryptocurrency revenue or associated costs during the year ended December 31, 2020. As the Company began increasing their capacity, the associated costs began to increase.
Cost of Data Hosting Revenue: As noted above, SCI began hosting services in August 2021 in which expenses are allocated based on the cost driving activity. As such, there were no related charges in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Margin: Gross profit, as a percentage of revenue, increased to 44% during 2021 compared to 32% for 2020, primarily due to mining operations having a stronger year for 2021. In fiscal year 2021, the Company began to streamline the mining operations into new facilities as compared fiscal year 2020 when the Company began their mining operations in the second quarter of 2020. The increase in gross profit for 2021 was slightly reduced due to the introduction of data hosting services in 2021, which had a lower gross profit margin of 28% compared to the cryptocurrency mining of 48.5% for fiscal year 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses includes cash and non-cash compensation, benefits and related costs in support of our general corporate functions, including general management, finance and accounting, human resources, selling and marketing, information technology, and legal services.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $8.9 million, or 487%, to $10.7 million from $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was a result of both expenses incurred in 2021 for which there was no comparable expense in 2020 as well as from changes in a number of our traditional selling, general and administrative expenses. Expenses for which there was no comparable outlay in 2020 consisted of non-cash stock option grants of $1.3 million to our Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and members of our Board of Directors, non-cash stock restricted grants of $630 thousand to certain Company employees and members of our Board of Directors, $1.2 million related to other outside related expenses in conjunction with pipeline acquisition diligence and operating and management agreements with HEL, and $500 thousand in expenses related to investor relations matters. Also, the Company incurred approximately $1.6 million in amortization expense for the strategic pipeline contract acquired in the Soluna Callisto acquisition on October 29, 2021. The increase of $780 thousand in legal fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to $390 thousand of legal fees related to the transaction to lease the building for SCI’s new cryptocurrency mining facility and the surrounding land located in Kentucky, discussed above, as well as other general matters related to the operations of SCI, and $385 thousand in corporate legal expenses mainly related to the Company’s reincorporation in Nevada, the preparation and adoption of the 2021 Stock Incentive Plan (the “Plan”), the Special Meeting of Stockholders we held on March 25, 2021, at which the Company’s stockholders approved (among another matter) the reincorporation and the adoption of the 2021 Plan, the Annual Meeting of Stockholders held in May 2021 and the Special Meeting of Stockholders held on October 29, 2021, the amendment and restatement of the Plan, as well as other due diligence matters. In addition, there was a $135 thousand increase in consultant fees for the year related to CEO and Board of Directors compensation consultation and the annual stockholders meeting, $260 thousand for consultant expenses related to the Company’s SCI operations, $75 thousand for temporary staffing as the Company was expanding operations in the corporate finance division, and $200 thousand for public relations services.
Investor relations expenses incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021, and for which there was no comparable expense during the year ended December 31, 2020, were $500 thousand, consisting primarily of $90 thousand for Nasdaq registration fees in connection with the initial listing of our common stock and preferred stock, $260 thousand related to our retention of an investor relations consulting firm to assist us with creating a more formal investor relations strategy given our status as an SEC reporting and Nasdaq-listed company, $85 thousand related to the Special Meeting of Stockholders held on March 25, 2021 and October 29, 2021, including the fees and expenses of the proxy solicitor we retained in connection therewith, and $50 thousand in conjunction with the Company’s annual stockholders meeting.
Salaries and benefits expenses increased by $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, $375 thousand of which is related to the salary and benefits of our Chief Financial Officer (hired in July 2020), CEO (hired in November 2020), Compliance Manager (hired in November 2020), and Financial Reporting Manager (hired in July 2021), $510 thousand of which is related to the salary and fringe benefits of 11 new employees of Soluna Callisto in connection with the October 2021 acquisition, as compared to none in prior year in which SCI payroll expenses were charged to selling, general and administrative for SCI in fiscal year 2021. The Company had eight corporate employees at the end of fiscal year 2021 compared to five Corporate employees at year ended December 31, 2020. Also, the Company has a significant increase in bonuses of $250 thousand due to growth in Company’s operations in the cryptocurrency mining and other operating initiatives set for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In addition, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, travel expenses increased $72 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in traveling to oversee the cryptocurrency mining locations, as well as the reduced travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Directors and officers insurance premiums increased by $250 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily to our status as an SEC reporting company and the increase in cryptocurrency operations.
The Company expects selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in 2022 and generally going forward as the Company significantly expands their cryptocurrency operations.
Operating Loss: Operating loss increased to $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1.6 million during the prior year. This $2.9 million loss increase was the result of the factors noted above, that is, significant increases in SGA for items not incurred in the prior year, as well as operations for SCI have significantly increased with increases in sales and costs for the year.
Interest expense: Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.9 million and was primarily related to the $1.9 million of interest expense in relation to the Notes payable issued at the end of October 2021. The Company did not incur any interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, net: Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11 thousand related to interest income on operating cash balances offset with miscellaneous expenses. Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $100 thousand and was primarily related to income from the sale of SCI’s excess equipment and interest income on operating cash balances.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit: Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $44 thousand and was primarily a result a change in the valuation allowance for the year offset with temporary timing differences. Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 1.0%. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $332 thousand and was primarily related to the increase of the tax asset based on projected future taxable earnings, giving the Company the ability to use prior tax losses. Our effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (21)%.
Net Loss from continuing operations: Net loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.3 million compared to net loss from continuing operations of $1.2 million in 2020. The increase for loss for the year were the result of the factors noted above, including expenses not incurred in prior year such as amortization expense for the strategic pipeline contract intangible, depreciation on miners installed, and noncash compensation expense distributed to the board of directors and other members of management, offset with increases sales to the cryptocurrency mining and data hosting revenue.
Net Income from discontinued operations: The Company notes that discontinued operations held for sale relates to the Company’s MTI Instrumentation business. Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.1 million compared to net income of $3.1 million in 2020. The main cause of the decrease in net income was due to product revenue for the year declined about $1.9 million due to a decrease portable balance system product sales in which fewer items were shipped to the United States Air Force compared to 2020, in which a large order was placed in 2020. The cost of sales didn’t decline as significantly as product sales due to unfavorable mix of the volume of products sales, with more units being sold that had higher gross margins in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization: Depreciation and amortization expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $3.7 million, which is an increase of approximately $3.6 million , as compared to $80 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to higher depreciation recognized of $2.05 million for the two new facilities deployed in Kentucky and the associated miners, in addition to amortization expense of approximately $1.6 million related to the strategic pipeline contract that was acquired in October 2021.
Net (Loss) Income: Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.3 million compared to net income of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the factors noted above with the losses incurred in continued operations offset with net income for the year in the MTI Instruments business as noted above.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to financial measures calculated in accordance U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we also use “Adjusted EBITDA.” Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net income (loss) from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) adjusted to eliminate the effects of certain non-cash, non-recurring items, that do not reflect our ongoing strategic business operations. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA results in a performance measurement that represents a key indicator of the Company’s business operations of cryptocurrency mining.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA can be an important financial measure because it allows management, investors, and our Board of Directors to evaluate and compare our operating results, including our return on capital and operating efficiencies, from period-to-period by making such adjustments. Non-GAAP financial measures are subject to material limitations as they are not in accordance with, or a substitute for, measurements prepared in accordance with GAAP. For example, we expect that stock-based compensation costs, which is excluded from the non-GAAP financial measures, will continue to be a significant recurring expense over the coming years and is an important part of the compensation provided to certain employees, officers, and directors. Similarly, we expect that depreciation and amortization of fixed assets will continue to be a recurring expense over the term of the useful life of the assets.
Adjusted EBITDA is provided in addition to, and should not be considered to be a substitute for, or superior to net income, the comparable measure calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Further, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to revenue growth, net income, diluted earnings per share or any other performance measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider such measures either in isolation or as substitutes for analyzing our results as reported under GAAP.
Reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA to net income from continuing operations, the most comparable GAAP financial metric, for historical periods are presented in the table below:
Stock based compensation costs represented non-cash stock option grants of $1.3 million to our CEO and members of our Board of Directors and non-cash stock restricted grants of approximately $630 thousand to certain Company employees and members of our Board of Directors for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to only $40 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The exchange registration expenses related to non-recurring expenses of approximately $189 thousand associated with the Company’s reincorporation in Nevada in March 2021 and the related special meeting of stockholders we held on March 25, 2021 to approve the reincorporation and the adoption of the 2021 Stock Incentive Plan. In addition, the Company incurred approximately $104 thousand in fees related to the initial listing of our common stock on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) and associated legal assistance in connection with our registration matters. There were no comparable exchange registration expenses related for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Several key indicators of our liquidity are summarized in the following table:
The Company has historically incurred significant losses primarily due to its past efforts to fund direct methanol fuel cell product development and commercialization programs and had a consolidated accumulated deficit of approximately $123.7 million as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital of approximately $9.3 million, a line of credit outstanding of $1.0 million, $7.1 million outstanding note payable that is convertible into common stock, in certain circumstances, outstanding commitments related to SCI for $16.2 million for capital expenditures, and approximately $10.3 million of cash available to fund our operations.
Based on business developments, including changes in production levels, staffing requirements, and network infrastructure improvements, we will require additional capital equipment in the foreseeable future. With the Company’s shift in focus of the business, and the potential sale of the MTI Instruments business, the Company expects that it will exit the instrumentation business and will be focused on developing and monetizing green, zero-carbon computing and cryptocurrency mining facilities. Although the Company has seen profits in operating activities in the past two years in its discontinued operations-held for sale segment, the Company has seen significant growth in its cryptocurrency business and has focused attention towards that segment.
As we have done historically, we expect to continue funding operations from our current cash position and our projected 2022 cash flows pursuant to management’s plans. If necessary, we may also seek to supplement our resources by increasing credit facilities to fund operational working capital and capital expenditure requirements. We expect to fund growth (additional cryptocurrency mining facilities and miners) through capital raise activities, to the extent that we can successfully raise capital through additional debt or equity sales. Any additional financing, if required, may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
While it cannot be assured, management believes that, due in part to our current working capital level and projected cash requirements for our existing operations, its current available cash of approximately $10.3 million, and our projected 2022 cash flow pursuant to management’s plans and anticipated profits from the sale of MTI Instruments, which we expect to be completed during the year ending December 31, 2022, the Company will have adequate resources to fund its operations through at least the end of the first quarter of 2023. As noted above, the Company expects to fund capital expenditures associated with managements anticipated growth strategy for SCI through capital raises. The Company has entered into an unsecured line of credit for $1.0 million to assist with possible future financing, which as of December 31, 2021, the entire amount had been drawn upon and was outstanding. In addition, on October 20, 2021, we issued to certain institutional investors secured convertible notes in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $16.3 million for an aggregate purchase price of $15.0 million. The notes are convertible, subject to certain conditions, at any time at the option of the Investors, into an aggregate of 1,776,073 shares of the Company’s common stock. On December 30, 2021, we entered into a Master Equipment Finance Agreement (the “Master Agreement”) with NYDIG ABL LLC (“NYDIG”) as lender, servicer and collateral agent. The Master Agreement outlined the framework for a financing up to approximately $14.4 million. Subsequently, the parties negotiated the specific terms of each equipment financing transaction as well as the terms upon which the investors would consent to the transactions contemplated by the Master Agreement. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, on January 14, 2022, we borrowed loans under the Master Agreement in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $4.6 million that will bear interest at 14% and will be repaid over 24 months. On February 22, 2022, we issued to certain institutional lenders promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of $7.6 million for an aggregate purchase price of $7.6 million as the first tranche of an aggregate financing of $20.0 million. On March 10, 2022, we issued to the lenders a second tranche of an aggregate principal amount of $2.4 million. The Company expects to issue to the lenders a third tranche of promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million for an aggregate purchase price of $10.0 million along with Class D common stock purchase warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 500,000 shares of common stock.
If our revenue estimates are off either in timing or amount, or if cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy the operational working capital and capital expenditure requirements, the Company may need to implement additional steps to ensure liquidity including, but not limited to, the deferral of planned capital spending and/or delaying existing or pending product development initiatives, or the Company may be required to obtain credit facilities or other loans, if available, to fund these initiatives. The Company has no other formal commitments for funding its future needs at this time and any additional financing we may require during the year ending December 31, 2022, may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Any one or more of such steps, if required, could potentially have a material and adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was approximately $4.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash was provided from operations by a net loss of $6.4 million, less non-cash items of $7.8 million, consisting primarily of $3.7 million of amortization and depreciation expense for the year for the intangible asset acquired and significant additions in fixed assets, approximately $2.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, and $1.9 million for amortization of deferred financing costs and discount on notes payables issued during the year. The change in asset and liabilities of $3.3 million consisted primary of increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $5.0 million offset by $2.2 million with increases in accounts receivable, prepaids and other assets, and other long- term assets.
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was approximately $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash was consumed from operations by a net loss of $1.2 million, less $81 thousand of depreciation, $40 thousand of stock compensation expense, and $86 thousand for amortization of lease asset. The change in assets and liabilities of $125 thousand was mainly due to increases in the year of accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and other liabilities of $537 thousand offset with increases in accounts receivable and other assets of $335 thousand.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $57.2 million compared to $1.8 million in for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the Company had $45.8 million worth of capital expenditures, a net change of $9.9 million in deposits on equipment and $1.6 million of cash purchased on intangible assets in relation to the asset acquisition in the current year. In 2020, the Company only had $805 thousand in capital expenditures, $280 thousand net change in deposits on equipment and $750 thousand for a purchase of stock in equity investment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $59.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of the common stock capital raise and preferred stock raises that totaled approximately $40.7 in net proceeds. The Company also received proceeds from a notes issuance of $15 million less costs associated of $1.3 million. The Company also exercised warrants totaling approximately $4.6 million and had stock option exercises of approximately $100 thousand. The Company borrowed $1.0 million under their line of credit and made cash dividend payments to preferred stockholders of around $630 thousand. During the year ended 2020, the Company only had stock option exercises totaling approximately $83 thousand.
Debt
On September 13, 2021, the Company entered into a $1.0 million unsecured line of credit with KeyBank National Association, that will, among other things, allow the Company to request loans and to use the proceeds of such loans for working capital and other general corporate purposes. The line of credit may be drawn at the discretion of the Company and bears interest at a rate of prime +.75% per annum. Accrued interest is due monthly, and principal is due in full following the lender’s demand. As of December 31, 2021, the entire line of credit of $1.0 million was drawn and outstanding. MTI Instruments, previously held a secured line of credit with Pioneer Bank in the amount of $300 thousand. The secured line of credit was closed on September 10, 2021 with no outstanding amounts.
In addition, on October 20, 2021, the Company issued to certain institution investors secured convertible notes in the aggregate principal amount of approximately $16.3 million for an aggregate purchase price of $15.0 million. The notes are convertible, subject to certain conditions, at any time at the option of the investors, into an aggregate of 1,776,073 shares of the Company’s common stock.
Subsequent to year-end, the Company entered into a Master Financing Agreement with NYDIG for $14.4 million. On February 22, 2022, the Company issued to certain institutional lenders promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of $7.6 million for an aggregate purchase price of $7.6 million as the first tranche of an aggregate financing of $20.0 million. On March 10, 2022, the Company has issued to the lenders a second tranche of an aggregate principal amount of $2.4 million for an aggregate purchase price of $2.4 million. The Company expects to issue to the lenders a third tranche of promissory notes in an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million for an aggregate purchase price of $10.0 million.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 global pandemic, the Company has implemented procedures to support flexible working arrangements for its workforce based on business needs. While these measures have been necessary and appropriate, they may result in additional costs and may adversely impact the Company’s business and financial performance. As the Company’s response to the pandemic evolves, the Company may incur additional costs and will potentially experience adverse impacts to its business, each of which are uncertain at this time.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The prior discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K includes a summary of our most significant accounting policies. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, income taxes and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Periodically, our management reviews our critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
The significant accounting policies that we believe are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial statements include the following:
Revenue Recognition, Accounts Receivable, and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. Cryptocurrency revenue consists of revenue recognized from SCI’s cryptocurrency mining facility. Revenue is recognized at the cryptocurrency’s realized cash value based upon the rates at cryptocurrency exchanges where we are registered. Cryptocurrencies are earned when the miners solve complex computations and cryptocurrency is issued as a result. The mined cryptocurrency is immediately paid to the Coinbase wallet. Cryptocurrency is converted to U.S. dollars on a daily basis. Also, the Company has entered into customer hosting contracts whereby the Company provides electrical power to cryptocurrency mining customers, and the customers pay a stated amount per megawatt-hour (“MWh”) (“Contract Capacity”) as well as a share of the coins mined. The fee is paid monthly in advance. The actual monthly amounts are calculated after the close of each month and reconciled to the monthly advance.
Trade accounts receivable are stated at the invoiced amount billed to customers and do not bear interest. An allowance for doubtful accounts, if necessary, represents our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing accounts receivable. We determine the allowance based on historical write-off experience and current exposures identified. We review our allowance for doubtful accounts monthly. We review past due balances over 90 days and over a specified amount individually for collectability. We review all other balances on a pooled basis by type of receivable. We charge off account balances against the allowance when we believe it is probable the receivable will not be recovered. We do not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to our customers.
Asset Acquisition.
As the discussed above, on October 29, 2021, we closed the Soluna Callisto acquisition, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of August 11, 2021, by and among the Company, SCI and Soluna Callisto.. The purpose of the transaction was for SCI to acquire substantially all of the assets (other than those assets physically located in Morocco) formerly held by HEL, which assets consisted of Soluna Callisto’s existing pipeline of certain cryptocurrency mining projects that HEL previously transferred to Soluna Callisto and to provide SCI with the opportunity to directly employ or retain the services of four individuals whose services it had retained through HEL prior to the merger. As a result of the merger, each share of common stock of Soluna Callisto issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, other than shares owned by the Company or any of our subsidiaries, was cancelled and converted into the right to receive a proportionate share of up to 2,970,000 shares (the “Merger Shares”) of the Company’s common stock payable upon the achievement of certain milestones within five years after the effective date in the merger, as set forth in the merger agreement and the schedules thereto (the “Merger Consideration”).
In connection with the Soluna Callisto acquisition, effective as of October 29, 2021, pursuant to the terms of a termination agreement dated as of August 11, 2021 by and among the Company, SCI, and HEL, on November 5, 2021, SCI paid HEL $725,000 and SHI issued to HEL 150,000 shares of SHI common stock (the “Termination Shares”). SCI also reimbursed HEL $75,000 for transaction-related fees and expenses. SHI included the termination costs as part of asset acquisition per ASC 805-50. Based on the closing price of the SHI common stock on Nasdaq on November 5, 2021, SHI has valued the aggregate termination consideration at approximately $1.9 million.
The acquisition was accounted for, for purposes of GAAP, using the asset acquisition method of accounting under the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 805-50. SHI determined that it acquired in the acquisition a group of similar identifiable assets (primarily, the “strategic pipeline contract” of certain cryptocurrency mining projects), which it classified as an intangible asset for accounting purposes. As a result, SHI’s acquisition of the set of assets and activities that it acquired will constitute an asset acquisition, as opposed to a business acquisition, under ASC 805. ASC 805-50 provides that assets acquired in an asset acquisition are measured based on the costs of the acquisition, which is the consideration that the acquirer transfers to the seller, and includes direct transaction costs related to the acquisition. SHI includes Soluna Callisto’s results of operations in our results of operations beginning on the effective date of the of the acquisition, October 29, 2021.
Fair Value Measurement.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including cash, accounts receivable and short-term debt approximates their carrying value due to their short maturities and varying interest rates. “Fair value” is the price that would be received to sell an asset or transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The Company utilizes valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Based on the observability of the inputs used in the valuation methods, the Company is required to provide the following information according to the fair value accounting standards. These standards established a fair value hierarchy as specified that ranks the quality and reliability of the information used to determine fair values. Financial assets and liabilities are classified and disclosed in one of the following three categories:
Level 1: Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities, which includes listed equities.
Level 2: Observable market-based inputs or unobservable inputs that are corroborated by market data. These items are typically priced using models or other valuation techniques. These models are primarily financial industry-standard models that consider various assumptions, including the time value of money, yield curves, volatility factors, as well as other relevant economic measures.
Level 3: These use unobservable inputs that are not corroborated by market data. These values are generally estimated based upon methodologies utilizing significant inputs that are generally less observable from objective sources.
The fair value hierarchy also requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The Company had Warrants included within the SPA agreement as noted in Footnote 9. The Warrants are considered freestanding equity-classified instruments due to their detachable and separately exercisable features and meet the indexation criteria within derivative accounting. Accordingly, the Warrants are presented as a component of Stockholders’ Equity in accordance with derivative accounting.
Consistent with the guidance in purchase accounting, the value of the Strategic Pipeline Contract as of the acquisition date was estimated using an expected value approach, which probability-weights various future outcomes and uses certain Level 3 inputs.
Share-Based Payments. We grant options to purchase our common stock and award restricted stock to our employees and directors under our equity incentive plans. The benefits provided under these plans are share-based payments and we account for stock-based awards exchanged for employee service in accordance with the appropriate share-based payment accounting guidance. Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-based awards granted to employees and directors. We measure stock-based compensation cost at grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognize the cost as expense on a straight-line basis in accordance with the vesting of the options (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee’s requisite service period. We estimate the fair value of stock-based awards on the grant date using a Black-Scholes valuation model. We use the fair value method of accounting with the modified prospective application, which provides for certain changes to the method for valuing share-based compensation. The valuation provisions apply to new awards and to awards that are outstanding on the effective date and subsequently modified.
The determination of the fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends.
Theoretical valuation models and market-based methods are evolving and may result in lower or higher fair value estimates for share-based compensation. The timing, readiness, adoption, general acceptance, reliability, and testing of these methods is uncertain. Sophisticated mathematical models may require voluminous historical information, modeling expertise, financial analyses, correlation analyses, integrated software and databases, consulting fees, customization, and testing for adequacy of internal controls.
For purposes of estimating the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes model, we use the historical volatility of our stock for the expected volatility assumption input to the Black-Scholes model, consistent with the accounting guidance. The risk-free interest rate is based on the risk-free zero-coupon rate for a period consistent with the expected option term at the time of grant. The expected option term is calculated based on our historical forfeitures and cancellation rates.
Income Taxes. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. (federal and state). As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we calculate income taxes for each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This involves estimating actual current taxes due together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment for tax and accounting purposes that are recorded as deferred tax assets and liabilities, loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards, for which income tax benefits are expected to be realized in future years. Deferred tax assets are reported net of a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We considered all available evidence, both positive and negative, such as historical levels of income and future forecasts of taxable income amongst other items in determining our valuation allowance. In addition, our assessment requires us to schedule future taxable income in accordance with accounting standards that address income taxes to assess the appropriateness of a valuation allowance, which further requires the exercise of significant management judgment.
We account for taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, we must recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. The impact of our reassessment of our tax positions for these standards did not have a material impact on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
We are also currently subject to audit in various jurisdictions, and these jurisdictions may assess additional income tax liabilities against us. Developments in an audit, litigation, or in applicable laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations could have a material effect on our operating results or cash flows in the period or periods in which such developments occur, as well as for prior and in subsequent periods.
Tax laws, regulations, and administrative practices in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change, with or without notice, due to economic, political, and other conditions, and significant judgment is required in evaluating and estimating our provision and accruals for these taxes. There are many transactions that occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Our effective tax rates could be affected by numerous factors, such as intercompany transactions, earnings being lower than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have higher statutory rates, the applicability of special tax regimes, losses incurred in jurisdictions for which we are not able to realize the related tax benefit, changes in foreign currency exchange rates, entry into new businesses and geographies, changes to our existing businesses and operations, acquisitions and investments and how they are financed, changes in our stock price, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, and changes in the relevant tax, accounting, and other laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations.
Factors Expected to Affect Our Future Results
We expect our revenues to comprise a combination of: (i) block rewards in Bitcoin, which are fixed rewards programmed into the Bitcoin software that are awarded to a miner or a group of miners for solving the cryptographic problem required to create a new block on a given blockchain and (ii) transaction fees in Bitcoin, which are flexible fees earned for verifying transactions in support of the blockchain.
Block rewards are fixed and the Bitcoin network is designed to periodically reduce them through halving. Currently the block rewards are fixed at 6.25 Bitcoin per block, and it is estimated that it will halve again to 3.125 Bitcoin in March 2024.
Bitcoin miners also collect transaction fees for each transaction they confirm. Miners validate unconfirmed transactions by adding the previously unconfirmed transactions to new blocks in the blockchain. Miners are not forced to confirm any specific transaction, but they are economically incentivized to confirm valid transactions as a means of collecting fees. Miners have historically accepted relatively low transaction confirmation fees, because miners have a very low marginal cost of validating unconfirmed transactions; however, unlike the fixed block rewards, transaction fees may vary, depending on the consensus set within the network.
As the use of the Bitcoin network expands and the total number of Bitcoin available to mine and, thus, the block rewards, declines over time, we expect the mining incentive structure to transition to a higher reliance on transaction confirmation fees, and the transaction fees to become a larger proportion of the revenues to miners.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.