ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act). These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “should,” “estimate,” “plan,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors,” set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report. The forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K represent our views as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We anticipate that subsequent events and developments will cause our views to change. However, while we may elect to update these forward-looking statements at some point in the future, we have no current intention of doing so except to the extent required by applicable law. You should, therefore, not rely on these forward-looking statements as representing our views as of any date subsequent to the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are focused on the development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for the treatment of rare diseases. Our lead candidate is Diazoxide Choline Extended Release tablets (DCCR), a once-daily oral tablet for the treatment of Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS). DCCR has orphan designation for the treatment of PWS in the United States (U.S.) as well as in the European Union (E.U.).
DCCR has been evaluated in a Phase 3 study (C601 or DESTINY PWS), a 3-month randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study, which completed enrollment in January 2020, with 127 patients at 29 sites in the U.S. and U.K. Patients who complete treatment in DESTINY PWS are eligible to receive DCCR in C602, an open-label extension study. Top line results from DESTINY PWS were announced in June 2020. Although the trial did not meet its primary endpoint of change from baseline in hyperphagia, significant improvements were observed in two of three key secondary endpoints. In February 2021, we announced analysis limited to data collected before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The analysis of the data through March 1, 2020 showed statistical significance in the primary, all key secondary and several other efficacy endpoints. In March 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) informed us that an additional clinical trial would be necessary to support a New Drug Approval (NDA) submission. In July 2021, we announced that we had received official meeting minutes from a Type B meeting with the FDA on June 11, 2021. Included in the meeting was the “patient voice” represented by the PWS advocacy organizations, as well as the family of a DCCR trial participant. The FDA continued to assert that an additional clinical trial is necessary for the submission of a NDA. However, the FDA strongly encouraged us to submit the available data and clinical study reports for ours C601 and C602 studies to allow it to assess if these studies may provide adequate evidence of safety and efficacy to support the submission of an NDA. In September 2021, we announced top line results from C602 showing statistically significant reduction in hyperphagia and all other PWS behavioral parameters and statistically significant improvements compared to natural history of PWS from the PATH for PWS Study (PfPWS) over a one year treatment period. The PfPWS study is an ongoing study sponsored by the Foundation for Prader-Willi Research (FPWR) to advance the understanding of the natural history in individuals with PWS. We submitted the data in the fourth quarter 2021 and in January 2022, we announced we had received official meeting minutes from a Type C meeting with the FDA on December 21, 2021. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the adequacy of the submitted data and possible ways to generate additional controlled clinical data. The FDA recommended that that additional controlled data be included in the NDA submission, and indicated they were receptive to a study design involving participants currently enrolled in Study C602, our ongoing open-label extension study to generate the data necessary to support an NDA.
The spread of the COVID-19 virus during 2020 caused an economic downturn on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. We have not experienced a significant financial impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $213.4 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We may never be successful in commercializing our novel therapeutic-lead candidate DCCR. Accordingly, we expect to incur significant losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $21.3 million. In March 2022, we completed a public offering of shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants and raised $13.9 million in net proceeds. Each share of common stock or pre-funded warrant was sold together with one immediately exercisable common warrant to purchase one share of common stock.
Financial overview
Summary
We have not generated net income from operations to date, and at December 31, 2021 we had an accumulated deficit of $213.4 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We may never be successful in commercializing our novel therapeutics products for the treatment of rare diseases. Accordingly, we expect to incur significant losses from operations for the foreseeable future, and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
Revenue recognition
To date, we have earned no revenue from the commercial development and sale of novel therapeutic products.
Research and development expenses
Research and development costs consist primarily of expenses incurred by contract research organizations (CROs) associated with our clinical trials, contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) associated with the manufacture of our drug product, employee related expenses, including salaries and benefits, and professional consultant costs. These expenses will vary with the cadence and success of our product candidate progressing from clinical to commercial stage.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and benefits, professional fees for legal, consulting, audit and tax services, insurance, rent, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development. We anticipate general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting an expanding infrastructure, other administrative expenses and increased professional fees associated with being a public reporting company.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration represents the change in the fair value of the additional consideration that we expect to pay to the former Essentialis stockholders based on our assessment of the expected likelihood of achieving two commercial sales milestones of $100.0 million in revenue and $200.0 million in revenue in future years.
Other income
Other income during 2021 is comprised of the change in the fair value of the 2018 PIPE common stock warrant liabilities and interest income. During 2020, Other income also includes the change in the fair value of the 2017 PIPE common stock warrant liabilities, which represents the largest component of the 2020 amount.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and
liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our audited financial statements contained herein.
Series C, 2017 PIPE Warrants, and the 2018 PIPE Warrants
We account for the Series C, 2017 PIPE warrants, and 2018 PIPE warrants, collectively referred to as the Warrants, in accordance with the guidance in ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging. The Warrants contain standard anti-dilution provisions for stock dividends, stock splits, subdivisions, combinations and similar types of recapitalization events. The Warrants also contain a fundamental transactions provision that permits their settlement in cash at fair value at the option of the holder upon the occurrence of a change in control. Such change in control events include tender offers or hostile takeovers, which are not within our sole control as the issuer of these warrants. Accordingly, the warrants are considered to have a cash settlement feature that precludes their classification as equity instruments. Settlement at fair value upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction would be computed using the Black Scholes Option Pricing Model, which approximates the binomial lattice model.
We classified the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and re-measure the warrants at each balance sheet date until they are exercised or expire. Any change in the fair value is recognized as other income (expense) in the statements of operations. The Series C warrants expired in March 2020; and the 2017 PIPE warrants expired in December 2020.
Research and development expense
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries, benefits, bonus, share-based compensation, consultant fees, certain facility costs and other costs associated with clinical trials. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors and other vendors. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can often occur several months later. We accrue the costs incurred for clinical trial activities as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. For other services, we accrue the costs in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of fees and costs associate with the contract that were rendered during the period and they are expensed as incurred.
Costs to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use are expensed to research and development costs when incurred.
Stock-based compensation expense
Stock-based compensation costs related to stock options and restricted stock units granted to employees, nonemployees and directors are measured at the date of grant based on the estimated fair value of the award. For restricted stock units this fair value is based on our common stock price on the grant date. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period for service-based awards. For performance-based awards the requisite service period is the longest explicit, implicit or derived service period based on management’s estimate of the probability of the performance criteria being satisfied, adjusted at each balance sheet date.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and net loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different. These assumptions include:
•
Expected volatility: We calculated the estimated volatility rate for stock options granted during 2021 based on the volatility of our common stock for a historical period equal to the expected life of the stock options. For stock options granted during 2020, and prior to having sufficient history of our common stock volatility, the estimated volatility rate was based on the volatility of our common stock together with comparable companies in our industry.
•
Expected life: Due to the lack of historical exercise history, the expected life of our service-based stock options is determined utilizing the “simplified method”, based on the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted-average vesting period. The expected life for performance-based options is
determined based on consideration of the contractual term of the stock options, an estimate of the date the performance criteria would be met and expectations of employee behavior.
•
Risk-free rate: The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected time to liquidity.
•
Expected dividend yield: We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Contingent consideration
Contingent consideration elements of a business combination are recorded in accordance with ASC 805 which provides that, when contingent consideration terms provide for future payment obligations, the obligation is measured at its fair value on the acquisition date, and the subsequent increase or decrease of the value of the estimated amounts of contingent consideration to be paid is be recognized as expense or income, respectively, in the statements of operations.
Our agreement to pay the former Essentialis stockholders for achieving certain commercial milestones resulted in the recognition of contingent consideration, which was recorded at the inception of the transaction, and subsequent changes to estimate the amount of contingent consideration to be paid is recognized as expenses or income in the statements of operations. The fair value of the contingent consideration is based on our analysis of the likelihood of the drug indication moving from Phase 2 through approval by the FDA and then reaching the cumulative revenue milestones.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants and Other Derivative Financial Instruments
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance in ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging. We classify common stock purchase warrants and other free standing derivative financial instruments as equity if the contracts (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement or (ii) give us a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in its own shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement). We classify any contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside our control), (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in shares (physical settlement or net-share settlement), or (iii) contain reset provisions as either an asset or a liability. We assess classification of freestanding derivatives at each reporting date to determine whether a change in classification between equity and liabilities is required. We determined that certain freestanding derivatives, which principally consist of Series C, the 2017 PIPE Warrants and 2018 PIPE Warrants, do not satisfy the criteria for classification as equity instruments due to the existence of certain cash settlement features that are not within our sole control or variable settlement provision that cause them to not be indexed to our stock. The Series C warrants expired in March 2020, and the 2017 PIPE warrants expired in December 2020.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes, whereby deferred tax assets or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. We have provided a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized.
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenues and expenses for tax and financial statement purposes. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period.
We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans and estimates. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted. Any adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance would be recorded in the income statement for the periods in which the adjustment is determined to be required.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes as required by the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. It is inherently difficult and subjective to estimate such amounts, as this requires us to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes.
In addition, the use of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be limited under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code in certain situations where changes occur in the stock ownership of a company. In the event that we have had a change in ownership, utilization of the carryforwards could be restricted. For more information, see the section titled “Risk Factors-Our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards and certain other tax attributes will be limited.”
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
We have not commenced commercialization of DCCR, our current sole novel therapeutic product, and accordingly, through December 31, 2021, have generated no revenue.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense of $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1.7 million from $23.2 million in 2020. The decrease is due to the completion of our DESTINY PWS study in June 2020. Following the completion of DESTINY PWS (C601), participants were eligible to enroll in the open-label extension study (C602). The CRO and clinical site costs are significantly lower to support participants in C602 compared to C601. The decrease was offset by an increase in our clinical pharmacology costs and regulatory efforts in anticipation of the next phase in the drug approval process. CMO costs remained consistent as we continue to progress the manufacture of our product candidate.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense of $10.8 million during 2021 increased by $2.0 million from 2020. The increase was primarily related to increased compensation costs, professional services and corporate business development expenses.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration represents the change in the fair value of the additional consideration that we expect to pay to the former Essentialis stockholders based on our assessment of the expected likelihood of achieving two commercial sales milestones of $100.0 million in revenue and $200.0 million in revenue in future years. On December 28, 2021, in connection with the dissolution of two of the former Essentialis stockholders, we signed an agreement which assigned the right, title and interest to all future earnout payments to the Company. As a result of the assignment, the maximum cash earnout payments decreased from the original $30.0 million to $21.2 million, which resulted in a $4.0 million decrease to the fair value of the contingent consideration liability. This decrease was largely offset by a $3.2 million increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration attributable to an increase in the probability and an acceleration of the expected timeline of achieving the commercial sales milestones based on recent interactions with the FDA. During 2020 the estimated fair value increased $4.3 million from the estimated $5.9 million at December 31, 2019.
Other income
Other income of $0.6 million in 2021 decreased $11.0 million from 2020. The decrease was primarily due to $10.8 of income recorded during 2020 for the change in fair value and expiration of the 2017 PIPE Warrants. In addition, the income recorded for the change in fair value of the 2018 PIPE Warrants during 2021 was $0.3 million less than in 2020, partially offset by $0.1 million higher interest income during 2021 compared to 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a net loss of $30.9 million during 2021 and an accumulated deficit of $213.4 million at December 31, 2021 as a result of having incurred losses since our inception. We had $21.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and $14.4 million of working capital at December 31, 2021, and used $27.8 million of cash in operating activities during 2021. We have financed our operations principally through issuances of equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had lease obligations totaling $0.5 million to be paid through 2023, consisting of an operating lease for office space in Redwood City, California. In July 2021, we announced that we were implementing an “at-the-market” (ATM) offering for up to $25.0 million. We have not sold any securities pursuant to this ATM offering. In March 2022, we completed a public offering of shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants and raised $13.9 million in net proceeds. Each share of common stock or pre-funded warrant was sold together with one immediately exercisable common warrant to purchase one share of common stock.
We expect to continue incurring losses for the foreseeable future and will be required to raise additional capital to complete our clinical trials, pursue product development initiatives and penetrate markets for the sale of our products. We believe that we will continue to have access to capital resources through possible public or private equity offerings, debt financings, corporate collaborations or other means, but the access to such capital resources is uncertain and is not assured. If we are unable to secure additional capital, we may be required to curtail our clinical trials and development of new products and take additional measures to reduce costs in order to conserve our cash in amounts sufficient to sustain operations and meet our obligations. These measures could cause significant delays in our efforts to complete clinical trials and commercialize our products, which is critical to the realization of our business plan and our future operations. These matters raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the date of filing this annual report.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the assumption we will continue to operate as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts of liabilities that may result from uncertainty related to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below:
Cash used in operating activities
During 2021, operating activities used net cash of $27.8 million, which was primarily due to the loss of $30.9 million plus non-cash income of $1.2 million for the change in fair value of common stock warrants and contingent consideration, adjusted for non-cash expense of $2.0 million for depreciation and amortization, $3.3 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $0.3 million for non-cash lease expense. Additionally, the usage of cash during 2021 was reduced by $1.2 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
During 2020, operating activities used net cash of $25.2 million, which was primarily due to the loss of $24.6 million plus non-cash income of $7.3 million for the change in fair value of common stock warrants and contingent consideration, adjusted for non-cash expense of $2.0 million for depreciation and amortization, $1.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $0.3 million for non-cash lease expense. Additionally, the usage of cash during 2020 was reduced by $3.0 million due to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash used in investing activities
There was minimal cash used during 2021 and 2020 for the costs of acquiring property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities
During 2021, we paid $0.1 million for tax withholding payments related to net share-settled equity awards. During 2020, we obtained $53.7 million of cash from the sale of shares of our common stock in a public offering, net of underwriting discounts and other offering expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $21.3 million.
We believe that we do not have sufficient capital resources to sustain operations through at least the next twelve months from the date of this filing. We expect to continue incurring losses for the foreseeable future and will be required to raise additional capital to pursue our therapeutic product development initiatives. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the date of this report.
We are obligated to make cash earnout payments of up to a maximum of $21.2 million to the former Essentialis stockholders upon the achievement of certain commercial milestones associated with the sale of Essentialis’ product in accordance with the terms of our merger agreement with Essentialis.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K as promulgated by the SEC.
Accounting Guidance Update
Recently Issued Accounting Guidance
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), or other standard setting bodies and adopted by us as of the specified effective date (see Note 3).