Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides material historical and prospective disclosures intended to enable investors and other users to assess our financial condition and results of operations. Statements that are not historical are forward-looking and involve risks and uncertainties discussed under the headings “SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” of this report. The following discussion of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
Introduction
Our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on developing effective epigenetic-based cancer treatments for indications with high unmet medical need. Our lead epigenetic enzyme technology was licensed from the University of Utah Research Foundation in 2011. We also recent acquired DRX-164, subsequently named as SP-3164, which is a next-generation cereblon binding molecular glue and we believe it has a clear development path in hematological cancer and potential in solid tumors.
Epigenetics refers to the system that regulates gene expression through conformational changes to the chromatin rather than changes to the DNA sequence itself. Our lead compound, seclidemstat (“SP-2577”), is a small molecule that inhibits the epigenetic enzyme lysine specific demethylase 1 (“LSD1”). LSD1 is an enzyme that removes mono- and di-methyl marks on histones (core protein of chromatin) to alter gene expression. LSD1’s enzymatic activity can cause genes to turn on or off and thereby affect the cell’s gene expression and overall activity. In addition, LSD1 can act via its scaffolding properties, independently of its enzymatic function, to alter gene expression and modulate cell fate. In healthy cells, LSD1 is necessary for stem cell maintenance and cell development processes. However, in several cancers LSD1 is highly expressed and acts aberrantly to incorrectly silence or activate genes leading to disease progression. High levels of LSD1 expression are often associated with aggressive cancer phenotypes and poor patient prognosis. Hence, development of targeted LSD1 inhibitors is of interest for the treatment of various cancers. SP-2577 uses a novel, reversible mechanism to effectively inhibit LSD1’s enzymatic and scaffolding properties and thereby treat and prevent cancer progression.
Our first indication of interest for SP-2577 is a devastating bone and soft-tissue cancer called Ewing sarcoma. Ewing sarcoma mostly afflicts adolescents and young adults, with the median age of diagnosis being 15. The most commonly expressed fusion oncoprotein in Ewing sarcoma is the EWS-FLI fusion protein, which is present in approximately 85% of Ewing sarcoma cases. The LSD1 enzyme associates with EWS-FLI (and other E26 Transformation-Specific (“ETS”) fusion proteins) and is thought to promote tumorigenesis. We believe the SP-2577 molecule helps inhibit EWS-FLI activity by disrupting EWS-FLI from associating with coregulators (including LSD1) that are necessary for its cancer promoting activity. Therefore, we believe that SP-2577 can potentially reverse the aberrant gene expression and thereby possibly prevent Ewing sarcoma cell proliferation and even promote cell death. Preclinical studies of SP-2577 in certain Ewing sarcoma animal models show a significant tumor reduction as well as a significant survival benefit compared to untreated animals. Our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial is designed as a single agent dose escalation followed by a dose expansion study. The trial can enroll up to 50 relapsed or refractory Ewing sarcoma patients. The primary objectives of the study are to assess the safety and tolerability of SP-2577. Secondary objectives include assessing preliminary efficacy of SP-2577.
As LSD1 can associate with over 60 regulatory proteins other than EWS-FLI, we believe that LSD1 may also play a critical role in progression of various other cancer types. These include both solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. In the second quarter of 2019, we initiated a second company-sponsored Phase 1 trial to study SP-2577 in Advanced Solid Tumors. The Advanced Solid Tumor (“AST”) trial is a single agent dose escalation, dose expansion study enrolling patients with advanced malignancies, excluding Ewing sarcoma or central nervous system tumors.
In addition, recent data from “LSD1 Ablation Stimulates Anti-tumor Immunity and Enables Checkpoint Blockade” by W. Sheng, et al. and “Inhibition of Histone Lysine-specific Demethylase 1 Elicits Breast Tumor Immunity and Enhances Antitumor Efficacy of Immune Checkpoint Blockade” by Y. Qin, et al. suggests that LSD1 plays a role in tumor immune activity and can sensitize tumors to checkpoint inhibitors. These recent works have sparked interest in combining LSD1 inhibitors with checkpoint inhibitors. We are conducting preclinical work with SP-2577 in this area.
Our plan is to develop SP-3164 in high unmet need hematological and solid tumor indications. SP-3164's development in hematological indications leverates the clinical safety and efficacy data demonstrated by avadomide in hematological malignancies (e.g., Diffuse Large B cell Lymphoma, Follicular Lymphoma) across several clinical trials. SP-3164 is the stabilized, active S-enantiomer of avadomide, which exists as a 1:1 ratio of the S and R enantiomers. However, only the S-enantiomer is the active, anti-cancer species. Therefore, because SP-3164 is the stabilized S-enantiomer, it has the potential to show improved therapy and safety over avadomide. This was demonstrated in early preclinical mouse models of multiple myeloma. In addition to having a clear development path
in hematological cancers, we believe SP-3164 also has potential in solid tumors. We are conducting preclinical work to identify the most promising indications and combinations for SP-3164's development in solid tumors.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. We had an accumulated deficit of $32.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates, add personnel necessary to continue to operate as a public company, and work to develop an advanced clinical pipeline of product candidates. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year due to timing of clinical development programs and efforts to achieve regulatory approval.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $29.2 million. We have received $14.5 million since inception of the grant. We believe that as of December 31, 2021, CPRIT fund matching requirements had been fully met. Additionally, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we received $28.8 million cash from equity offering.
The lack of revenue from product sales to date and recurring losses from operations since our inception raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. We will continue to require substantial additional capital to continue our clinical development activities and may need such additional capital sooner than 12 months. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to continue to fund our operations. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our development, regulatory approvals and authorizations, commercialization efforts and market conditions. Failure to raise capital as and when needed, on favorable terms or at all, would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop and commercialize our product candidates.
We intend to obtain additional capital through the sale of equity securities in one or more offerings or through issuances of debt instruments. We may also consider new collaborations or selectively partnering our technology. However, we cannot provide any assurance that we will be successful in accomplishing any of our plans to obtain additional capital or be able to do so on terms acceptable to us.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the consolidated results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue, which was derived solely from the CPRIT grant, was $1.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, we reached the maximum amount of the eligible spending that can be reimbursed from CPRIT.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $1.6 million was principally due to higher headcount in 2021, increased clinical trial cost in 2021 directly tied to patients enrollment, more spending on lab material and nonclinical activities, partially offset by decreased manufacturing cost.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses were $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consistent with prior year.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The change in fair value of warrant liability in current year was primarily due to the fluctuation of the price of our common stock which was $0.5 per share on December 31, 2021 compared to $0.9 per share on December 31, 2020 and our common stock price was $3.8 per share on December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. To date, we have generated revenue from the CPRIT grant, and have not generated any cash inflows from product sales.
We have known material contractual obligations which will require cash to meet their requirements. These applicable obligations include our lease agreement for our facilities, and our employment contracts. We also plan to deploy cash for other research and development and general and administrative operating expenses. Our ability to continue meeting these contractual obligations will be reliant upon our ability to secure significant additional capital funding.
We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercializes any of our product candidates, all of which are in early stages of development. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $28.1 million of working capital and our cash and cash equivalents totaled $29.2 million, which were held in bank accounts and money market account. Our cash and cash equivalents balance increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the capital received from financing activities partially offset by our net loss incurred.
Liquidity
Net cash provided by financing activities was $28.3 million and $17.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This increase of $10.6 million resulted primarily from higher proceeds from the sale of our common shares during the first and third quarters of 2021, partially offset by lower net proceeds from warrants exercised for cash. Principal payments on the insurance financing note were $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capital Resources
We expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with our ongoing research and development activities and our continued operation as a public company. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of any of our product candidates, we anticipate we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
We have no products approved for commercial sale, have not generated any revenue from product sales to date and have suffered recurring losses from operations since our inception. The lack of revenue from product sales to date and recurring losses from operations since our inception raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue from our products, if ever, we expect to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Based on our expected cash requirements, we believe that there is substantial doubt that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operation through one year from the date of this report.
We expect our research and development expenses to substantially increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance our product candidates in or towards clinical development.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•the terms and timing of any strategic alliance, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•the initiation and progress of our ongoing pre-clinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the number of programs we pursue;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals;
•the cost and timing of hiring new employees to support our continued growth;
•the costs involved in patent filing, prosecution, and enforcement; and
•the costs and timing of having clinical supplies of our product candidates manufactured.
We expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity and potentially through borrowing, strategic alliances with partner companies, and grants. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant
licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market itself.
Successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate and ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated balance sheet and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ materially from our estimates and judgments under different assumptions or conditions. We periodically review our estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in our consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that our accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, research and development expenses, stock-based compensation and fair value of financial instruments are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. We have identified these policies as critical because they both are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require us to make judgments and estimates on matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in future periods. For more information regarding these policies, you should refer to Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and does not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Application of New Accounting Standards
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (Topic 740). The guidance eliminates certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intra-period allocation and calculating income taxes in interim periods. This guidance also includes guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a consolidated group. ASU 2019-12 is effective for annual and interim periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 in the first quarter of 2021 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.