ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The purpose of this Management's Discussion and Analysis is to better allow our investors to understand and view our company from management's perspective. We are providing an overview of our business and strategy including a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in such forward-looking statements, including those discussed in the section “Risk Factors” in Part I - Item 1A of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on developing novel cancer immunotherapeutics for a broad range of cancer indications. Our product candidates currently include galinpepimut-S and nelipepimut-S.
Galinpepimut-S, or GPS
Our lead product candidate, galinpepimut-S, or GPS, is a cancer immunotherapeutic agent licensed from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, or MSK, that targets the Wilms tumor 1, or WT1, protein, which is present in 20 or more cancer types. Based on its mechanism of action as a directly immunizing agent, GPS has potential as a monotherapy or in combination with other immunotherapeutic agents to address a broad spectrum of hematologic, or blood, cancers and solid tumor indications.
In January 2020, we commenced a Phase 3 trial, the REGAL study, for GPS monotherapy in patients with acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, in the maintenance setting after achievement of second complete remission, or CR2, following successful completion of second-line antileukemic therapy. We expect this study will be used as the basis for submission of a Biologics License Application, or BLA, subject to a statistically significant and clinically meaningful data outcome and agreement with the U.S. Food & Drug Administration, or the FDA. The REGAL study is expected to enroll approximately 116 patients at up to approximately 85 clinical sites primarily in the United States, Europe, and Asia with a planned interim safety and futility analysis after 80 events (deaths).
At the request of several investigators, we are planning to institute an Expanded Access Program that would allow qualified physicians who desire so to treat with GPS AML patients who do not meet currently required study entry criteria for the ongoing REGAL trial. The access will be provided on a case by case basis to patients in the U.S. and, potentially, Germany. Patients treated under the Expanded Access Program will not be considered participants in the REGAL study. We expect the program to commence in the second quarter of 2022.
In December 2018, we initiated a Phase 1/2 multi-arm "basket" type clinical study of GPS in combination with Merck & Co., Inc.’s anti-PD-1 therapy, Keytruda® (pembrolizumab). The tumor type currently being studied is ovarian cancer (second or third line). In February 2022, we announced that we had completed enrollment of 17 evaluable patients in this Phase 1/2 clinical trial. Data from 15 patients is expected to be examined by mid-2022, with final data analysis of all 17 evaluable patients in the study by the end of 2022.
In February 2020, a Phase I open-label investigator-sponsored clinical trial of GPS, in combination with Bristol-Myers Squibb’s anti-PD-1 therapy, nivolumab (Opdivo®), in patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma, or MPM, who harbor relapsed or refractory disease after having received frontline standard of care multimodality therapy was commenced at MSK. Completion of enrollment of a target total of 10 evaluable patients is expected during the second half of 2022.
GPS was granted Orphan Drug Product Designations from the FDA, as well as Orphan Medicinal Product Designations from the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, for GPS in AML, malignant pleural mesothelioma, or MPM, and multiple myeloma, or MM, as well as Fast Track Designation for AML, MPM, and MM from the FDA.
Nelipepimut-S or NPS
Nelipepimut-S, or NPS, is a cancer immunotherapy that targets human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2, expressing cancers. We have presented data from Phase 2 studies of NPS in different types of breast cancers, which we considered to be the lead indication for NPS; however, we do not currently plan to conduct or fund a Phase 3 program for NPS. Following extensive efforts over the past four years to out-license NPS for further development in breast cancer, we have concluded that continued effort to seek a licensee for NPS for breast cancer will not result in a transaction which would provide value for the asset to us or our shareholders. We are reviewing our options for NPS.
Financial Position
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $21.4 million. We have incurred operating losses since inception and have not generated any product sales revenue or achieved profitable operations. We incurred net losses of $20.7 million and $16.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021 was $138.6 million, and we expect to continue to incur substantial losses in future periods.
Our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to advance our product candidates assuming we receive sufficient funding to continue our ongoing studies and initiate our planned studies. We anticipate that our expenses will increase as we:
•complete our ongoing and planned clinical trials, including the REGAL study;
•continue the research, development and scale-up of manufacturing capabilities to optimize products and dose forms for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•scale up manufacturing for GPS, including manufacturing validation activities;
•maintain, expand and protect our global intellectual property portfolio; and
•hire additional personnel, including clinical, manufacturing, and scientific personnel, sales and marketing personnel, and general and administrative personnel.
We intend to use our existing cash and cash equivalents for working capital and to fund the research and development of our product candidates. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to fund our current planned operating expenses for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic, including the surges of cases from the Delta and Omicron variants, continues to disrupt our business operations and those of our contractors, contract research organizations, or CROs, suppliers, clinical sites, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and other partners. The COVID-19 pandemic could affect the health and availability of our workforce and that of the third-parties we rely on, such as our CROs, clinical sites, CMOs, and other contractors as well as the governmental agencies, such as the FDA and health authorities in other countries which could delay or otherwise adversely impact the ability of such parties to fulfill their obligations. We have implemented a return-to-work policy in compliance with federal, state and local requirements and guidance, which provides for a hybrid of remote and in-office work, and we operated on such a semi-virtual basis in 2021. We are continuously monitoring the impact of the pandemic on our clinical development programs. Our Phase 3 REGAL study is progressing, with the necessary work to activate additional sites in the United States and Europe continuing. However, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have observed that, at certain times and in certain instances, clinical site initiations, patient screening and patient enrollment have been delayed. These delays are likely due to many reasons, which have been changing and evolving as the COVID-19 pandemic itself has evolved, including the prioritization of hospital resources towards the care of patients with COVID-19, delays in reviews and approvals by independent institutional review boards, or IRBs, and/or ethics committees at clinical sites, the challenges for clinicians and patients to comply with clinical trial protocols due to quarantines impeding patient movement or interrupting operations at sites, restrictions on travel and, most recently, inadequate staffing at clinical sites, supply chain-related delays, and materials shortages. Throughout the United States, Europe and Asia, newly initiated sites have taken longer than expected to become fully operational and begin enrolling patients. We have taken several steps to mitigate these actual and potential delays, including increasing the number of clinical sites from 50 to up to approximately 85, increasing the number of additional countries, both in Europe and Asia, in which sites were or will be initiated, allocating additional resources, including additional CROs and internal personnel, to the REGAL study, and making certain changes to the protocol for the study. We are continuing to monitor each clinical site through our CROs as well as conducting direct outreach to investigators and study staff through site visits investigator meetings and other modes of communication. Accordingly, due to the accumulation of these delays over the past two years, we have adjusted the projected timing of the REGAL study. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the outbreak, the continued availability and efficacy of vaccines, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19, the emergence of new variants of COVID-19, and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others.
Components of Results of Operations
License Revenue
License revenue consists of revenue recognized pursuant to our Exclusive License Agreement with 3D Medicines Inc., or 3DMed, dated December 7, 2020, or the 3DMed Agreement. In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of regulatory, development, and sales milestone payments and royalties in connection with the 3DMed Agreement.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred. These expenses include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, as well as investigative sites and consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•manufacturing expenses;
•outsourced professional scientific development services;
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•payments made under our license agreements, under which we acquired certain intellectual property;
•expenses relating to certain regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies;
•laboratory materials and supplies used to support our research activities; and
•allocated expenses, utilities and other facility-related costs.
The successful development of our current and future product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of, or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from, any current or future product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the duration and cost of our clinical trials, which vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of many factors, including:
•the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
•the length of time required to enroll suitable patients;
•the number of patients that ultimately participate in the trials;
•the number of doses patients receive;
•the duration of patient follow-up;
•the results of clinical trials;
•the expenses associated with manufacturing;
•the receipt of marketing approvals; and
•the commercialization of current and future product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Cancer immunotherapy product candidates in the later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in the earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of the later-stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we conduct and complete our ongoing early and late stage clinical trials and initiate additional clinical trials.
Our expenditures are subject to additional uncertainties, including the terms and timing of regulatory approvals. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our current or future product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials. We may elect to discontinue, delay or modify clinical trials of some product candidates or target indications or focus on others. A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, administrative, finance and legal functions, including stock-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses, fees for outside legal counsel, and director and officer insurance premiums. Other general and administrative expenses include facility related costs, patent filing and prosecution costs, professional fees for business development, accounting, consulting, legal and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with our Nasdaq listing and SEC reporting requirements, investor relations costs, and other expenses associated with being a public company.
If and when we believe that regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate that an increase in general and administrative expenses will occur as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, particularly as it relates to the sales and marketing of such product candidate. Cancer immunotherapy product commercialization may take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
In-Process Research and Development Impairment Charge
Intangible assets are comprised of identifiable in-process research and development assets, or IPR&D, and are considered indefinite-lived assets and are assessed for impairment annually or more frequently if impairment indicators are present. Our indefinite-lived intangible asset consisted of IPR&D of NPS that was acquired as part of the merger with Galena Biopharma, Inc. in 2017, or the Merger. The impairment charge recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 was a result of the determination that the carrying amount of the IPR&D was not recoverable and was measured by the amount the carrying value exceeded its fair value.
Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net
Non-operating income (expense), net consists of changes in fair value of our warrant liability, changes in fair value of our contingent consideration, and interest income. Interest income primarily reflects the interest earned from our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $20.7 million compared with a net loss of $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $3.9 million in net loss was primarily attributable to an increase in operating expenses of $14.0 million, driven by a $6.4 million increase in research and development expenses, a $5.7 million non-cash impairment charge of IPR&D, a $1.7 million increase in general and administrative expenses, and a $0.2 million increase in costs of license revenue. These increases in operating expenses were partially offset by a $5.7 million increase in licensing revenue, a $4.2 million increase in non-operating income, and a $0.2 million increase in income tax benefit.
Further analysis of the changes and trends in our operating results are discussed below.
License Revenue
License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.6 million compared to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and related to the out-licensing of intellectual property rights and transfer of technical know-how associated with the 3DMed Agreement for the development and commercialization of GPS in China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan.
Cost of License Revenue
We incurred $0.2 million of sublicensing fees payable under our license from MSK in connection with the 3DMed Agreement during year ended December 31, 2021. There was no cost of license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As compared to the prior period, the $6.4 million increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to a $4.3 million increase in clinical trial expenses primarily related to our ongoing Phase 3 REGAL clinical trial of GPS in AML, a $1.7 million increase in manufacturing and drug supply costs due to the ramp up of the manufacture of clinical trial materials and registration batches of GPS, a technology transfer to a new contract manufacturer, and clinical drug supply purchase costs in the European Union as we prepared to open sites and enroll patients in European Union countries for our Phase 3 REGAL clinical trial for GPS in AML, and a $0.5 million increase in personnel related expenses due to increased headcount. These increases were partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease in other research and development expenses. We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase in the future as we continue to advance the development of GPS, including our Phase 3 REGAL clinical trial of GPS in AML.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $1.7 million increase was primarily driven by a $1.1 million amortization expense of our contract asset associated with the 3DMed License Agreement and a $0.9 million increase in personnel related expenses, including a $0.3 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses.
In-Process Research and Development Impairment Charge
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed an annual impairment analysis of our IPR&D. The impairment charge recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 was in connection with our determination that consummating an out-licensing transaction of NPS for further development in breast cancer was unlikely and taking into account the deferred development timelines and a lower probability of success associated with earlier stages of clinical development for the potential development of NPS in other oncology indications. The Company determined that the carrying amount of the IPR&D associated with NPS exceeded the fair value and recorded a $5.7 million impairment charge during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-Operating Income, Net
Non-operating income, net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was as follows (in thousands):
The increase in our net non-operating income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $4.1 million increase in the change in fair value of contingent consideration, and a $0.1 million increase in the change in the fair value of liability-classified warrants to acquire shares of our common stock. The change in estimated fair value of contingent consideration is driven by changes in discount periods and rates, changes in the timing of development milestones achieved and changes in probability assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achieving the various earnout criteria. The $4.3 million change in fair value of the contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the inability to execute an out-licensing transaction of NPS for further development in breast cancer and reflected adjusted assumptions of deferred development timelines and a lower probability of success, associated with earlier stages of clinical development, for the potential development of NPS in other oncology indications. The change in the estimated fair value of our warrant liability was primarily due to the changes in our common stock price.
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consists of nominal interest earned from our cash and cash equivalents. The changes in fair value of warrant liability and changes in fair value of contingent consideration are all non-cash in nature.
Income Tax Benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.2 million, primarily related to the intangible asset impairment charge. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a de minimis income tax benefit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not generated any revenue from product sales in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Since inception, we have incurred net losses, used net cash from our operations, and have funded substantially all of our operations through proceeds from the sale of debt and equity securities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $20.7 million, used $26.0 million of cash in operations, and had an accumulated deficit of $138.6 million as of December 31, 2021. We continue to expect to generate operating losses and negative cash flows for the next few years and we will need additional funding to support our planned operating activities through profitability. The transition to profitability is dependent upon the successful development, approval, and commercialization of our product candidates and the achievement of a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $21.4 million. We expect that our cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to fund our current planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. These conditions give rise to a substantial doubt over our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant sales of any current or future product candidates in development. This going concern assumption is based on management’s assessment of the sufficiency of our current and future sources of liquidity considering whether or not it is probable we will be able to meet our obligations as they become due for at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are available to be issued, and if not, whether our liquidation is imminent.
On April 16, 2021, the Company entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or the Agent. From time to time during the term of the Sales Agreement, we may offer and sell shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price up to a total of $50.0 million in gross proceeds. The Agent will collect a fee equal to 3% of the gross sales price of all shares of common stock sold. Shares of common stock sold under the Sales Agreement are offered and sold pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-3, which was filed with the SEC on April 16, 2021 and declared effective on April 29, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 786,927 shares of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement at an average price of $12.04 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $9.0 million. Other than the Sales Agreement, we currently do not have any commitments to obtain additional funds.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $3.1 million from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $2.0 million from milestones achieved pursuant to the 3DMed Agreement. In January 2022, we announced that an IND application for a small Phase I clinical trial investigating safety of GPS in China was accepted by China's National Medical Products Administration, or the NMPA. On March 30, 2022, the IND was approved by the NMPA triggering a $1.0 million milestone payment to the Company which is expected to be received in the second quarter of 2022. 3D Medicines expects to initiate the trial by mid-2022 and will be responsible for all expenses related to executing the trial in China. The current clinical development plan provides for initiation of a Phase II clinical trial following receipt of satisfactory safety data from the Phase I study; the initiation of the Phase II study will also trigger a milestone payment to us which we expect will occur in the second half of 2022. Total remaining potential milestone payments to us under the 3DMed Agreement between total $192.5 million, not including future royalties.
We will require substantial additional financing to develop any current or future product candidates. Alternatively, we will be required to scale back our plans and place certain activities on hold. Other than the Sales Agreement, we currently do not have any commitments to obtain additional funds, and may be unable to obtain sufficient funding in the future on acceptable terms, if at all. Our management continues to evaluate different strategies to obtain the required funding for future operations. These strategies may include utilizing the Sales Agreement, public and private placements of equity and/or debt securities, payments from potential strategic research and development collaborations, and licensing and/or marketing arrangements with pharmaceutical companies. Additionally, we continue to pursue discussions with global and regional pharmaceutical companies for licensing and/or co-development rights to our late- and early-stage pipeline candidates. There can be no assurance that these future funding efforts will be successful. If we cannot obtain the necessary funding, we will need to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs; consider other various strategic alternatives, including a merger or sale; or cease operations.
Our future operations are highly dependent on a combination of factors, including (i) the timely and successful completion of additional financing, (ii) our ability to complete revenue-generating partnerships with pharmaceutical companies, (iii) the success of our research and development activities, (iv) the development of competitive therapies by other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, and, ultimately, (v) regulatory approval and market acceptance of our proposed future products.
The following table provides a reconciliation of the components of cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and restricted cash equivalents reported in our consolidated balance sheets to the total of the amount presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows (in thousands):
Restricted cash and cash equivalents of $0.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 related to certificates of deposit maintained on hand with our financial institutions as collateral for our corporate credit cards.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $26.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $20.7 million and a change in our operating assets and liabilities of $7.6 million, which was partially offset by various net non-cash charges of $2.3 million. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities is primarily attributable to a decrease in deferred revenue of $5.6 million, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1.8 million, a $1.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets primarily for clinical trial costs, and a $0.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, which were partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease in contract acquisition costs related to the out-licensing of intellectual property rights and transfer of technical know-how associated with the 3DMed License Agreement.
Net cash used in operating activities of $10.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $16.8 million. This amount was offset by a change in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.9 million and various net non-cash charges of $0.5 million These noncash charges were comprised of $0.6 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense and $0.2 million in other noncash charges. These amounts were partially offset by a gain of $0.3 million from the decrease in the fair value of our contingent consideration liability. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities is primarily attributable to an increase in deferred revenue related to our 3DMed License Agreement.
Net Cash Flow from Financing Activities
We generated $12.1 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to $9.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the Sales Agreement and $3.1 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
We generated $38.4 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to $29.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock, common stock pre-funded warrants, and common stock warrants and $8.5 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants to acquire shares of common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Leases
Our lease commitments reflect payments due for our lease agreement for office space at the premises that expire in December 2024 in New York, New York. As of December 31, 2021, our contractual commitments for our lease was $1.5 million, which will be paid over the term of the lease. The amount of lease commitments reflects payments due for additional premises under an amendment to our lease agreement that had not commenced as of December 31, 2021, and as a result, our future lease payments as of December 31, 2021 was $1.0 million. On February 21, 2022, the Company took possession of the additional premises and the lease amendment commenced. For additional information on our leases and timing of future payments, please read Note 8, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Other Commitments
We acquire product candidates still in development and enter into research and development arrangements with third parties that often require milestone and royalty payments to the third-party contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events linked to the success of the product candidate in development. Milestone payments may be required, contingent upon the successful achievement of an important point in the development life-cycle of the pharmaceutical product (e.g., approval of the product for marketing by a regulatory agency). We also typically have to make royalty payments based upon a percentage of the sales of the product candidate in the event that regulatory approval for marketing is obtained. Because of the contingent nature of these payments, they are not included in the table of contractual obligations.
These arrangements may be material individually and in the event that multiple milestones are reached in the same period, the aggregate charge to expense could be material to the results of operations in any one period. In addition, these arrangements often give us the discretion to terminate development of the product candidate, which would allow us to avoid making the contingent payments; however, we are unlikely to cease development if the product candidate successfully achieves clinical testing objectives.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation generally consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments have not been included separately within these contractual and other obligations disclosures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. We base such estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We record revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of Topic 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and we assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Development, Regulatory and Sales Milestones and Other Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes regulatory or development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments upon first commercial sales and milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets are comprised of identifiable IPR&D acquired in conjunction with the completion of the Merger and are considered indefinite-lived intangible assets and are assessed for impairment annually during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or more frequently if impairment indicators exist.
The identifiable intangible assets are measured at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date and may be subject to revision within the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date. The models used in valuing these intangible assets require the use of significant estimates and assumptions including but not limited to:
•estimates of revenue and operating profits related to products or product candidates;
•the probability of success for unapproved product candidates considering their stages of development;
•the time and resources needed to complete the development and approval of product candidates;
•the life of the potential commercialized products and associated risks, including the inherent difficulties and uncertainties in developing a product candidate such as obtaining FDA and other regulatory approvals; and
•risks related to the viability of and potential alternative treatments in any future target markets.
We believe that the fair values used to record intangible assets acquired in connection with a business combination use information known and knowable, and are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions given the facts and circumstances as of the related valuation dates.
Intangible assets related to IPR&D are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. If and when development is complete, which generally occurs if and when regulatory approval to market a product is obtained, the associated assets would be deemed finite-lived and would then be amortized based on their respective estimated useful lives at that point in time. During the period the assets are considered indefinite-lived, they are not amortized but are tested for impairment on an annual basis as well as between annual tests if we become aware of any events or changes that would indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the IPR&D is below their respective carrying amounts. The fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets is dependent on assumptions such as the expected timing or probability of achieving the specified milestones, changes in projected revenues or changes in discount rates. Significant judgment is employed in determining these assumptions and changes to our assumptions could have a significant impact on our results of operations in any given period.
When performing our impairment assessment, we calculate the fair value using the same methodology as described above. If the carrying value of our IPR&D exceeds its fair value, then the intangible asset is written down to its fair value. Changes in estimates and assumptions used in determining the fair value of our IPR&D could result in an impairment. Impairment charges are recorded within our consolidated statements of operations. Based on our most recent impairment assessment we incurred a $5.7 million impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2021, mainly related to our determination that the execution of an out-licensing transaction of NPS for further development in breast cancer was unlikely and taking into account the deferred development timelines and a lower probability of success associated with earlier stages of clinical development for the potential development of NPS in other oncology indications. See Note 4, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net amounts assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to an annual impairment test. We have a single reporting unit and all goodwill relates to that reporting unit.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment test at the reporting unit level on October 1 of each fiscal year or more frequently if changes in circumstances or the occurrence of events suggest that an impairment exists. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment using the simplified test of goodwill impairment as defined by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, No. 2017-04. Under the guidance, goodwill impairment is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, without exceeding the carrying amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill. We did not recognize any impairment of goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers require advance payments; however, some invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•Vendors in connection with clinical development activities;
•the production of clinical trial materials;
•CROs in connection with clinical trials; and
•investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect its estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Valuation of Contingent Consideration
Acquisitions may include contingent consideration payments based on the achievement of certain future events. Contingent consideration is required to be recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. The obligations for such contingent consideration payments are recorded at fair value on the acquisition date. The contingent consideration obligations are then evaluated each reporting period. Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, other than changes due to payments, are recognized as a gain or loss and recorded within the change in the fair value of contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of development and regulatory milestones are estimated utilizing a probability adjusted, discounted cash flow approach. The fair value of net sales milestones is based on probability adjusted sales estimates and estimated discount rates and utilizes an option pricing model with Monte Carlo simulation to simulate a range of possible payment scenarios, and the average of the payments in these scenarios is then discounted to calculate present fair value. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we changed the valuation technique of net sales milestones from a probability adjusted, discounted cash flow approach to the option pricing model with Monte Carlo simulation.
The discount rates are an estimated measure of credit risk associated with the years of expected payments based on the current development stage of the product candidate, our specific development plan for that product candidate adjusted for the probability of completing the stages of development and when the contingent payments would be triggered. In estimating the probability of success, we utilize data regarding similar milestone events from several sources, including industry studies and the Company's experience. The fair value of the contingent consideration is classified as a Level 3 liability as the valuation requires substantial judgment and estimation of factors that are not currently observable in the market. If different assumptions were used for the various inputs to the valuation, including but not limited to, assumptions involving the probability of success, estimated discount rate, and projected years of payment, the estimated fair value could be significantly higher or lower than the fair value determined.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by estimating the fair value of each stock option on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model. We recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting term. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make certain assumptions regarding: (i) the expected volatility in the market price of our shares; (ii) dividend yield; (iii) risk-free interest rates; and (iv) the period of time employees are expected to hold the award prior to exercise (referred to as the expected holding period). As a result, if we revise our assumptions and estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could change.
Given our limited history as a publicly traded company following the Merger on December 29, 2017, we did not have sufficient trading data to calculate volatility based on our own common stock, and the expected volatility was calculated as of each grant date based on our own implied volatility in combination with a peer group of publicly traded companies. The expected term of the stock options was determined based upon the simplified approach for employees, allowed under SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 110, which assumes that the stock options will be exercised evenly from vesting to expiration. As data associated with future exercises is obtained, the expected term of future grants will be adjusted accordingly. For non-employee awards, we use the remaining contractual term.
We measure compensation for restricted stock units, or RSUs, based on the price of our shares at the grant date and we recognize the expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The expense relating to RSUs that contain both a service and a performance condition is estimated and adjusted on a quarterly basis based upon our assessment of the probability that the performance condition would be met. As a result, if we revise such assessment, our stock-based compensation expense could change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740):Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes which, among other things, eliminates certain exceptions in the current rules regarding the approach for intra-period tax allocations and the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. The standard was adopted by the Company on January 1, 2021. This new standard did not have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity which, among other things, simplifies the accounting models for the allocation of proceeds attributable to the issuance of a convertible debt instrument. As a result, after adopting the ASU’s guidance, entities will not separately present in equity an embedded conversion feature in such debt. Instead, they will account for a convertible debt instrument wholly as debt, and for convertible preferred stock wholly as preferred stock (i.e., as a single unit of account), unless (i) a convertible instrument contains features that require bifurcation as a derivative under ASC 815 or (ii) a convertible debt instrument was issued at a substantial premium. The standard becomes effective for the Company in the first quarter of 2024 and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of the adoption of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, ASU No. 2021-04, Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications of Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options was issued to clarify the accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options, such as warrants to acquire shares of common stock, that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. This ASU became effective for the Company on January 1, 2022 and is not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.