ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on May 14, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to consummate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on October 21, 2021 (the “Closing Date”) and the Private Placement, and from additional issuances of, if any, our equity and our debt, or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
Our sponsor is SportsMap, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on October 18, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On October 21, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 11,500,000 Units, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 1,500,000 units, at a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit generating a profit of $115,000,000.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, we consummated the private placement 675,000 units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit to the Sponsor and the representative of the underwriters and/or certain of their designees or affiliates, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $6,750,000.
Following the closing of the IPO on October 21, 2021, $117,300,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of Units in the IPO and a portion of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Units was deposited into a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S. government treasury bills, notes or bonds with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act and which invest solely in U.S. Treasuries. Except as set forth below, the proceeds held in the Trust Account will not be released until the earlier of: (1) the completion of the initial Business Combination within the required time period; (2) our redemption of 100% of the outstanding public shares if we have not completed an initial Business Combination in the required time period; and (3) the redemption of any public shares properly tendered in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (A) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to allow redemption of public shares as described in the IPO or redeem 100% of the public shares if the we do not complete the initial Business Combination within the required time period or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-Business Combination activity.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $931,271 in its operating bank account, and working capital of $1,194,449, excluding franchise tax payable. Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of up to $400,000. The outstanding balance under the promissory note of $323,190 was paid in full, on October 22, 2021.
After consummation of the IPO on October 21, 2021, we had $24,991 in its operating bank account, and working capital of $1,463,454, which included $2,150,000 of private placement proceeds receivable from the Sponsor which was received into our operating bank account on October 22, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide our Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from May 14, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the Initial Public Offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from May 14, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $413,954, which consisted of formation and operating costs.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
We entered into an administrative services agreement on October 18, 2021, pursuant to which we will pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and other administrative and consulting services. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or its liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. As of December 31, 2021, the Company incurred and has an unpaid balance of $24,516 of administrative expenses.
Registration Rights
Our initial stockholders and their permitted transferees can demand that the Company registers the founder shares, the Private Placement Units and the underlying private shares and private warrants, and the units issuable upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and the underlying common stock and warrants, pursuant to an agreement to be signed prior to or on the date of the IPO. The holders of such securities are entitled to demand that the Company registers these securities at any time after the Company consummates an initial Business Combination. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any holder that is affiliated with an underwriter participating in the IPO may only make a demand on one occasion and only during the five-year period beginning on the commencement date of sales in the IPO. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights on registration statement filed after the Company’s consummation of a Business Combination; provided that any holder that is affiliated with an underwriter participating in the IPO may participate in a “piggy-back” registration only during the seven-year period beginning on the commencement date of sales in the IPO.
Underwriting Agreement
On October 21, 2021, we paid a cash underwriting discount of 2.0% per Unit, or $2,300,000.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
We have engaged the representative as an advisor in connection with the Business Combination to assist it in holding meetings with its stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that are interested in purchasing its securities in connection with the initial Business Combination, assist the Company in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist the Company with its press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay the representative a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the initial Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $4,025,000 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable).
Critical Accounting Policies
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the IPO. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments to be issued in the IPO based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction of equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. Upon closing of the IPO on October 21, 2021, offering costs associated with the common stock and the warrants were charged to stockholders’ equity. Transaction costs amounted to $2,822,937, consisting of $2,686,076 which was charged to temporary equity and $136,861 which was charged to additional paid-in capital.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We will account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Common stock will feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and will be subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption will be presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Stock
We comply with the accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. At December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per common stock is the same as basic loss per common stock for the periods presented.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common stocks and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. We account for our outstanding warrants as equity-classified instruments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments. The guidance removes certain accounting models that separate the embedded conversion features from the host contract for convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 allows for a modified or full retrospective method of transition. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact this change will have on our financial statements.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB (including its Emerging Issues Task Force), the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the SEC did not, or are not believed by management to, have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, (the “Securities Act”), as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statement, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, us, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.