Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Company Overview - Discussion of our business plan and strategy in order to provide context for the remainder of MD&A.
● Critical Accounting Policies - Accounting policies that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
● Results of Operations - Analysis of our financial results comparing the year ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources - Liquidity discussion of our financial condition and potential sources of liquidity.
Company Overview
Business
SmartMetric, Inc. was incorporated pursuant to the laws of Nevada on December 18, 2002. “SmartMetric is a development stage company engaged in the technology industry. SmartMetric’s main products are a fingerprint sensor activated payments card and security card with a finger sensor and fully functional fingerprint reader embedded inside the card. The SmartMetric biometric cards have a rechargeable battery allowing for portable biometric identification and card activation. This card is referred to as a biometric card or the SmartMetric Biometric Card.”
To date, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to the development of our SmartMetric Card. Since our inception in 2002, we have generated no revenue from product sales and have funded our operations principally through the private sales of our equity securities. We have never been profitable and, as of June 30, 2022, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $30,503,856. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our technologies and advance them to market.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance at June 30, 2022 was approximately $126,791 representing 72.3% of total assets. Notwithstanding our recent capital raises, based on our current expected level of operating expenditures, we expect to be able to fund our operations into the quarter beginning April 1, 2023. This period could be shortened if there are any significant increases in spending that were not anticipated or other unforeseen events.
We anticipate raising additional cash through the private or public sales of equity or debt securities to continue to fund our operations and the development of our technologies. There is no assurance that financing will be available to us when needed in order to allow us to continue our operations, or if available, on terms acceptable to us. If we do not raise sufficient funds in a timely manner, we may be forced to curtail operations, delay or stop our ongoing clinical trials, cease operations altogether, or file for bankruptcy. We currently do not have commitments for future funding from any source.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the carrying amounts of recorded assets or the carrying amounts and classification of recorded liabilities that may be required should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements the Company has incurred recurring losses of $1,687,348 and $924,728 for the period ending June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and has incurred a cumulative loss of $30,496,042 since inception (December 18, 2002). These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the date of this filing. The Company is currently in the development stage and has spent a substantial portion of its time in the development of its technology.
There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to raise enough capital or generate revenues to sustain its operations.
Management believes that the Company’s capital requirements will depend on many factors. These factors include the final phase of development and mass production being successful as well as product implementation and distribution. Management plans to continue its relationship with Geneva Roth Remark in order to raise capital beyond exclusively private placement stock sales.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the carrying amounts of recorded assets or the carrying amounts and classification of recorded liabilities that may be required should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have prepared our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which requires management to make significant judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. We base these significant judgments and estimates on historical experience and other applicable assumptions we believe to be reasonable based upon information presently available. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the financial statements as soon as they became known. Actual results could materially differ from our estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions.
All of the Company’s significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We have identified the following as our significant accounting policies and estimates, which are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, are the most pervasive and important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions, judgments or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Use of Estimates - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying disclosures. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Research and Development Costs - Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of expenditures for electronics design and engineering, software design and engineering, component sourcing, component engineering, manufacturing, product trials, compensation and consulting costs.
Earnings Per Share - In accordance with FASB ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share,” the basic loss per share is computed by dividing the loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Basic net loss per share excludes the dilutive effect of stock options or warrants and convertible notes. Diluted net earnings (loss) per common share is determined using the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period, adjusted for the dilutive effect of common stock equivalents, consisting of shares that might be issued upon exercise of common stock options and warrants. In periods where losses are reported, the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding excludes common stock equivalents, because their inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
Patent Impairment - When the carrying balance of the Company’s patent is more than what it could be sold for on the open market and/or is not recoverable through future use, the Company decreases its value. In determining whether the carrying value is not recoverable, the Company estimates the sum of the expected cash flows from the use of the patent or its possible sale. If the results in an amount less that the patent’s value on the financial statements, the Company will deem the patent’s carrying value on the balance sheet to be impaired by the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair market value of the asset. The decrease in the patent’s value will then be included as a loss in the Company’s profit and loss statement. The Company had no patent asset recorded at June 30, 2022.
Cash - The Company considers all highly liquid debt instruments and other short-term investments with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Any amounts of cash in financial institutions which exceed FDIC insured limits exposes the Company to cash concentration risk. The Company had no cash equivalents at June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Result of Operations
Year Ended June 30, 2022 Compared to the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Our results of operations have varied significantly from year to year and quarter to quarter and may vary significantly in the future. We did not have revenue during the years ending June 30, 2022 and 2021. We did not generate any revenues during the years ending June 30, 2022 and 2021. Net loss for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $1,687,348 and $944,203, respectively, resulting from the operational activities described below.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were $1,133,502 and $821,824 during the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in operating expenses is the result of increasing research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses as a result of increasing product development activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, as compared to June 30, 2021, as set forth below.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $128,616 and $76,344 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase of $52,272, or 68.5%, in 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in engineering costs associated with increased development efforts in the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year.
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of expenditures related to engineering development of our card product.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $814,886 and $555,480 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase of $259,406 or 46.7%, in 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily the result of an increase in consulting expenses for research and development during the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year.
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of expenditures related to employee compensation, legal, accounting and tax, other professional services, and general operating expenses.
Officer salary was $190,000 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since our inception in 2002 as a result of significant expenditures for operations and research and development and the lack of any revenue. We have an accumulated deficit of approximately $30.5 million as of June 30, 2022, and anticipate that we will continue to incur additional losses for the foreseeable future. Through June 30, 2022, we have funded our operations through the private sale of our equity securities and exercise of options and warrants, resulting in gross proceeds of approximately $27 million. Cash and cash equivalents at June 30, 2022 were $126,791.
We are actively seeking sources of financing to fund our continued operations and research and development programs. To raise additional capital, we may sell shares of equity or debt securities. There can be no assurance that we will be able to complete any financing transaction in a timely manner or on acceptable terms or otherwise. If we are not able to raise additional cash, we may be forced to further delay, curtail, or cease development of our product candidates, or cease operations altogether.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,042,743 and $548,107 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase of $494,636 in cash used during 2022 compared to 2021 was primarily attributable to higher consulting and legal expenses during the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0 and $0 for years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,159,209 for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $506,530 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase of $652,679 was due to increased private placement sales during the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year. We are actively seeking sources of financing to fund our continued operations and research and development programs.