Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report contains comments or information that constitute forward looking statements (within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Act of 1995) that are based on current expectations that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Words such as “expects”, “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates” and other similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as “will”, “should”, “would” and “could” are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. The Private Securities Litigation Act of 1995 indicates that the disclosure of forward-looking information is desirable for investors and encourages such disclosure by providing a safe harbor for forward-looking statements by us. In order to comply with the terms of the safe harbor, we note that a variety of factors could cause our actual results and experience to differ materially from the anticipated results or other expectations expressed in those forward-looking statements.
Although we believe the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results may differ materially. Factors that might cause such a difference include: the effect of the COVID-19 crisis, including the negative impacts and disruptions on the communities we serve, and the domestic and global economy, which may have an adverse effect on our business; current and future economic and market conditions, including the effects of declines in housing prices, high unemployment rates, U.S. fiscal debt, budget and tax matters, geopolitical matters, and any slowdown in global economic growth; fiscal and monetary policies of the Federal Reserve; future provisions for credit losses on loans and debt securities; changes in nonperforming assets; changes in interest rates and interest rate relationships; demand for products and services; the degree of competition by traditional and non-traditional competitors; the successful integration of operations of our acquisitions; changes in banking laws and regulations; changes in tax laws; the impact of technological advances; the outcomes of contingencies; trends in customer behavior as well as their ability to repay loans; and changes in the national and local economies. We undertake no obligation to revise these statements following the date of this filing.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
We are a $3.58 billion community-based financial services company providing a full range of banking and other financial services to individuals and businesses through our our community bank, Summit Community Bank, Inc., which has a total of 45 banking offices located in West Virginia,Virginia and Kentucky. We have a trust and wealth management division offering trust services and other non-bank financial products principally within our community bank's market area.
OVERVIEW
Our primary source of income is net interest income from loans and deposits. Business volumes tend to be influenced by the overall economic factors including market interest rates, business spending and consumer confidence, as well as competitive conditions within the marketplace.
Key Items in 2021
•Our earnings per diluted share increased from $2.41 in 2020 to $3.47 in 2021.
•Our return on average equity increased to 14.76% from 11.80% and return on average tangible common equity increased from 14.73% to 19.29%.
•2021 net income applicable to common shares was $45.15 million ($3.47 per diluted share) compared to $31.33 million ($2.41 per diluted share) in 2020.
•Net interest margin decreased 17 basis points in 2021, principally due to a 44 basis point decrease in cost of interest bearing funds compared to a 52 basis point decrease in our yield on interest earning assets.
•Net revenues increased $14.6 million, or 12.6 percent during 2021 primarily as result of increased interest income related to loan growth and the MVB Bank branches and WinFirst Financial Corp. ("WinFirst") acquisitions and reduced deposit interest costs.
•We achieved loan growth, excluding mortgage warehouse lines of credit, acquired loans and PPP loans, of 18.3 percent, or $382.1 million during 2021.
•Nonperforming assets declined to their lowest level since 2008, representing 0.63 percent of total assets at year end 2021 compared to 1.16 percent at the prior year end.
•During 2021, provisions for credit losses decreased by $10.5 million, which reflects credit loss accounting rules adopted in 2020 which required us to record all estimated future losses in our loan portfolio, and this contributed significantly to our credit loss provision for 2020 as we recorded our estimate of credit losses expected to result from the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Cash dividends paid on our common stock in 2021 totaled $0.70 per share compared to $0.68 paid per share in 2020.
•We completed the acquisition of substantially all of MVB Bank’s southern West Virginia community banking operations, including four full-service branches and two drive-up locations in and around the state’s largest cities of Charleston and Huntington during third quarter 2021. These branches had total loans of $54.3 million and deposits of $164.0 million.
OUTLOOK
The year just concluded represents another significant milestone relative to Summit’s goal to be a consistent growth, high-performing community banking institution. Our solid lending activity and strong core operating performance of the past year offer significant evidence of our progress. In addition, our acquisition strategy continued to present us with significant opportunities for ongoing performance enhancement. Looking forward to 2022, while we could be challenged by a variety of potential economic uncertainties, we anticipate sustaining our recent positive trends with respect to: revenue growth, loan portfolio growth, a relatively stable net interest margin, low overhead, and stability in overall levels of problem assets.
COVID-19 IMPACTS
Overview
During 2020 and to a lesser extent in 2021, our business has been, and continues to be somewhat impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As further discussed in “Results of Operations,” the current interest rate environment, borrower credit quality and market volatility, among other factors, continue to impact our performance. Although we are unable to estimate the magnitude, we expect the pandemic and the resulting economic environment will continue to affect our future operating results. The longer-term potential impact on our business could depend to a large extent on future developments and actions taken by authorities and other entities to contain COVID-19 and its economic impact. Furthermore, the sustainability of the economic recovery observed in 2021 remains unclear and significant volatility could continue for a prolonged period as the potential exists for additional variants of COVID-19, including the recent Omicron variant, to impede the global economic recovery and exacerbate geographic differences in the spread of, and response to, COVID-19.
Impact on our Operations
Summit continues to address the issues arising as a result of COVID-19 as we have implemented various plans, strategies and protocols to protect our employees, maintain services for clients, assure the functional continuity of our operating systems, controls and processes, and mitigate financial risks posed by changing market conditions. While governmental entities have generally eased temporary business closures and all of our offices are now open as normal without restriction and approved vaccines are being administered throughout our footprint, it remains unknown when, or if, there will be a return to historical norms of economic and social activity.
Impact on our Financial Position and Results of Operations
Lending and Credit Risks: While we have not experienced any material charge-offs related to COVID-19, our allowance for credit losses ACL computation and resulting provision for credit losses are significantly impacted by the estimated potential future economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis. Refer to the Asset Quality section of this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further details regarding provision for credit losses.
We took actions to identify and assess our COVID-19 related credit exposures by asset classes and borrower types. Depending on the demonstrated need of the client, in certain cases, we either modified to interest only or deferred the full loan payment. The aggregate balances of loans the Company had modified as result of COVID-19 at December 31, 2020 totaled $79.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, all modified loans had returned to normal status.
Capital and Liquidity: Our capital management activities, coupled with our historically strong earnings performance and prudent dividend practices, have allowed us to build and maintain strong capital reserves. At December 31, 2021, all of Summit’s regulatory capital ratios significantly exceeded well-capitalized standards. More specifically, the Company bank
subsidiary’s Tier 1 Leverage Ratio, a common measure to evaluate a financial institutions capital strength, was 10.4% at December 31, 2021, which is well in excess of the well-capitalized regulatory minimum of 5.0%.
In addition, management believes the Company’s liquidity position is strong. The Company’s bank subsidiary maintains a funding base largely comprised of core noninterest bearing demand deposit accounts and low cost interest-bearing transactional deposit accounts with clients that operate or reside within the footprint of its branch bank network. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s cash and cash equivalent balances were $78.5 million. In addition, Summit maintains an available-for-sale securities portfolio, comprised primarily of highly liquid U.S. agency securities, highly-rated municipal securities and U.S. agency-backed mortgage backed securities, which serves as a ready source of liquidity. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s available-for-sale securities portfolio totaled $401.1 million, $257.0 million of which was unpledged as collateral. The Company bank subsidiary’s unused borrowing capacity at the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh at December 31, 2021 was $982.2 million, and it maintained $279.5 million of borrowing availability at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond’s discount window.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and follow general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates, assumptions and judgments. Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and as such have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported.
Our most significant accounting policies are presented in the notes to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. These policies, along with the other disclosures presented in the financial statement notes and in this financial review, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined.
Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions and estimates underlying those amounts, we have identified the determination of the allowance for losses, fair value measurements and accounting for acquired loans to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments and as such could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Allowance for Credit Losses: The allowance for credit losses represents our estimate of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses is considered a critical accounting estimate because it requires significant judgment and the use of estimates related to the amount and timing of expected future cash flows on loans individually evaluated, estimated losses on pools of homogeneous loans based on historical loss experience and consideration of current and future economic trends and conditions, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. The loan portfolio also represents the largest asset type on our consolidated balance sheet. To the extent forecasted economic conditions change considerably and/or actual outcomes differ from our estimates, additional provisions for credit losses may be required that would negatively impact earnings in future periods. Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements describes the methodology used to determine the allowance for credit losses for loans and a discussion of the factors driving changes in the amount of the allowance for credit losses for loans is included in the Asset Quality section of this financial review. Note 17 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements describes our policies and methodology used to calculate the allowance for credit losses for off-balance-sheet credit exposures.
Fair Value Measurements: Fair value is based upon the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, including, but not limited to, property held for sale, individually evaluated collateral dependent loans and derivatives. Based on the observability of the inputs used in the valuation techniques, we classify our financial assets and liabilities measured and disclosed at fair value in accordance with a three-level hierarchy (e.g., Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3) . Fair value determination requires that we make a number of significant judgments. In determining the fair value of financial instruments, we use market prices of the same or similar instruments whenever such prices are available. We do not use prices involving distressed sellers in determining fair value. If observable market prices are unavailable or impracticable to obtain, then fair value is estimated using modeling techniques such as discounted cash flow analyses. These modeling techniques incorporate our assessments regarding assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or the liability, including assumptions about the risks inherent in a particular valuation technique and the risk of nonperformance.
Fair value is used on a recurring basis for certain assets and liabilities in which fair value is the primary basis of accounting. Additionally, fair value is used on a non-recurring basis to evaluate assets or liabilities for impairment or for disclosure purposes.
Accounting for Acquired Loans: Loans acquired are initially recorded at their acquisition date fair values. The fair value of the acquired loans are based on the present value of the expected cash flows, including principal, interest and prepayments. Periodic principal and interest cash flows are adjusted for expected losses and prepayments, then discounted to determine the present value and summed to arrive at the estimated fair value. Fair value estimates involve assumptions and judgments as to credit risk, interest rate risk, prepayment risk, liquidity risk, default rates, loss severity, payment speeds, collateral values and discount rate.
Acquired loans are divided into loans with evidence of credit quality deterioration (acquired impaired ("PCI") before adoption of ASC 326 and purchased credit deteriorated ("PCD") post adoption) and loans that do not meet this criteria (acquired performing). Acquired impaired loans (PCI) have experienced a deterioration of credit quality from origination to acquisition for which it is probable that we will be unable to collect all contractually required payments receivable, including both principal and interest. In the assessment of credit quality, numerous assumptions, interpretations and judgments must be made, based on internal and third-party credit quality information and ultimately the determination as to the probability that all contractual cash flows will not be able to be collected. This is a point in time assessment and inherently subjective due to the nature of the available information and judgment involved.
Subsequent to the acquisition date, we continue to estimate the amount and timing of cash flows expected to be collected on acquired impaired loans (PCI). Increases in expected cash flows will generally result in a recovery of any previously recorded allowance for credit losses, to the extent applicable, and/or a reclassification from the nonaccretable difference to accretable yield, which will be recognized prospectively. The present value of any decreases in expected cash flows after the acquisition date will generally result in an impairment charge recorded as a provision for credit losses, resulting in an increase to the allowance for credit losses.
ASC 326 replaced the concept of purchased credit impaired loans (PCI assets) with the concept of purchased financial assets with credit deterioration (PCD assets). A PCD asset is recorded at the purchase price plus the allowance for credit losses expected at the time of acquisition. Under this method, there is no credit loss expense affecting net income on acquisition. Changes in estimates of expected credit losses after acquisition are recognized as credit loss expense (or reversal of credit loss expense) in subsequent periods as they arise.
An asset is considered a PCD asset if, on the acquisition date, it has experienced a more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality since loan origination. FASB did not define the term “more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality”. They did however, state that they did not intend for PCD accounting to be limited to financial assets that are considered nonaccrual or impaired under legacy US GAAP; instead, it intended the term to include additional assets that have experienced a more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality since loan origination. Therefore the determination of what constitutes a PCD asset is left to management judgement.
Summit Community Bank has determined the following would constitute a “more-than-insignificant deterioration in credit quality”:
•Nonaccrual status
•Greater than 60 days past due at any time since loan origination
•Risk rating of OLEM, Substandard, Doubtful or Loss
We established a materiality limit of $50,000 for evaluating loans for PCD status. Subsequent to the acquisition date of PCD assets, we continue to estimate the amount and timing of cash flows expected to be collected on these acquired loans. Increases in expected cash flows will generally result in a recovery of any previously recorded allowance for credit losses, to the extent applicable. The present value of any decreases in expected cash flows after the acquisition date will generally result in additional provision for expected credit losses, resulting in an increase to the allowance for credit losses.
For acquired performing loans, the difference between the acquisition date fair value and the contractual amounts due at the acquisition date represents the fair value adjustment. Fair value adjustments may be discounts (or premiums) to a loan’s cost basis and are accreted (or amortized) to interest income over the loan’s remaining life using the level yield method. Based on ASC 326, a purchased financial asset that does not qualify as a PCD asset is accounted for similar to an originated financial asset. Generally, this means that an entity recognizes the allowance for credit losses for non-PCD assets through net income at acquisition. These purchased performing loans are accounted for through our CECL methodology as basically we would a new origination. Therefore, upon adoption of ASC 326, accounting for purchased performing acquired loans results in the bank
recognizing a fair value adjustment to the loan at acquisition and also establishing a provision for excepted credit losses as in the same manner of an originated asset.
See Note 3 and Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our acquired loans.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Earnings Summary
Net income applicable to common shares increased 44.1% during 2021 to $45.1 million, compared to $31.3 million in 2020 and $31.9 million in 2019. Net income applicable to common shares was $3.47, $2.41 and $2.53 per diluted share for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a 44.0% increase in 2021 and a 4.7% decrease in 2020. Return on average equity was 14.76% in 2021 compared to 11.80% in 2020 and 13.43% in 2019. Return on average assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 1.36% compared to 1.13% in 2020 and 1.40% in 2019.
2021 net income applicable to common shares was positively impacted by higher net interest income of $14.5 million (or $1.11 per diluted share) and $10.5 million (or $0.81 per diluted share) lower provision for credit losses. Partially offsetting these positive impacts were $3.0 million (or $0.23 per diluted share) fewer realized securities gains, $3.1 million (or $0.24 per diluted share) higher salaries and employee benefits and $1.3 million (or $0.10 per diluted share) increased other noninterest expenses.
2020 net income was positively impacted by higher net interest income of $18.4 million (or $1.42 per diluted share), $1.5 million (or $0.12 per diluted share) higher realized securities gains and a $2.0 million increase (or $0.16 per diluted share) in mortgage origination revenue. The $13.0 million increase in provision for credit losses (or $1.00 per diluted share), lower insurance commission revenue of $1.7 million (or $0.13 per diluted share) as result of the sale of our former insurance subsidiary during 2019 (which generated a 2019 gain of $1.9 million pre-tax, or $0.15 per diluted share) and higher salaries and employee benefits of $3.1 million (or $0.24 per diluted share) partially offset these positive impacts.
2019 net income was positively impacted by higher net interest income of $7.3 million (or $0.58 per diluted share), $1.3 million (or $0.10 per diluted share) higher realized securities gains and the $1.9 million pre-tax (or $0.15 per diluted share) gain recognized on the sale of our former insurance subsidiary, Summit Insurance Services, LLC. Lower insurance commission revenue of $2.4 million (or $0.19 per diluted share) and higher writedowns of OREO properties of $1.3 million (or $0.10 per diluted share) partially offset these positive impacts.
Net Interest Income
The major component of our net earnings is net interest income, which is the excess of interest earned on earning assets over the interest expense incurred on interest bearing sources of funds. Net interest income is affected by changes in volume, resulting from growth and alterations of the balance sheet's composition, fluctuations in interest rates and maturities of sources and uses of funds. We seek to maximize net interest income through management of our balance sheet components. This is accomplished by determining the optimal product mix with respect to yields on assets and costs of funds in light of projected economic conditions, while maintaining portfolio risk at an acceptable level.
Net interest income on a fully tax equivalent basis, average balance sheet amounts and corresponding average yields on interest earning assets and costs of interest bearing liabilities for the years 2017 through 2021 are presented in Table I. Table II presents, for the periods indicated, the changes in interest income and expense attributable to (a) changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior period rate) and (b) changes in rate (change in rate multiplied by prior period volume). Changes in interest income and expense attributable to both rate and volume have been allocated between the factors in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the change in each.
Net interest income on a fully tax equivalent basis totaled $111.0 million, $96.5 million and $78.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of 15.0% in 2021 and 23.7% in 2020. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the volumes of both interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities increased.
During 2021, our earnings on interest earning assets increased $7.5 million due to higher volumes while the cost of interest bearing liabilities decreased $7.0 million due to lower cost of funds.
During 2020, our earnings on interest earning assets increased $8.0 million due to higher volumes while the cost of interest bearing liabilities decreased $10.5 million due to lower cost of funds.
During 2019, our earnings on interest earning assets increased $11.3 million due to both higher volumes and higher yields, while the cost of interest bearing liabilities increased $4.4 million due to higher cost of funds.
Total average earning assets increased 20.5% to $3.13 billion for 2021 from $2.60 billion in 2020. Total average interest bearing liabilities increased 19.2% to $2.49 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $2.09 billion at December 31, 2020.
Our net interest margin was 3.54% for 2021 compared to 3.71% and 3.66% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net interest margin decreased 17 basis points during 2021 due to higher volumes of interest earning assets and lower cost of interest bearing funds. Our net interest margin increased 5 basis points during 2020 due to higher volumes of interest earning assets and lower cost of interest bearing funds..
Assuming no significant unanticipated changes in market interest rates, we expect growth in our net interest income to continue over the near term principally due to continuing expected growth in earning assets, primarily loans. We continue to monitor the net interest margin through net interest income simulation to minimize the potential for any significant negative impact.
See the “Market Risk Management” section for discussion of the impact changes in market interest rates could have on us. Further analysis of our yields on interest earning assets and interest bearing liabilities are presented in Tables I and II below.
(1)For purposes of this table, nonaccrual loans are included in average loan balances. Included in interest and fees on loans are loan fees of $1,414,000, $1,210,000, $960,000, $839,000 and $998,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
(2)For purposes of this table, interest income on tax-exempt securities and loans has been adjusted assuming a Federal tax rate of 21% for 2021, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and 35% for 2017. The taxable equivalent adjustment results in an increase in interest income of $1,050,000, $997,000, $922,000, $1,280,000 and $2,413,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses is determined by management as the amount to be added to the allowance for credit loss accounts for various types of financial instruments including loans, securities and off-balance-sheet credit exposure after net charge-offs have been deducted to bring the allowance to a level which, in management’s best estimate, is necessary to absorb expected credit losses over the lives of the respective financial instruments.
The following table summarizes the changes in the various factors that comprise the components of credit loss expense.
Our reasonable and supportable economic forecasts at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 improved markedly as our forecasts for unemployment and GDP now reflect 2021's strengthening economic recovery while early 2020 economic forecasts were extraordinarily negative as result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Provision for credit losses during 2019 was calculated under the prior incurred loss accounting methodology. See the section captioned “Asset Quality” elsewhere in this discussion for further analysis of provision for credit losses related to loans and off-balance-sheet credit exposures.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income totaled 0.60% 0.72% and 0.84% of average assets in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Noninterest income totaled $20.2 million in 2021 compared to $20.1 million in 2020 and $19.2 million in 2019. During 2021, mortgage origination revenue and bank card revenue increased $1.2 million and $1.4 million, respectively, while realized gains on debt securities decreased $3.0 million. However, most recently, mortgage origination volumes are lower as mortgage refinance opportunities have become more limited. The 2020 increase is primarily due to increased gains realized on debt securities and also increased mortgage origination revenue. Further detail regarding noninterest income is reflected in the following table.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense totaled $68.7 million, $62.3 million and $55.2 million, or 2.0%, 2.2%, and 2.4% of average assets for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Total noninterest expense increased $6.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020 and increased $7.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Our most notable changes in noninterest expense during 2021 were increased salaries and employee benefits, increased equipment expense and increased other expenses and during 2020 were increased salaries, commissions and employee benefits, increased equipment expense, increased FDIC premiums, increased acquisition-related expenses and increases in other expenses. Table V below presents a summary of our noninterest expenses for the past 3 years and the related year-over-year changes in each such expense.
Salaries, commissions and employee benefits: These expenses are 9.9% higher in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to general merit increases and the increased average number of annual full-time equivalent employees related to the southern West Virginia MVB branches acquisition in Q3 2021 and the WinFirst acquisition in Q4 2020. These expenses were 10.4% higher in
2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to general merit increases and an increase in our average annual full-time equivalent employees, primarily those in conjunction with the Cornerstone and MVB Bank branches acquisitions in early 2020.
Equipment: The 2021 and 2020 increases in equipment expense are primarily increased depreciation and amortization related to various technological upgrades, both hardware and software, including interactive teller machine upgrades made during the past three years and also recent acquisitions.
FDIC premiums: 2019 FDIC premiums were unusually low due to the FDIC's Small Bank Assessment Credits resulting from the reserve ratio meeting the required 1.38 percent threshold. Balance sheet growth and the full utilization of this credit during 2020 resulted in increased FDIC premiums for 2020. The increase during 2021 was primarily due to a higher assessment base resulting from our balance sheet growth.
Acquisition-related expense: These expenses are comprised of data processing conversion costs, employee severance costs, write-downs of equipment and professional and legal fees related to recent acquisitions.
Foreclosed properties expense, net of gains/losses: Foreclosed properties expense, net of gains/losses decreased for 2021 primarily as a result of lower writedowns of theses properties to their estimated fair values and fewer losses realized on sales of these properties.
Other: The 2021 increase in other expenses is primarily due to $259,000 increase in internet banking expense due to increased internet activity by customers, $306,000 increase in debit card costs due to increased usage by customers and $318,000 increased fraud losses. The 2020 increase in other expenses is primarily due to a $448,000 increase in service charges related to mortgage warehouse lines due to our increased participations and $267,000 increase in debit card costs due to increased usage by customers.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 totaled $11.7 million, $7.4 million and $7.7 million, respectively. Our effective tax rates (income tax expense as a percentage of income before taxes) for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were 20.3%, 19.2% and 19.5%, respectively. Refer to Note 15 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information and additional discussion of the significant components influencing our effective income tax rates.
CHANGES IN FINANCIAL POSITION
Our average assets increased during 2021 to $3.35 billion, an increase of 20.4% above 2020's average of $2.78 billion, and our year end December 31, 2021 assets were $470.3 million more than December 31, 2020. Average assets increased 22.0% in 2020, from 2019's average of $2.28 billion.
As highlighted in table VI, 2021's balance sheet growth was primarily loans and debt securities available for sale. As highlighted in table VII, the majority of the changes in our financial position in 2020 versus 2019 resulted from the acquisitions of Cornerstone, MVB branches, and WinFirst. Other changes in financial position are discussed below.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The 2021 net reduction of $117.0 million is primarily attributable to funding loan growth and the purchase of available for sale taxable and tax-exempt municipal securities with cash provided by increased customer deposits and the issuance of $75 million subordinated debentures. The 2020 net reduction of $137.1 million is primarily attributable to repayments of short-term Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") advances, maturing brokered CDs, funding of $101.3 million of PPP loans and the cash consideration of $36.0 million paid in conjunction with the Cornerstone and WinFirst acquisitions.
Loan Portfolio
Table VIII depicts gross loan balances by type at December 31, as follows:
Total loans averaged $2.5 billion in 2021, which represented 74% of total average assets compared to $2.2 billion in 2020, or 78% of total average assets. We experienced 17.3% loan growth, excluding mortgage warehouse lines, which increased $373.2 million (of which $54.3 million were acquired loans) in 2021, primarily in the commercial real estate and construction and development portfolios primarily due to additional commercial lending staff, following 2020's growth of 20.9% and 2019's growth of 7.9%. Mortgage warehouse lines of credit declined $23.9 million in 2021 due to a reduction in size of our participation arrangement with a regional bank to fund residential mortgage warehouse lines of medium- and large-sized mortgage originators located throughout the United States after having grown $125.6 million in 2020 as we expanded our then existing line participations and established several new participations in light of strong mortgage refinance and home purchase activity nationally. Refer to Note 7 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for our loan maturities and a discussion of our adjustable rate loans as of December 31, 2021.
In the normal course of business, we make various commitments and incur certain contingent liabilities, which are disclosed in Note 17 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements but not reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. There have been no significant changes in these types of commitments and contingent liabilities and we do not anticipate any material losses as a result of these commitments.
Debt Securities
Debt securities comprised approximately 14.0% of total assets at December 31, 2021 compared to 12.4% at December 31, 2020. Average debt securities approximated $460.7 million for 2021 or 21.5% more than 2020's average of $379.3 million. At December 31, 2021, we did not own debt securities of any one issuer that were not issued by the U.S. Treasury or a U.S. Government agency that exceeded ten percent of shareholders’ equity. Refer to Note 5 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for details of amortized cost, the estimated fair values, unrealized gains and losses as well as the debt security classifications by type.
Debt securities available for sale: The 2021 net increase of $115.0 million is principally a result of purchases of taxable municipal securities and tax-exempt municipal securities. The 2020 net decrease of $81.9 million in securities available for sale is principally a result of sales of a large portion of the acquired Cornerstone securities portfolio and the sales of a portion of our tax-exempt municipals securities, whose proceeds were used to fund loan growth and calls and maturities of brokered and direct CDs.
The maturity distribution of the available for sale securities portfolio at December 31, 2021, together with the weighted average yields for each range of maturity, is summarized in Table IX. The stated weighted average yields have been computed on a fully taxable-equivalent basis using a tax rate of 21%.
Debt securities held to maturity: During second quarter 2020, we invested in various municipal securities that we have classified as held to maturity as we have the positive intent and ability to hold them to maturity. Accordingly, they are carried at cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts.
The maturity distribution of the held to maturity securities portfolio at December 31, 2021, together with the weighted average yields for each range of maturity, is summarized in Table X. The stated average yields are stated on a tax equivalent basis.
Deposits
Total deposits at December 31, 2021 increased $347.4 million or 13.4% compared to December 31, 2020. Total deposits at December 31, 2020 increased $682.4 million or 35.7% compared to December 31, 2019. Deposits acquired in conjunction with the purchase of southern West Virginia MVB Bank branches in 2021 totaled $164.0 million. Deposits acquired in conjunction with the purchases of Cornerstone, eastern panhandle West Virginia MVB Bank branches and WinFirst in 2020 totaled $466.7 million. We have strengthened our focus on growing core transaction accounts. Excluding acquired deposits, core transaction accounts grew $226.3 million or 16.4% during 2021 while our savings accounts increased $60.9 million and brokered CDs decreased $40.8 million due to maturities and calls.
See Table I for average deposit balance and rate information by deposit type for the past five years and Note 12 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a maturity distribution of time deposits as of December 31, 2021.
Borrowings
Lines of Credit: We have a remaining available line of credit from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh (“FHLB”) totaling $982.2 million at December 31, 2021. We use this line primarily to fund loans to customers. Funds acquired through
this program are reflected on the consolidated balance sheet in short-term borrowings or long-term borrowings, depending on the repayment terms of the debt agreement. We also had $279.5 million available on a short term line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank at December 31, 2021, which is primarily secured by consumer loans, construction loans and commercial and industrial loans and a $6 million available line of credit with a correspondent bank.
Short-term Borrowings: Total short-term borrowings consisting primarily of advances from the FHLB having original maturities of 30 days or less were unchanged at $140.1 million at December 31, 2021. See Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional disclosures regarding our short-term borrowings.
Long-term Borrowings: Long-term borrowings historically have been used to fund our loan growth, however, as a result of prolonged low short-term interest rates following the economic downturn of 2008, long-term borrowings have been reduced significantly as we have replaced maturing long-term borrowings with short-term funding. Total long-term borrowings of $679,000 and $699,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of a long-term FHLB advance. Refer to Note 13 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our long-term borrowings.
Subordinated debentures: We issued $75 million of subordinated debentures, net of $1.67 million debt issuance costs, during third quarter 2021 in a private placement transaction. The subordinated debt qualifies as Tier 2 capital under Federal Reserve Board guidelines, until the debt is within 5 years of its maturity; thereafter the amount qualifying as Tier 2 capital is reduced by 20 percent each year until maturity. This subordinated debt bears interest at a fixed rate of 3.25% per year, from and including November 16, 2021 to, but excluding, December 1, 2026, payable semi-annually in arrears. From and including December 1, 2026 to, but excluding, the maturity date or earlier redemption date, the interest rate will reset quarterly at a variable rate equal to the then current three-month term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, plus 230 basis points, payable quarterly in arrears. As provided in the Notes, the interest rate on the Notes during the applicable floating rate period may be determined based on a rate other than three-month term SOFR. This debt has a 10 years term and generally, is not prepayable by us within the first five years.
We issued $30 million of subordinated debentures, net of $664,000 debt issuance costs, in Q3 2020 in a private placement transaction. The subordinated debt qualifies as Tier 2 capital under Federal Reserve Board guidelines, until the debt is within 5 years of its maturity; thereafter the amount qualifying as Tier 2 capital is reduced by 20 percent each year until maturity. This subordinated debt, bears interest at a fixed rate of 5.00% per year, from and including September 22, 2020 to, but excluding, September 30, 2025, payable quarterly in arrears. From and including September 30, 2025 to, but excluding, the maturity date or earlier redemption date, the interest rate will reset quarterly at a variable rate equal to the then current three-month term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, plus 487 basis points, payable quarterly in arrears. As provided in the Notes, the interest rate on the Notes during the applicable floating rate period may be determined based on a rate other than three-month term SOFR. This debt has a 10 year term and generally, is not prepayable by us within the first five years.
Shareholders' equity
Preferred: In April 2021, we sold through private placement 1,500 shares of 6% Fixed-Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, Series 2021, $1.00 par value, with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share for net proceeds of $14.9 million.
Common: Changes in common shareholders' equity are a result of net income, other comprehensive income, dividends and issuances of our stock in conjunction with acquisitions.
ASSET QUALITY
For purposes of this discussion, we define nonperforming assets to include foreclosed properties, other repossessed assets and nonperforming loans, which is comprised of loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing interest and nonaccrual loans. Performing troubled debt restructurings ("TDRs") are excluded from nonperforming loans.
Table XII presents a summary of nonperforming assets at December 31, as follows:
Refer to Note 7 for information regarding our past due loans, loans individually evaluated, nonaccrual loans and troubled debt restructurings.
We monitor our concentrations in higher-risk lending areas in accordance with the Interagency Guidance for Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending issued in 2006. This guidance establishes concentration guidelines of 100% of Tier 1 Capital plus the allowance for credit losses for lending in construction, land development and other land loans. It further establishes a guideline of 300% of Tier 1 Capital plus the allowance for credit losses for lending in construction, land development and other land loans plus loans secured by non-owner occupied non-farm non-residential properties. As of December 31, 2021, Summit Community Bank was within the recommended limits of 100% and 300%, respectively.
We maintain the allowance for credit losses on loans at a level considered adequate to cover an estimate of the full amount of expected credit losses relative to loans. The allowance is comprised of three distinct reserve components: (1) specific reserves related to loans individually evaluated, (2) quantitative reserves related to loans collectively evaluated and (3) qualitative reserves related to loans collectively evaluated. A summary of the methodology we employ on a quarterly basis with respect to each of these components in order to evaluate the overall adequacy of our allowance for credit losses on loans is provided in Note 7 of the accompanying financial statements.
Relationship between Allowance for Credit Losses, Net Charge-offs and Nonperforming Loans
In analyzing the relationship among the allowance for credit losses, net loan charge-offs and nonperforming loans, it is helpful to understand the process of how loans are treated as the probability of collection changes over time. Allowances are established at origination through the allowance for credit losses to estimate the expected credit loss over the life of the financial assets based on risk characteristics inherent in the loan. (Please refer to Note 7 for detail on how allowance for credit losses are established.)
Generally, loans are placed on nonaccrual status (and become non-performing) when principal or interest is greater than 90 days past due based upon the loan’s contractual term. As a loan deteriorates in credit quality, if the loan balance is material the loan may be individually evaluated through the allowance for credit losses on loans (" ACLL") instead of on a collective basis with other loans as it may no longer have similar risk characteristics. The allowance for credit losses on an individually evaluated loan are established based on the fair value of the underlying collateral for collateral dependent loans or based on the present value of future cash flows for loans deemed not to be collateral dependent. Therefore, as loan credit quality deteriorates the allowance for credit loss may change.
Charge-offs, if necessary, are recognized as deemed appropriate based on loan-type. Commercial-related loans or portions thereof, are charged off to the ACLL when the loss has been confirmed. This determination is made on a case by case basis considering many factors, including the prioritization of our claim in bankruptcy, expectations of the workout/restructuring of the loan and valuation of the borrower’s equity. We deem a loss confirmed when a loan or a portion of a loan is classified “loss” in accordance with bank regulatory classification guidelines, which state, “Assets classified loss are considered uncollectible and of such little value that their continuance as bankable assets is not warranted.”
Consumer loans are generally charged to the ACLL upon reaching specified stages of delinquency, in accordance with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council policy. For example, credit card loans are charged off by the end of the month in which the account becomes 180 days past due or within 60 days from receiving notification about a specified event (e.g., bankruptcy of the borrower), whichever is earlier. Residential mortgage loans are generally charged off to net realizable value no later than when the account becomes 180 days past due. Other consumer loans, if collateralized, are generally charged off to net realizable value at 120 days past due.
Expected credit losses are reflected in the ACLL through a charge to provision for credit losses. When we deem all or a portion of a financial asset to be uncollectible the appropriate amount is written off and the ACLL is reduced by the same amount. The Company applies judgement to determine when a financial asset is deemed uncollectible; however, generally speaking, an asset will be considered uncollectible no later than when all efforts at collection have been exhausted. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credit to the ACLL when received. The following tables summarizes the changes in the various factors that comprise the provisions for credit losses.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our allowance for credit losses on loans totaled $32.3 million, or 1.17% of total loans and $32.2 million, or 1.34% of total loans, respectively. The allowance for credit losses on loans is considered adequate to cover all estimated future losses in our loan portfolio.
Table XIII presents an allocation of the allowance for credit losses on loans by loan type at each respective year end date, as follows:
The following table details our provision for credit losses on loans and net charge-offs and recoveries.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately $9.9 million and $15.6 million, respectively, in property held for sale which was obtained as the result of foreclosure proceedings. Although foreclosed property is recorded at fair value less estimated costs to sell, the prices ultimately realized upon their sale may or may not result in us recognizing additional loss. Refer to Note 8 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our property held for sale.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Bank Liquidity: Liquidity reflects our ability to ensure the availability of adequate funds to meet loan commitments and deposit withdrawals, as well as provide for other transactional requirements. Liquidity is provided primarily by excess funds at correspondent banks, non-pledged securities and available lines of credit with the FHLB, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and correspondent banks, which totaled approximately $1.6 billion or 43.4% of total consolidated assets at December 31, 2021.
Our liquidity strategy is to fund loan growth with deposits and other borrowed funds while maintaining an adequate level of short- and medium-term investments to meet normal daily loan and deposit activity. As a member of the FHLB, we have access to borrow approximately $1.12 billion, which is collateralized by $1.60 billion of residential mortgage loans, commercial loans, mortgage backed securities and securities of U. S. Government agencies and corporations. At December 31, 2021, we had available borrowing capacity of $982.2 million on our FHLB line. We also maintain a credit line with the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond as a contingency liquidity vehicle. The amount available on this line at December 31, 2021 was approximately $279 million, which is secured by a pledge of $514.5 million of our consumer loans, construction loans and commercial and industrial loan portfolios. We have a $6 million unsecured line of credit with a correspondent bank. Also, we classify nearly 80% of our securities as available for sale to enable us to liquidate them if the need arises. During 2021, our
loan growth was funded primarily by deposits as our loans increased approximately $349.2 million, while total deposits increased $347.4 million.
Liquidity risk represents the risk of loss due to the possibility that funds may not be available to satisfy current or future commitments based on external market issues, customer or creditor perception of financial strength and events unrelated to Summit such as war, terrorism, or financial institution market specific issues. The Asset/Liability Management Committee (“ALCO”), comprised of members of senior management and certain members of the Board of Directors, oversees our liquidity risk management process. The ALCO develops and recommends policies and limits governing our liquidity to the Board of Directors for approval with the objective of ensuring that we can obtain cost-effective funding to meet current and future obligations, as well as maintain sufficient levels of on-hand liquidity, under both normal and “stressed” circumstances.
One aspect of our liquidity management process is establishing contingent liquidity funding plans under various scenarios in order to prepare for unexpected liquidity shortages or events. The following represents three “stressed” liquidity circumstances and our related contingency plans with respect to each.
Scenario 1 - Summit Community’s capital status becomes less than “well capitalized”. Banks which are less than “well capitalized” in accordance with regulatory capital guidelines are prohibited from issuing new brokered deposits without first obtaining a waiver from the FDIC to do so. In the event Summit Community’s capital status were to fall below well capitalized and was not successful in obtaining the FDIC’s waiver to issue new brokered deposits, Summit Community:
•Would have limited amounts of maturing brokered deposits to replace in the short-term, as we have limited our brokered deposits maturing in any one quarter to no more than $50 million.
•Presently has $1.6 billion in available sources of liquid funds which could be drawn upon to fund maturing brokered deposits until Summit Community had restored its capital to well capitalized status.
•Would first seek to restore its capital to well capitalized status through capital contributions from Summit, its parent holding company.
•Would generally have no more than $100 million in brokered deposits maturing in any one year time frame, which is well within its presently available sources of liquid funds, if in the event Summit does not have the capital resources to restore Summit Community’s capital to well capitalized status. One year would give Summit Community ample time to raise alternative funds either through retail deposits or the sale of assets and obtain capital resources to restore it to well capitalized status.
Scenario 2 - Summit Community’s credit quality deteriorates such that the FHLB restricts further advances. If in the event that the Bank’s credit quality deteriorated to the point that further advances under its line with the FHLB were restricted, Summit Community:
•Would severely curtail lending and other growth activities until such time as access to this line could be restored, thus eliminating the need for net new advances.
•Would still have available current liquid funding sources secured by unemcumbered loans and securities totaling $769 million aside from its FHLB line, which would result in a funding source of approximately $506 million.
Scenario 3 - A competitive financial institution offers a retail deposit program at interest rates significantly above current market rates in Summit Community’s market areas. If a competitive financial institution offered a retail deposit program at rates well in excess of current market rates in Summit Community’s market area, the Bank:
•Presently has $1.6 billion in available sources of liquid funds which could be drawn upon immediately to fund any “net run off” of deposits from this activity.
•Would severely curtail lending and other growth activities so as to preserve the availability of as much contingency funds as possible.
•Would begin offering its own competitive deposit program when deemed prudent so as to restore the retail deposits lost to the competition.
We continuously monitor our liquidity position to ensure that day-to-day as well as anticipated funding needs are met. We are not aware of any trends, commitments, events or uncertainties that have resulted in or are reasonably likely to result in a material change to our liquidity. Refer to page 13 of Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of our liquidity risk.
Growth and Expansion: During 2021, we spent approximately $4.5 million on capital expenditures for premises and equipment. We expect our capital expenditures to approximate $4.5 - $5.0 million in 2022, primarily for new branch site construction and equipment and technological upgrades.
Capital Compliance: Our capital position is strong. Stated as a percentage of total assets, our equity ratio was 9.2% at December 31, 2021 compared to 9.1% at December 31, 2020. Our subsidiary bank, Summit Community Bank, had Tier 1 risk-based, Total risk-based and Tier 1 leverage capital in excess of the minimum “well capitalized” levels of $119.3 million, $85.4 million and $189.1 million, respectively. We intend to maintain Summit Community Bank's capital ratios at levels that would be considered to be “well capitalized” in accordance with regulatory capital guidelines. See Note 19 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our regulatory capital.
During 2021, we retained $36.1 million of earnings and the net change in accumulated other comprehensive income was $37,000, principally resulting from $5.4 million unrealized net losses on securities available for sale and $5.1 million unrealized net gains on cashflow hedges.
On July 30, 2015, our Employee Stock Ownership Plan ("ESOP") purchased 225,000 shares of Summit Financial Group Inc. common stock, which is shown as a reduction of shareholders' equity, similar to a purchase of treasury stock. When the shares are committed to be released and become available for allocation to plan participants, the then fair value of such shares will be charged to compensation expense. Unallocated shares owned by the Company’s ESOP are not considered to be outstanding for the purpose of computing earnings per share.
In April 2021, we sold through a private placement 1,500 shares or $15.0 million of Series 2021 6% Fixed-Rate Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value, with a liquidation preference of $10,000 per share (the “Preferred Stock”). The Preferred Stock is non-convertible and will pay noncumulative dividends, if and when declared by the Summit board of directors, at a rate of 6.0% per annum. Dividends declared will be payable quarterly in arrears on the 15th day of March, June, September and December of each year. Summit contributed the proceeds of this issuance to the capital of SCB to support its lending, investing and other financial activities.
Dividends: Cash dividends per share totaled $0.70 and $0.68 during 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing dividend payout ratios of 19.9% and 28.2%, respectively. It is our intention to continue to pay dividends on a quarterly basis during 2022. Future dividend amounts will depend on the earnings and financial condition of our subsidiary bank as well as general economic conditions.
The primary source of funds for the dividends paid to our shareholders is dividends received from our subsidiary bank. Dividends paid by our subsidiary bank are subject to restrictions by banking law and regulations and require approval by the bank’s regulatory agency if dividends declared in any year exceed the bank’s current year's net income, as defined, plus its retained net profits of the two preceding years. In addition, cash dividends depend on the earnings and financial condition of our subsidiary bank and our capital adequacy as well as general economic conditions. During 2022, the net retained profits available for distribution to Summit as dividends without regulatory approval are approximately $70.8 million.
Contractual Cash Obligations: During our normal course of business, we incur contractual cash obligations. Refer to Note 10 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our lease commitments and Note 13 for information regarding debt obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements: We are involved with some off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have an effect on our financial condition, liquidity, or capital. These arrangements at December 31, 2021 are presented in the following table. Refer to Note 17 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our off-balance sheet arrangements.
LIBOR AND OTHER BENCHMARK RATES
Following the announcement by the U.K.’s Financial Conduct Authority in July 2017 that it will no longer persuade or require banks to submit rates for the London InterBank Offered Rate (LIBOR) after 2021, central banks and regulators around the world have commissioned working groups to find suitable replacements for Interbank Offered Rates ("IBOR") and other benchmark rates and to implement financial benchmark reforms more generally. These actions have resulted in uncertainty regarding the use of alternative reference rates ("ARRs") and could cause disruptions in a variety of markets. We will continue to monitor developments related to ARRs, however at this time, we do not anticipate any material adverse impact to our business operation or financial results during the period of transition from IBORs to ARRs.
QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA
A summary of our selected quarterly financial data is as follows: