Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
The Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, describes principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition and liquidity, as well as our critical accounting policies and estimates that require significant judgment and thus have the most significant potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. This section provides an analysis of our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the discussion and analysis covering the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the eleven months ended December 31, 2019, please refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021.
Company Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development, and commercialization of patient-, physician-, caregiver- and societal-friendly medicinal therapies intended to improve quality of life, increase life expectancy, and resolve
serious unmet needs. Our novel mechanism pipeline of product candidates is designed with the goal to become the patient-friendly, new-era standard-of-care medicines, and to work in harmony with the human microbiome. Summit’s lead product candidate, ridinilazole, is a novel first-in-class drug that is engaged in a global Phase III clinical trial program. On December 20, 2021, we announced topline results for the Phase III Ri-CoDIFy study evaluating ridinilazole for treating patients suffering from Clostridioides difficile infection, also known as C. difficile infection, or CDI. Our second product candidate, SMT-738, was announced in May 2021 for combating multidrug resistant infections, specifically Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (“CRE”) infections. SMT-738 is the first of a novel class of precision antibiotics that has entered into preclinical development. We intend to expand our portfolio by developing further new mechanism, new era product offerings that are designed to work in harmony with the human gut microbiome in the therapeutic areas of oncology and infectious diseases.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through issuances of our common stock (and before the Redomiciliation Transaction (as defined below) issuances of Summit Therapeutics plc’s ordinary shares and American Depositary Shares, or ADSs), payments to us under our license and commercialization agreement with Eurofarma Laboratórios SA, or Eurofarma, development funding and other assistance from government entities, philanthropic, non-government and not-for-profit organizations for our product candidates. In particular, we have received funding from BARDA, CARB-X, Innovate UK, Wellcome Trust and a number of not-for-profit organizations.
We have devoted substantially all of our efforts to research and development, including clinical trials. We have not completed the development of any drugs. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next few years. The net losses we incur may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year, due to the nature and timing of our research and development activities. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to be significant in connection with our ongoing research and development efforts. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval of ridinilazole in the U.S. or other jurisdictions where we retain commercial rights, and if we choose to maintain those rights, we would expect to incur significant sales, marketing, distribution and outsourced manufacturing expenses, as well as ongoing research and development expenses.
Recent Developments
On May 12, 2021, we closed our rights offering, which was fully subscribed. We received aggregate gross proceeds from the rights offering of $75.0 million from the sale of 14,312,976 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $5.24. Issuance costs associated with the rights offering were immaterial. In connection with the closing of the rights offering, a promissory note, dated April 20, 2021, issued by us in favor of our Chairman, Chief Executive Officer, and the beneficial owner of approximately 70% of our outstanding common stock prior to this rights offering, Robert W. Duggan, in the principal amount of $55.0 million, matured and became due and we repaid all principal and accrued interest thereunder using a portion of the proceeds from the rights offering.
On August 11, 2021, based on a thorough review of the design and enrollment status of its two ongoing blinded Phase III Ri-CoDIFy trials, we announced that we combined our two blinded pivotal Phase III clinical trials evaluating ridinilazole versus vancomycin into a single study and presented this decision to the United States ("U.S.") Food and Drug Administration (the "FDA") as such. During September 2021, we received feedback from the FDA that the FDA did not agree with the change to the primary endpoint that we proposed and subsequently implemented in our ongoing Phase III Ri-CoDIFy studies when combining the trials.
On December 20, 2021 we announced topline results for the Phase III Ri-CoDIFy study evaluating ridinilazole, for the treatment of and Sustained Clinical Response (“SCR”), as defined below, for patients suffering from C. difficile infection ("C. diff. infection" or "CDI"). The study showed that ridinilazole resulted in a numerically higher SCR rate than vancomycin, but did not meet the study’s primary endpoint for superiority. The pivotal Phase III clinical trial consisted of two Phase III clinical trials combined into a single study, designed to assess, as the primary endpoint, the superiority of ridinilazole compared to vancomycin in SCR, which is defined as Clinical Response of the treated episode of CDI and no recurrence of CDI through 30 days after the end of treatment. Additional endpoints include Clinical Response ("CR"), safety, tolerability, recurrence, and analyses of the gut microbiome and metabolome, in addition to quality of life and health economic outcome measures. We are in the process of evaluating the future path forward with respect to ridinilazole, including potential partnership opportunities.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue consists of amounts received from the license and commercialization agreement with Eurofarma Laboratórios S.A. ("Eurofarma"). We have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Under the terms of the license and commercialization agreement with Eurofarma, we received an upfront payment of $2.5 million in December 2017. In February 2020, we achieved the first enrollment milestone and received $1.0 million. In September 2021, we achieved the second enrollment milestone and received $1.3 million. The terms of the contract have been assessed under ASC 606 and currently only the upfront payment and the first two milestone payments are included in the transaction price. These payments were initially reported as deferred revenue in the balance sheet and are being recognized as revenue ratably over the performance period.
Revenue recognized during the period ended December 31, 2021 related to the upfront payment and the first two enrollment milestones earned in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. Revenue recognized during the period ended December 31, 2020 related to the upfront payment and the first enrollment milestone earned in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. The revenue is being recognized ratably over the performance period to reflect the transfer of control to the customer occurring over the time period that the research and development services are provided. This output method is, in management’s judgment, the best measure of progress towards satisfying the performance period.
In addition, we will be entitled to receive an additional $1.5 million for achieving various development milestones. We are also eligible to receive up to $21.4 million in additional development, commercial and sales milestones when cumulative net sales equal or exceed $100.0 million in the Eurofarma licensed territory. For each incremental $100.0 million in cumulative net sales achieved, we are entitled to additional milestone payments, which, when combined with the aforementioned anticipated product supply transfer payments, is estimated to range from a mid-teens to high-teens percentage of cumulative net sales in the territories where we have granted Eurofarma commercialization rights.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income includes income received and recognized from grants and clinical trial support from government entities, philanthropic, non-government and not-for-profit organizations. In September 2017, we were awarded a funding contract from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority ("BARDA"), part of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response at the United States Department of Health and Human Services, in support of our Ri-CoDIFy clinical trials and clinical development of ridinilazole. The awarded contract was originally worth up to $62.0 million. In June 2019 and again in January 2020, BARDA increased the value of the contract such that it is now worth up to $72.5 million. The remaining federal government funding is dependent on BARDA in its sole discretion exercising the final independent option work segment, upon the achievement by the Company of certain agreed-upon milestones for ridinilazole. As of December 31, 2021, an aggregate of $56.5 million of the total committed BARDA funding had been received and the Company has recognized $50.3 million of cumulative income since contract inception.
We have also received income from research and development ("R&D") tax credits, which consist of the R&D tax credit received in the United Kingdom ("U.K."). We benefit from two U.K. research and development tax credit cash rebate regimes: Small and Medium Enterprise Program ("SME Program") and the Research and Development Expenditure Credit Program ("RDEC Program"). Qualifying expenditures largely comprise employment costs for research staff, consumables, a proportion of relevant, permitted sub-contract costs and certain internal overhead costs incurred as part of research projects for which we do not receive income. Tax credits related to the SME Program and RDEC Program are recorded as other operating income in the consolidated statements of operations and other comprehensive loss. Under both schemes, we receive cash payments that are not dependent on our pre-tax net income levels.
Based on criteria established by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs ("HMRC"), a portion of expenditures being carried out in relation to our pipeline research and development, clinical trials management and third-party manufacturing development activities are eligible for the SME regime and we expect such elements of expenditure will also continue to be eligible for the SME regime for future periods.
In May 2021, we announced the selection of a new preclinical candidate, SMT-738, from the DDS-04 series for development in the fight against multi-drug resistant infections, specifically Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae ("CRE") infections. Simultaneously, we received an award from the Trustees of Boston University under the Combating Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria Biopharmaceutical Accelerator program ("CARB-X") to progress this candidate through preclinical development and
Phase Ia clinical trials. The award commits initial funding of up to $4.1 million with the possibility of up to another $3.7 million based on the achievement of future milestones. As of December 31, 2021, $0.5 million of grant funding from CARB-X has been received and the Company has recognized $1.2 million of cumulative income since contract inception.
Operating Expenses
The majority of our operating expenses since inception have consisted of research and development activities and general and administrative costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of all costs associated with our research and development activities.
These include:
•costs incurred in conducting our preclinical studies and clinical trials through contract research organizations, including preclinical toxicology, pharmacology, formulation and manufacturing work;
•laboratory and vendor expenses incurred in relation to our preclinical and non-clinical studies;
•costs incurred in supply chain development and scale up activities to support product registration;
•employee related expenses, which include salary, benefits and stock-based compensation, for our research and development staff; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
We utilize our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research projects. We track expenses related to our clinical programs and certain preclinical programs on a per project basis. We expect our research and development expenses to continue to be significant as we continue our early-stage research programs for the treatment of Enterobacteriaceae infections, continue our activities to initiate preclinical programs for future product candidates, including under our Discuva Platform, and develop product candidates that we may obtain through business development activities. The timing and amount of these expenses will depend upon the outcome of our clinical trials and the associated costs. The timing and amount of these expenses will also depend on the costs associated with potential future clinical trials of our product candidates and the related expansion of our research and development organization, regulatory requirements, advancement of our preclinical programs and product candidate manufacturing costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits related to our executive, finance, business development, human resources and other support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include stock-based compensation expenses, market research costs, facility-related costs, consulting costs and expenses associated with the requirements of being a publicly traded company in the United States, including insurance, legal, audit and taxation services fees.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also anticipate continued accounting, audit, regulatory, compliance, insurance and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a publicly traded company in the United States. Prior to the Redomiciliation Transaction, our American Depositary Shares, or ADSs, had traded on the Nasdaq Global Market and, until we canceled the admission on February 24, 2020, our ordinary shares had traded on the Alternative Investment Market in the United Kingdom. Our common stock is currently traded on the Nasdaq Global Market, and therefore, we only anticipate incurring future expenses associated with being a listed public company in the United States.
Taxation
As a U.S. tax resident trading entity we are subject to U.S. corporate taxation. Prior to the Redomiciliation Transaction we were a U.K. resident trading entity and were subject to U.K. corporate taxation on group-wide taxable income. Our U.K. resident trading subsidiaries are still individually subject to U.K. corporate taxation. Due to the nature of our business, we have generated losses since inception. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets with respect to
these tax losses in excess of our deferred tax liabilities because we do not consider it probable that there will be suitable taxable profits in the foreseeable future based on the evidence available against which to offset these losses.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012
As of January 1, 2021, we are no longer an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Formerly, as an emerging growth company, we were able to take advantage of specified reduced reporting and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. The last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering in March 2015 was December 31, 2020, hence we have ceased to be an emerging growth company.
Business Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to contain it have affected our business and operations in several ways. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
•A substantial portion of our employees are remote working. We have been unable to undertake certain activities directly at the same level as prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, including clinical trial visits and investigator meetings, with such activities being done remotely where possible. We have been relying on remote means of working and communication both internally and externally. We are continuing to monitor and support the health and well-being of our employees and their productivity as remote working continues.
•Certain of our clinical trial sites have suspended enrollment due to facility closures, reduced staff and operations, quarantine travel restrictions and other governmental restrictions. Additionally, we experienced patient enrollment at a slower pace than expected at certain clinical trial sites which resulted in increased clinical development costs.
.
•Many of our clinical trial sites have been operating with reduced staff and other restrictions. We increased our efforts to engage with our clinical trial sites with a focus on retaining patients and maintaining scheduled visits and treatments, and where possible, instituted practices such as addition of home healthcare provider services for patients and remote monitoring.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and its enduring impact on our business remains uncertain. There may be other material adverse impacts on our business, operations and financial condition that are unpredictable at this time, including delays in the development and regulatory approval of our product candidates and difficulties in retaining qualified personnel during the pandemic and once it subsides. The extent to which the pandemic may impact our business will depend on future developments, such as the duration of the pandemic, quarantines, travel restrictions and other measures in the U.S., the U.K. and around the world, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken to contain the pandemic.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase is primarily attributed to the achievement of a milestone related to our license and commercialization agreement with Eurofarma Laboratórios S.A. ("Eurofarma") in September of 2021. The total milestone of $1.3 million is recognized ratably over the performance period the research and development services are provided, which extends beyond 2021.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Investment in our CDI program increased by $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily due to clinical and manufacturing activities associated with the Phase III clinical program of ridinilazole.
Investment in our antibiotic pipeline development activities was $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which reflects costs associated with development of our preclinical candidate, SMT-738, from the DDS-04 series for development in the fight against multi-drug resistant infections, specifically Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae ("CRE") infections. Investment in our antibiotic pipeline development activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which reflects costs associated with work on the DDS-01 series and the gonorrhoeae program which we ceased work on at the end of 2020.
Other research and development costs are comprised of the following:
Other research and development costs increased by $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year, due primarily to an increase of $9.4 million in compensation related costs and an increase of $5.6 million in stock-based compensation as a result of increased hiring.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $23.6 million and $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.4 million, compared to the same period in the prior year, primarily due to an increase of $8.0 million in compensation related costs, including stock-based compensation due to the initial recognition of modified stock option awards in September 2021 of $2.7 million, and an increase of $5.3 million as a result of increased hiring, partially offset by a decrease of $3.4 million in consulting and professional fees, as the prior year included professional fees related to the Redomiciliation Transaction.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an impairment charge of $0.9 million relating to our option over a non-financial intangible asset pursuant to an evaluation and option agreement with a collaboration partner. The partner was no longer conducting antibiotic candidate programs over which we had the option and thus, we assessed the fair value to be zero.
Other Operating Income
Other operating income was $21.0 million and $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The increase in other operating income of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year is due to an increase of $5.8 million related to U.K. research and development tax credits for research and development expenses incurred that are not funded by third parties and an increase of $0.7 million in grant income received from CARB-X to progress the preclinical candidate, SMT-738, from the DDS-04 series for development in the fight against multi-drug resistant infections, offset by a decrease of $4.9 million in funding income from BARDA in support of our Ri-CoDIFy clinical trials and regulatory development of ridinilazole.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other expense, net was $2.4 million and other income, net was $0.3 million income for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and related primarily to changes in foreign exchange rates.
Income Tax Benefit
A tax benefit of $0.2 million was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to a tax refund recognized from the overpayment of estimated federal tax liabilities for previous tax years. The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets in excess of our deferred tax liabilities, as the deferred tax liability represents future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through issuances of our common stock (and before the Redomiciliation Transaction issuances of Summit Therapeutics plc’s ordinary shares and American Depositary Shares, or ADSs), payments to us under license, collaboration, and commercialization arrangements, for example, our license and commercialization agreement with Eurofarma Laboratórios SA, or Eurofarma, and development funding and other assistance from government entities, philanthropic, non-government and not-for-profit organizations for our product candidates. In particular, we have received funding from BARDA, CARB-X, Innovate UK, Wellcome Trust and a number of not-for-profit organizations.
In January 2019, we received net proceeds of $24.4 million from the issuance and sale of 15,625,000 shares of common stock to a single investor, Mr. Robert W. Duggan. In December 2019, we received net proceeds of $49.1 million from the issuance and sale of 35,075,690 shares of common stock to three existing investors. As part of the equity placing, the participating investors were granted warrants with the right to subscribe for 5,261,353 new shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.58 per share. On November 6, 2020, we received net proceeds of $50.0 million from the issuance and sale of 14,970,060 shares of common stock to three existing investors. Following the issuance of an unsecured promissory note on March 24, 2021, we received net proceeds of $55.0 million. Such note was later repaid without interest or penalty, rescinded and replaced by a new note on April 20, 2021, pursuant to a second unsecured promissory note we received net proceeds of $55.0 million. Subsequently, on May 12, 2021, we received proceeds of $75.0 million in the aggregate from the sale of 14,312,976 shares of Common Stock at a price per share of $5.24 from our rights offering, the proceeds of which were used in part to repay amounts outstanding on the second unsecured promissory note. On March 10, 2022, we received net proceeds of $25.0 million from the issuance of an unsecured promissory note (the "2022 Note") which becomes due upon the earlier of (i) the consummation of a registered public offering with net proceeds of no less than $25,000 or (ii) 18 months from the date of issuance of the 2022 Note.
We have devoted substantially all of our efforts to research and development, including clinical trials. We have not completed the development of any drugs. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. The net losses we incur may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year, due to the nature and timing of our research and development activities. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to be significant in connection with our ongoing research and development efforts. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval of ridinilazole in the United States or other jurisdictions where we retain commercial rights, and if we choose to retain those rights, we would expect to incur significant sales, marketing, distribution and outsourced manufacturing expenses, as well as ongoing research and development expenses. In addition, our expenses will increase if and as we:
•continue the research and development of ridinilazole, as well as our early-stage programs targeting infections caused by Enterobacteriaceae;
•seek to identify and develop additional future product candidates, including through our bacterial genetics-based Discuva Platform for the discovery and development of new mechanism antibiotics, and specifically our research activities against a group of bacteria that collectively are known as the ESKAPE pathogens;
•seek marketing approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development;
•ultimately establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure in jurisdictions where we have retained commercialization rights and scale up external manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•acquire or in-license other product candidates and technology;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional clinical, regulatory and scientific personnel;
•expand our physical presence; and
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and planned future commercialization efforts.
During year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $88.6 million, and cash flows used in operating activities was $72.6 million. As of December 31, 2021 we had an accumulated deficit of $299.5 million, cash of $71.8 million, research and development tax credit receivable of $15.7 million and accounts receivable of $1.5 million. We expect to continue to generate operating losses for the foreseeable future. Based on our current funding arrangements and financial resources as of December 31, 2021 and after considering proceeds received of $25.0 million from the 2022 Note issued on March 10, 2022, the Company has the ability to fund its operating costs and working capital needs into the second half of 2023. Until we can generate substantial revenue and achieve profitability, we will need to raise additional capital to fund ongoing operations and capital needs. We will continue to review our data, including performing additional analyses on the microbiome and the relative impacts of ridinilazole and vancomycin in order to submit our data to the FDA. We have also determined, in light of our increased focus on the microbiome, that we may seek one or more third-party partnership opportunities for ridinilazole. In addition, we may consider and/or pursue business development opportunities to expand our pipeline of product candidates, including without limitation, potential acquisitions of and/or collaborations with other entities. While these capital resources will allow us to continue to evaluate our next steps, we will need additional capital to prepare for regulatory filings and commercial readiness, consider commencing additional trials, or consider other strategic alternatives with respect to ridinilazole or pursue other business development opportunities. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
We have based the foregoing estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect. This estimate assumes, among other things, that we do not obtain any additional funding through grants and clinical trial support or through new collaboration arrangements. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the timing and evaluation of the data from our Phase III Ri-CoDIFy clinical trial for our lead product candidate, ridinilazole (formerly SMT19969), the next steps we will take with ridinilazole based upon our review, and the costs associated with these decisions, including completing our review of the data associated with Ri-CoDIFy and any partnerships into which we may enter to continue the advancement of ridinilazole;
•the number and development requirements of other future product candidates that we pursue;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of ridinilazole and our other product candidates we develop;
•the costs and timing of commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing, for any of our product candidates that receive marketing approval;
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue received from commercial sales of ridinilazole or any other product candidates;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property-related claims;
•our contract with BARDA and whether BARDA elects to pursue its final designated option beyond the base period and two exercised options;
•the amounts we receive from Eurofarma under our license and commercialization agreement, including for the achievement of development, commercialization and sales milestones and for product supply transfers;
•our ability to establish and maintain third-party partnerships or other arrangements and the financial terms of such arrangements;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in other businesses, products and technologies;
•the rate of the expansion of our physical presence;
•the extent to which we change our physical presence
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of some, or all, of the following: equity and debt offerings, collaborations, strategic alliances, grants and clinical trial support from government entities, philanthropic, non-government and not-for-profit organizations and, marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds other than amounts we may receive from Eurofarma, BARDA, CARB-X and under our arrangements with them and our research and development tax credits receivable.
We will be entitled to receive an additional $1.5 million from Eurofarma for the achievement of various development milestones and we are eligible to receive up to $21.4 million in development, commercial and sales milestones when cumulative net sales equal or exceed $100.0 million in the Eurofarma licensed territory. Each subsequent achievement of an additional $100.0 million in cumulative net sales will result in the Company receiving additional milestone payments, which, when combined with anticipated product supply transfer payments from Eurofarma paid to the Company in connection with a commercial supply agreement to be entered into between the two parties, will provide payments estimated to range from a mid-
teens to high-teens percentage of cumulative net sales in the territories where we have granted Eurofarma commercialization rights. As of December 31, 2021, we have recognized $3.9 million of cumulative income since inception.
The total amount of committed BARDA funding is $62.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, an aggregate of $56.5 million of the total committed BARDA funding has been received and we have recognized $50.3 million of cumulative income since contract inception. The total amount of committed CARB-X funding is $4.1 million, with the possibility of up to another $3.7 million based on the achievement of future milestones. As of December 31, 2021, an aggregate of $0.5 million of grant funding from CARB-X has been received and we have recognized $1.2 million of cumulative income since inception.
We will need additional capital to fund our operations. Additional capital, when needed, may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends or other distributions. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we will be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the results of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $72.6 million and resulted from a net loss of $88.6 million, which included non-cash charges of $16.1 million, which is primarily comprised of $12.8 million of stock-based compensation, and a $0.1 million net increase in working capital. The net increase in working capital was primarily due to an a $6.0 million increase in the research and development tax credit receivable, a $1.7 million decrease in accounts payable, a $1.1 million increase in accounts receivable, a $1.1 million decrease in lease liabilities and a $0.8 million decrease in deferred revenue partially offset by a $8.2 million increase in accrued liabilities and accrued compensation and a $2.3 million decrease in prepaid expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $48.1 million and resulted from a net loss of $52.7 million, which included non-cash charges of $4.0 million, which is primarily comprised of $1.8 million in stock-based compensation and $1.2 million in amortization of intangible assets, and a net decrease in working capital of $0.6 million. The net decrease in working capital was primarily due to a $5.4 million increase in deferred revenue and other income and an increase of $1.6 million in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in the research and development tax credit receivable of $4.4 million, a decrease of $1.3 million in accrued liabilities and accrued compensation, a $0.5 million decrease in lease liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $0.3 million was for the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash outflow in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.4 million was for the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $77.9 million and primarily resulted from net proceeds of $74.8 million from the rights offering in May 2021, proceeds from the promissory notes from a related party of $110.0 million, offset by repayments of the promissory notes from a related party of $110.0 million and $3.1 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $50.6 million and resulted from net proceeds of $50.0 million received from a private placement of common stock in November 2020, and $0.6 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our lease contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
The preceding table excludes contingent payment obligations which primarily consist of commitments under our agreements with the Wellcome Trust, the University College London and certain employees, former employees and former directors of Discuva, pursuant to which we will be required to pay royalties or make milestone payments.
As of December 31, 2021, we were unable to estimate the amount, timing or likelihood of achieving the milestones or making future product sales that these contingent payment obligations relate to. For additional information regarding these agreements, see “Business-Our Collaborations and Funding Arrangements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Additionally, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. Most contracts provide for termination upon notice, and therefore are cancellable contracts. As of December 31, 2021, total contractual commitments are estimated to be approximately $17.0 million and the majority of these commitments are due within one year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, intangible assets, accrued research and development expenses, stock-based compensation and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant judgments, assumptions and estimates we use in preparing the consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue using Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606 ("ASC 606"). This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards.
The Company enters into out-licensing agreements within the scope of ASC 606 under which it licenses certain rights to its product candidates to third parties. Such agreements may include the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of
licenses, transfer of technological know-how, delivery of drug substances, research and development services, and participation on certain committees with the counterparty. Payments made by the customers may include one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; development, regulatory, and commercial milestone payments; payments for manufacturing supply services the Company provides through its contract manufacturers; and royalties on net sales of licensed products if they are successfully approved and commercialized. Each of these payments may result in license, collaboration, or other revenue, except revenue from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which would be classified as royalty revenue.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as the Company fulfills its obligations under each of its out-licensing agreements, the following steps are performed: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. Revenue is then recognized in respect of the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, the Company must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; (b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and (c) the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of transaction price in step (iv) above. The Company also uses judgment to determine whether milestone payments or other variable consideration, except for royalties and sales-based milestones, should be included in the transaction price, as described below. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation in the contract, and the Company recognizes revenue based on those amounts when, or as, the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied.
Exclusive Licenses
If the license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from nonrefundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. In assessing whether a promise or performance obligation is distinct from the other promises, the Company considers factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, the Company considers whether the collaboration partner can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promises, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promises, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promises, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promises. For licenses that are combined with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of progress and related revenue recognition. The measure of progress, and the resulting periods over which revenue should be recognized, are subject to estimates by management and may change over the course of the research, development and licensing arrangement. Such a change could have a material impact on the amount of revenue the Company records in future periods. Under the Company’s existing license and collaboration agreements, the Company has concluded that the transfer of control to the customer occurs over the time period that the research and development services are to be provided by the Company, and this output method is, in management’s judgment, the best measure of progress towards satisfying the performance obligation.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes potential research, development or regulatory milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered likely to be met and estimates the amount to be considered for inclusion in the transaction price using the most-likely-amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized would not occur, the associated milestone payment value is included in the transaction price. For milestone payments due upon events that are not within the control of the Company or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, the Company is not able to assert that it is likely that the regulatory approval will be granted and that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur until those approvals are received. In making this assessment, the Company evaluates factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized would not occur. At the end of each
subsequent reporting period, the Company reevaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price of the arrangement. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect the amounts of revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments due upon first commercial sales or based on a level of sales, that are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, the Company recognizes revenue at the later of (i) the occurrence of the related sales or (ii) the date upon which the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied. To date, the Company has not recognized any royalty revenue from any of its licensing arrangements.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include patents, licenses, an option over non-financial assets and a research and development discovery platform ("Discuva Platform").
Patents, licenses, and the option over non-financial assets are initially recorded at fair value, assigned an estimated useful life, and amortized primarily on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. The Company evaluates the recoverability of its intangible and long-lived assets whenever events and changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. If events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not fully be recoverable, the Company will perform a qualitative assessment, and consider certain events and circumstances specific to the intangible asset and to the entity as a whole, such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance and cost factors when evaluating whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. This periodic review may result in an adjustment of estimated depreciable lives or asset impairment. When indicators of impairment are present, the carrying values of the asset are evaluated in relation to their operating performance and future undiscounted cash flows of the underlying business. If the future undiscounted cash flows are less than their carrying value, impairment exists. The impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the underlying asset. Fair values are based on estimates of market prices and assumptions concerning the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows and assumed discount rates, reflecting varying degrees of perceived risk.
Other intangible assets are amortized in equal installments over their estimated useful lives as follows:
Intangible Asset Amortization Period
Option over non-financial assets Over the period of the relevant agreement
Amortization of intangible assets is included as part of the research and development expense line shown on the face of the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred to discover, research and develop product candidates, including personnel expenses, stock-based compensation expense, allocated facility-related and depreciation expenses, third-party license fees and external costs of outside vendors engaged to conduct preclinical and clinical development activities and clinical trials as well as to manufacture clinical trial materials. Non - refundable prepayments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such amounts are recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed, or until it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services rendered. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced. Milestone and other payments made to third-parties with respect to in-process research and development, in accordance with the Company’s license, acquisition and other similar agreements are expensed when determined to be probable and estimable.
The Company has entered into various research and development contracts with other companies. These agreements are generally cancellable, and related payments are recorded as research and development expenses as incurred. The Company records accruals for estimated ongoing research and development costs or prepaid expenses where the payments made exceeds the estimated costs. When evaluating the adequacy of these balances, the Company analyzes progress of the studies, including the estimated costs to complete each study or activity, the estimation of the current stage of completion and the invoices received, as well as predetermined milestones which are not reflective of the current stage of development for prepaid expenses. Actual results could differ from the Company’s estimates. In all cases, the full cost of each study or activity is expensed by the
time the final report or where applicable, product, has been received. The Company’s historical estimates have not been materially different from the actual costs.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all stock option and restricted stock unit awards based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards. The fair value is recognized as expense, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award, on a straight-line basis for each separately vesting portion of the award when the only condition to vesting is continued service. If vesting is subject to a market or performance condition, recognition is based on the derived service period of the award. Expense for awards with performance conditions is estimated and adjusted on a quarterly basis based upon the assessment of the probability that the performance condition will be met. Use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to apply judgment under highly subjective assumptions. These assumptions include:
•Expected term-The expected term of stock options represents the weighted-average period the stock options are expected to be outstanding. The Company uses the simplified method for estimating the expected term as provided by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•Expected volatility-The expected volatility was calculated based on historical volatility of the Company's share price.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments, the terms of which were consistent with the expected term of the Company’s stock options.
•Expected dividend-The expected dividend assumption is based on the Company’s history and expectation of dividend payouts. The Company has not paid and does not intend to pay dividends.
The Company estimates expected forfeitures at the time of grant instead of accounting for forfeitures as they occur. Stock option and restricted stock unit awards have been granted at fair value to non-employees, in connection with research and consulting services provided to the Company, to non-employees in connection with corporate activities, and to employees, in connection with Stock Purchase and Restriction Agreements. Equity awards generally vest over terms of 3 or 4 years.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach. Tax laws may require items to be included in tax filings at different times than the items are reflected in the financial statements. A current asset or liability is recognized for the estimated taxes receivable or payable for the current year. Deferred taxes represent the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid. Deferred taxes are initially recognized at enacted tax rates in force at the time of initial recognition and are subsequently adjusted for any enacted changes in tax rates and tax laws. Subsequent changes to deferred taxes originally recognized in equity are recognized in income. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets in excess of its deferred tax liabilities, as the deferred tax liability represents future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences. The Company records interest and penalties related to income tax matters as part of income tax expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, please see Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.