ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a leading manufacturer and distributor of premium replacement parts utilized in the maintenance, repair and service of vehicles in the automotive aftermarket industry. In addition, we continue to increase our supplier capabilities with a complementary focus on specialized original equipment parts for manufacturers across multiple industries such as agriculture, heavy duty, and construction equipment. We believe that our extensive design and engineering capabilities have afforded us opportunities to expand our product coverage in our aftermarket business and enter newer specialized markets that require application-specific knowledge, such as those mentioned above.
We are organized into two operating segments. Each segment is focused on different product categories and with providing our customers with full-line coverage of its products, a full suite of complementary services that are tailored to our customers’ business needs, and with driving end-user demand for our products. We sell our products primarily to automotive aftermarket retailers, program distribution groups, warehouse distributors, original equipment manufacturers and original equipment service part operations in the United States, Canada, Europe, Asia, Mexico and other Latin American countries.
Overview of Financial Performance
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto. This discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting our results of operations and the financial condition of our business during each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2021.
The post COVID-19 sales momentum we experienced in the second half of 2020 carried over into 2021 resulting in record net sales and earnings from continuing operations. We experienced strong demand across all our product categories as well as a more normalized seasonal trend consistent with years prior to 2020.
Net sales for 2021 were $1,298.8 million, an increase of $170.2 million, or 15.1% compared to net sales of $1,128.6 million in 2020, and an increase of $160.9 million, or 14.1%, compared to net sales of $1,137.9 million in 2019.
Index
The increase in net sales in 2021 reflects the favorable impact of multiple factors including:
•
successful customer initiatives in the marketplace,
•
the phase-in of new business wins,
•
beneficial summer weather,
•
continued strong customer demand as evidenced by robust customer POS and fueled by the replenishment of customer inventory levels,
•
the partial impact of price increases in the fourth quarter of the year, which were implemented to pass through inflationary increases in raw materials, freight and labor costs, and
•
incremental net sales from our soot sensor, Trombetta and Stabil acquisitions.
The combination of the above factors more than offset the impact of lost revenue related to the decision of a large retail customer to pursue a private brand strategy in December 2020.
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales in 2021 was 29% as compared to 29.8% in 2020 and 29.2% in 2019. Gross margins in the first half of 2021 were favorably impacted by greater fixed cost absorption due to higher production volumes as we increased inventories to meet the strong customer demand. The strong gross margins achieved in the first half of 2021 were offset by some compression in the second half of 2021 caused by several factors including lower fixed cost absorption due to lower production levels than those achieved in the second half of 2020, inflationary cost increases in certain raw materials, labor and elevated transportation expense, and the higher mix of heavy duty parts sales from our recent acquisitions, which have a different margin profile than our aftermarket business with lower gross margins but comparable operating margin. While we anticipate continued margin pressure resulting from inflationary headwinds, we believe that our annual cost initiatives coupled with our ability to pass through higher prices to our customers should help to offset much of this impact to our margins.
Operating margin as a percentage of net sales in 2021 was 9.9% as compared to 9.6% in 2020 and 8.3% in 2019. Our operating margins in 2021 were favorably impacted by higher net sales. Included in our operating margin were selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) of $247.5 million, or 19.1% of net sales in 2021, $224.7 million, or 19.9% of net sales in 2020, and $234.7 million, or 20.6% of net sales in 2019. The higher SG&A expenses in 2021 resulted principally from elevated distribution costs associated with higher sales volumes as well as the impact of increased freight costs, higher employee compensation costs, and incremental expenses from our soot sensor, Trombetta and Stabil acquisitions. We anticipate that our future operating margins will be in line with the operating margins achieved in 2021 and 2020.
Overall, our financial results in 2021 were extremely strong. We posting record net sales and earnings from continuing operations and achieving substantial new business wins with existing customers. Our core automotive aftermarket business remains strong and we have made major strides into new complementary markets with upside potential.
Recent Strategic Acquisitions
As part of our strategic plan for diversification and growth beyond our core automotive aftermarket business, and to further expand internationally with a focus on the European market, we completed three acquisitions in 2021. The acquisitions continue to increase our supplier capabilities with a complementary focus on specialized original equipment parts to manufacturers across multiple industries such as medium and heavy duty vehicles, construction and agricultural equipment, power sports, and other sub-segments. In addition to expanding beyond our core automotive aftermarket business, it also provided geographic expansion as we now have meaningful footprints to grow sales in Europe and Asia.
As we integrate these businesses, we will be able to take advantage of shared customer lists, product portfolios, manufacturing and engineering capabilities, and geographic reach. Many of the products in the acquired businesses are either power-train neutral, or are geared toward electric and alternative energy vehicles and, as such, not limited to applications on internal combustion engine (“ICE”), providing potential synergies and future sales growth opportunities in non-internal combustion engine applications. After these acquisitions, we estimate that approximately half of our product offering is power-train neutral, or suitable for electric, hybrid electric and/or alternative energy vehicles. Following is a brief summary of the acquired businesses.
Index
In March 2021, we acquired certain Soot Sensor product lines from Stoneridge, Inc. for $2.9 million. The product line assets acquired manufacture sensors used in the exhaust and emission systems of diesel engines. The acquisition is an excellent fit for our strategy of expansion into the heavy duty market.
In May 2021, we acquired 100% of the capital stock of Trumpet Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, (more commonly known as “Trombetta”), for $111.7 million. Trombetta has manufacturing facilities in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Sheboygan Falls, Wisconsin; Tijuana, Mexico, as well as a 70% ownership in a joint venture in Hong Kong, with operations in Shanghai and Wuxi, China (“Trombetta Asia, Ltd.”). Trombetta is a worldwide leader in power switching and power management products and has a long history of supplying high-quality products to a broad group of blue-chip customers across multiple commercial vehicle and off-highway channels, including heavy truck, construction, agricultural, electric vehicle and power sports markets. Few of Trombetta’s products are powertrain-related and thus unaffected by the shift from internal combustion engines. We believe that the combination of Trombetta, along with our existing businesses will create a critical mass that can be a powerful force for growth.
In September 2021, we acquired 100% of the capital stock of Stabil Operative Group GmbH, a German company (“Stabil”), for Euros 13.7 million, or $16.3 million, subject to certain post-closing adjustments. Stabil is a manufacturer and distributor of a variety of components, including electronic sensors, control units, and clamping devices to the European market, serving both commercial and light vehicle applications. The acquired Stabil business is headquartered on the outskirts of Stuttgart, Germany with facilities in Germany and Hungary. The acquisition is an excellent fit for our strategy of expansion beyond our core aftermarket business into complementary areas, and gives us exposure to a diversified group of blue chip European commercial and light vehicle customers.
For additional information on our recent acquisitions, see Note 2, “Business Acquisitions and Investments,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Impact of the Coronavirus (“COVID-19”)
On an ongoing basis, we continue to monitor the impact, if any, of COVID-19 on the global economy, our industry, business, and the markets that we serve. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020, we established a committee, comprised of our executive officers, to oversee the Company’s risk identification, management and mitigation strategies regarding the impact of the pandemic on our business and operations. The committee continues to meet on a regular basis, monitoring events related to the pandemic and any appropriate actions to be taken. Among the issues that are actively being monitored by the committee are the general state of economic conditions, governmental measures in response to the pandemic, the spread of the delta and omicron variants, and the enactment of policies and practices to ensure the health and safety of our employees, contractors and customers, as well as customer demand for our products and any potential disruptions in our supply chain.
As related to the performance of our business, we were declared an essential business under national and regional shelter-in-place orders and, as such, our business operations continued throughout 2020. After a downturn in net sales initially in the second quarter of 2020, customer orders strengthened in the last half of the second quarter and continued throughout 2020, resulting in strong net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net sales momentum continued into 2021, as we experienced strong demand for our products, and a seasonal trend that was more in line with years prior to 2020.
Although our business remains strong and we continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic, any uncertain future effect of the pandemic may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Index
Impact of Global Supply Chain Disruption and Inflation
Disruptions in the global economy in 2020 and the lingering impacts into 2021 have impeded global supply chains, resulted in longer lead times and delays in procuring component parts and raw materials, and resulted in inflationary cost increases in certain raw materials, labor and transportation. In response to the global supply chain volatility and inflationary cost increases, we have taken, and continue to take, several actions to mitigate the impact by working closely with our suppliers and customers to minimize any potential adverse impacts on our business, including implementing cost savings initiatives and the pass through of higher costs to our customers, which began in the fourth quarter of 2021. We believe that we have also benefited from our geographically diversified manufacturing footprint and our strategy to bring more product manufacturing in-house, especially with respect to product availability and fill rates. We expect these inflationary trends to continue for some time, and while we believe that we will be able to somewhat offset the impact, there can be no assurances that unforeseen future events in the global supply chain affecting the availability of materials and components, and/or increasing commodity pricing, will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of Changes in U.S. Trade Policy
Changes in U.S. trade policy, particularly as it relates to China, as with much of our industry, have resulted in the assessment of increased tariffs on goods that we, as with much of our industry, import into the United States. Although our operating results in 2021 have been only slightly impacted by the tariff costs associated with Chinese sourced products (due to our diversified manufacturing and distribution footprint), we have taken, and continue to take, several actions to mitigate the impact of the increased tariffs, including but not limited to, price increases to our customers. We do not anticipate that the increased tariffs will have a significant impact on our future operating results. Although we are confident that we will be able to pass along the impact of the increased tariffs to our customers, there can be no assurances that we will be able to pass on the entire increased costs imposed by the tariffs.
Environmental, Social, & Governance (“ESG”)
Our Company was founded in 1919 on the values of integrity, common decency and respect for others. These values continue to this day and are embodied in our Code of Ethics, which has been adopted by the Board of Directors of the Company to serve as a statement of principles to guide our decision-making and reinforce our commitment to these values in all aspects of our business. These values also serve as the foundation for our increased focus on many important environmental, social and governance issues, such as environmental stewardship and our efforts to identify and implement practices that reduce our environmental impact while achieving our business goals; our attention to diversity, equity and inclusion, employee development, retention, and health and safety; and our community engagement initiatives, to name a few. We have made significant strides building awareness of the environmental impact of our operations, and challenging ourselves to reduce our impact by reducing our consumption of energy and generation of waste, as well as enhancing our recycling efforts.
Additionally, we realize the intricate role our employees play to the overall success of our business. Their health and happiness is important, and we continue to look for ways to address their needs and the needs of their families. For example, in 2021 we conducted several surveys on employee engagement, employee satisfaction, and diversity, equity and inclusion to gain a deeper understanding of our employees’ well-being so as to ensure that the company’s culture remains strong.
Index
Comparison of Results of Operations For Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020
Sales. Consolidated net sales for 2021 were $1,298.8 million, an increase of $170.2 million, or 15.1%, compared to $1,128.6 million in the same period of 2020. Consolidated net sales increased in both our Engine Management and Temperature Control Segments, with the majority of our net sales to customers located in the United States.
Consolidated net sales in 2020 were adversely impacted in the first half of 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic, and were followed by strong net sales in the second half of 2020, as our business improved to pre-COVID-19 levels with our customers’ POS sales exceeding their comparable levels in prior periods.
The following table summarizes consolidated net sales by segment and by major product group within each segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Engine Management’s net sales increased $102.3 million, or 12.2%, to $937.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net sales in ignition, emission control, fuel and safety related system products for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $786.5 million, an increase of $94.8 million, or 13.7%, compared to $691.7 million in the same period of 2020. Net sales in the wire and cable product group for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $151.4 million, an increase of $7.5 million, or 5.2%, compared to $144 million in the same period of 2020. Engine Management’s increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, reflects the impact of successful customer initiatives in the marketplace, the phase-in of new business wins, continued strong customer demand as evidenced by robust customer POS, the partial impact of price increases in the fourth quarter of the year, which were implemented to pass through inflationary increases in raw materials, freight and labor costs, and incremental net sales from our soot sensor, Trombetta and Stabil acquisitions, along with the favorable year-over-year impact of having lower net sales in the first part of 2020 due to the general weakness in the economy caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The favorable net sales results achieved by Engine Management in 2021 more than offset the impact of the lower net sales from the decision, in December 2020, of a large retail customer to pursue a private brand strategy.
Incremental net sales from our soot sensor, Trombetta and Stabil acquisitions of $54.3 million were included in the net sales of the ignition, emission control, fuel and safety related system product group from the date of acquisition through December 31, 2021. Compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, excluding the incremental net sales from the acquisitions, net sales in the ignition, emission control, fuel and safety related product group increased $40.5 million, or 5.9%, and Engine Management net sales increased $48 million, or 5.7%.
Index
Temperature Control’s net sales increased $66.5 million, or 23.6%, to $348.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net sales in the compressors product group for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $206.7 million, an increase of $43.6 million, or 26.7%, compared to $163.1 million in the same period of 2020. Net sales in the other climate control parts group for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $141.7 million, an increase of $22.8 million, or 19.2%, compared to $118.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Temperature Control’s increase in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, reflects the impact of continued strong customer demand stemming from the impact of very warm summer weather conditions and the replenishment of customer inventory levels, along with the favorable year-over-year impact of having lower net sales in the first part of 2020 due to the general weakness in the economy caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Demand for our Temperature Control products may vary significantly with summer weather conditions and customer inventory levels.
Gross Margins. Gross margins, as a percentage of consolidated net sales, decreased to 29% for 2021, compared to 29.8% for 2020. The following table summarizes gross margins by segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively (in thousands):
(a)
Segment net sales include intersegment sales in our Engine Management and Temperature Control segments.
Compared to 2020, gross margins at Engine Management decreased 1.6 percentage points from 30.1% to 28.5%, while gross margins at Temperature Control increased 0.6 percentage points from 26.7% to 27.3%. The gross margin percentage decrease in Engine Management compared to the prior year reflects the impact of the lower gross margins achieved in the second half of 2021 compared to the second half of 2020, resulting from lower fixed cost absorption due to lower production levels than those achieved in the second half of 2020, inflationary cost increases in raw materials, labor and transportation, which began in the second quarter of 2021, and a higher mix of heavy duty OE sales from recent acquisitions, which has a different margin profile than our aftermarket business with lower gross margins but comparable operating margins. Engine Management gross margins in the first half of 2021 were favorably impacted by higher year-over-year absorption due to higher production volumes to build inventory levels, and the impact of year-over-year production variances carried over from the prior year.
The gross margin percentage increase in Temperature Control compared to the prior year reflects the favorable impact of higher year-over-year absorption due to higher production volumes, as well as overall higher sales volume, which more than offset the unfavorable impact in the second half of 2021 of inflationary cost increases in certain raw materials, labor and transportation. While we anticipate continued margin pressures at both Engine Management and Temperature Control resulting from inflationary cost increases, we believe that our annual cost initiatives, and our ability to pass through higher prices to our customers, will help to offset the impact of the inflationary increases on our margins.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) increased to $247.5 million, or 19.1% of consolidated net sales in 2021, as compared to $224.7 million, or 19.9% of consolidated net sales in 2020. The $22.8 million increase in SG&A expenses as compared to 2020 is principally due to (1) higher distribution costs associated with higher sales volumes and the impact of an increase in freight costs, (2) higher employee compensation costs, and (3) the impact of incremental expenses of $7.8 million from our soot sensor, Trombetta and Stabil acquisitions, including amortization of intangible assets acquired. The lower year-over-year SG&A expense percentage of consolidated net sales reflects the impact of discretionary cost reduction measures implemented in 2020 and carried over into 2021, and higher year-over-year sales volumes.
Index
Intangible Asset Impairment. In December 2020, a large retail customer informed us of its decision to pursue a private brand strategy for its engine management product line. As a result of this development, products sold under the BWD trademark were significantly reduced. In connection with the decision, we recorded an impairment charge of $2.6 million in 2020.
Restructuring and Integration Expenses. Restructuring and integration expenses were $0.4 million in 2021 compared to restructuring and integration expenses of $0.5 million in 2020. Restructuring and integration expenses incurred in 2021 relate to the relocation in our Engine Management Segment of certain inventory, machinery, and equipment acquired in our March 2021 soot sensor acquisition; while restructuring and integration expenses incurred in 2020 relate to (1) the increase in environmental cleanup costs for ongoing monitoring and remediation in connection with the prior closure of our manufacturing operations at our Long Island City, New York location, and (2) costs related to the residual relocation activities in our Engine Management segment in connection with our integration of the Pollak business of Stoneridge, Inc., acquired in April 2019.
Operating Income. Operating income was $129 million, or 9.9%, of consolidated net sales in 2021, compared to $108.9 million, or 9.6%, of consolidated net sales in 2020. The year-over-year increase in operating income of $20.1 million is the result of the impact of higher consolidated net sales and the impact of the impairment charge in 2020 related to the BWD trademark, which more than offset the impact of lower gross margins as a percentage of consolidated net sales and higher SG&A expenses. Operating income of 9.9% of consolidated net sales achieved in 2021 is in line historical operating margin percentages achieved.
Other Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net. Other non-operating income, net was $3.5 million in 2021, compared to $0.8 million in 2020. The year-over-year increase in other non-operating income, net results primarily from the increase in year-over-year equity income from our joint ventures and the favorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. During the first quarter of 2020, our joint ventures in China experienced temporary shutdowns due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in significantly lower equity income. In March 2020, the joint ventures reopened and resumed manufacturing and distribution.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased to $2 million in 2021, compared to $2.3 million in 2020. The year-over-year decrease in interest expense reflects the impact of lower year-over-year average interest rates on our revolving credit facility, which more than offset the impact of slightly higher average outstanding borrowings in 2021 when compared to 2020.
Income Tax Provision. The income tax provision for 2021 was $31 million at an effective tax rate of 23.8%, compared to $27 million at an effective tax rate of 25.1% in 2020. The lower effective tax rate in 2021 compared to 2020 results primarily from the increased year-over-year income tax benefit from the exercise of restricted stock, and changes in the mix of U.S. and foreign income.
Loss From Discontinued Operations. Loss from discontinued operations, net of income tax, reflects information contained in the actuarial studies performed as of August 31, 2021 and 2020, and in December 2020 to reflect events that occurred in the fourth quarter of 2020, as well as other information available and considered by us, and legal expenses and other costs associated with our asbestos-related liability. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a net loss of $8.5 million and $23 million from discontinued operations, respectively. The loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 includes a $5.3 million and $25.7 million pre-tax provision, respectively, to increase our indemnity liability in line with the 2021 and 2020 actuarial studies; and legal expenses and other miscellaneous expenses, before taxes, of $6.1 million and $5.4 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. As discussed more fully in Note 21 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we are responsible for certain future liabilities relating to alleged exposure to asbestos containing products.
Index
Net Earnings Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest. In May 2021, we acquired the Trombetta business for $111.7 million. As part of the acquisition, we acquired a 70% ownership in a joint venture in Hong Kong, with operations in Shanghai and Wuxi, China (“Trombetta Asia, Ltd.”). Net earnings attributable to the noncontrolling interest of $68,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021 represents 30% of the net earnings of Trombetta Asia, Ltd. from the date of acquisition through December 31, 2021.
Comparison of Results of Operations For Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
For a detailed discussion on the comparison of fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2019, see Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring and Integration Programs
For a detailed discussion on the restructuring and integration costs, see Note 3, “Restructuring and Integration Expense,” of the Notes Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities. During 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $85.6 million compared to $97.9 million in 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities resulted primarily from the increase in inventories compared to the decrease in inventories in the prior year, the smaller year-over-year increase in sundry payables and accrued expenses, and the larger year-over-year increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by the increase in net earnings, the decrease in accounts receivable compared to the increase in accounts receivable in the prior year, and the larger year-over-year increase in accounts payable.
Net earnings during 2021 were $91 million compared to $57.4 million in 2020. During 2021 (1) the decrease in accounts receivable was $28.5 million compared to the year-over-year increase in accounts receivable of $71.9 million in 2020; (2) the increase in inventories was $107.6 million compared to the year-over-year decrease in inventories of $18 million in 2020; (3) the increase in accounts payable was $33 million compared to the year-over-year increase in accounts payable of $7.4 million in 2020; (4) the increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets was $0.8 million compared to the year-over-year increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.4 million in 2020; and (5) the increase in sundry payables and accrued expenses was $13.4 million compared to the year-over-year increase in sundry payables and accrued expenses of $40.7 million in 2020. The decrease in accounts receivable during 2021 reflects the impact of $50 million of receivables presented to financial institutions at December 31, 2020, pursuant to our supply chain financing arrangements, that were collected in 2021; while the increase in inventories during 2021 reflects actions taken to meet continued strong customer demand, to replenish stock levels, which were depleted after record sales in the last half of 2020, and to serve as a hedge against the global disruptions in the supply chain. We continue to actively manage our working capital to maximize our operating cash flow.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $151.2 million in 2021 compared to $17.8 million in 2020. Investing activities during 2021 consisted of (1) the payment of $15.4 million, net of $0.9 million of cash acquired, for our acquisition of 100% of the capital stock of Stabil Operative Group GmbH, a German company, (“Stabil”); (2) the payment of $107.1 million, net of $4.6 million of cash acquired, for our acquisition of 100% of the capital stock of Trumpet Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, (“Trombetta”); (3) the payment of $2.9 million for our acquisition of certain assets of the soot sensor product lines from Stoneridge, Inc.; and (4) capital expenditures of $25.9 million. Investing activities in 2020 consisted of capital expenditures of $17.8 million.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities was $69 million in 2021 compared to cash used in financing activities of $71.5 million in 2020. During 2021, we (1) increased our borrowings under our revolving credit facility by $115.3 million; (2) increased our borrowings under lease obligations and our Polish overdraft facility by $3 million; (3) made cash payments for the repurchase of shares of our common stock of $26.8 million; and (4) paid dividends of $22.2 million. Cash provided by operating activities, along with borrowings under our revolving credit agreement, lease obligations and Polish overdraft facility were used to fund our investing activities, purchase shares of our common stock and pay dividends.
Index
Cash used in financing activities was $71.5 million in 2020. During 2020, we (1) reduced our borrowings under our revolving credit facility by $42.5 million; (2) reduced our borrowings under lease obligations and our Polish overdraft facility by $4.2 million; (3) made cash payments for the repurchase of shares of our common stock of $13.5 million; and (4) paid dividends of $11.2 million. Cash provided by operating activities was used to pay down our revolving credit facility, our lease obligations and Polish overdraft facility, and to fund our investing activities, purchase shares of our common stock and pay dividends.
Dividends of $22.2 million and $11.2 million were paid in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In January 2020, our Board of Directors voted to increase our quarterly dividend from $0.23 per share in 2019 to $0.25 per share in 2020. In April 2020, in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, our Board of Directors approved to temporarily suspend our quarterly cash dividend payments and stock repurchases. In September 2020, our Board of Directors approved to reinstate our stock repurchase program; and in October 2020, our Board of Directors approved the reinstatement of our quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per share. In February 2021, our Board of Directors voted to maintain our quarterly dividend at $0.25 per share in 2021; and in February 2022, our Board of Directors voted to increase our quarterly dividend from $0.25 per share in 2021 to $0.27 per share in 2022.
Comparison of Liquidity and Capital Resources For Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
For a detailed discussion of our Liquidity and Capital Resources comparison of fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2019, see Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity
Our primary cash requirements include working capital, capital expenditures, regular quarterly dividends, stock repurchases, principal and interest payments on indebtedness and acquisitions. Our primary sources of funds are ongoing net cash flows from operating activities and availability under our secured revolving credit facility (as detailed below).
We have entered into an amended credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as agent, and a syndicate of lenders. The amended credit agreement provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility with a line of credit of up to $250 million (with an additional $50 million accordion feature) and extends the maturity date to December 2023. The line of credit under the amended agreement also allows for a $10 million line of credit to Canada as part of the $250 million available for borrowing. Direct borrowings under the amended credit agreement bear interest at LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.25% to 1.75% based on our borrowing availability, or floating at the alternate base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.25% to 0.75% based on our borrowing availability, at our option. The amended credit agreement is guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries and secured by certain of our assets.
Borrowings under the amended credit agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets, including accounts receivable, inventory and certain fixed assets, and those of certain of our subsidiaries. Availability under the amended credit agreement is based on a formula of eligible accounts receivable, eligible drafts presented to the banks under our supply chain financing arrangements and eligible inventory. After taking into account outstanding borrowings under the amended credit agreement, there was an additional $122.1 million available for us to borrow pursuant to the formula at December 31, 2021. The loss of business of one or more of our key customers or, a significant reduction in purchases of our products from any one of them, could adversely impact availability under our revolving credit facility.
Outstanding borrowings under the credit agreement, which are classified as current liabilities, were $125.3 million and $10 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively; while letters of credit outstanding under the credit agreement were $2.6 million and $2.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Borrowings under the credit agreement have been classified as current liabilities based upon accounting rules and certain provisions in the agreement.
Index
At December 31, 2021, the weighted average interest rate on our amended credit agreement was 1.4%, which consisted of $125 million in direct borrowings at 1.4% and an alternative base rate loan of $0.3 million at 3.5%. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average interest rate on our amended credit agreement was 1.4%, which consisted of $10 million in direct borrowings. Our average daily alternative base rate loan balance was $1.1 million and $1.5 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At any time that our borrowing availability is less than the greater of either (a) $25 million, or 10% of the commitments if fixed assets are not included in the borrowing base, or (b) $31.25 million, or 12.5% of the commitments if fixed assets are included in the borrowing base, the terms of the amended credit agreement provide for, among other provisions, a financial covenant requiring us, on a consolidated basis, to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of 1:1 at the end of each fiscal quarter (rolling four quarters). As of December 31, 2021, we were not subject to these covenants. The amended credit agreement permits us to pay cash dividends of $20 million and make stock repurchases of $20 million in any fiscal year subject to a minimum availability of $25 million. Provided specific conditions are met, the amended credit agreement also permits acquisitions, permissible debt financing, capital expenditures, and cash dividend payments and stock repurchases of greater than $20 million.
In February 2022, our Polish subsidiary, SMP Poland sp. z.o.o., amended its overdraft facility with HSBC Continental Europe (Spolka Akcyjna) Oddzial w Polsce, formerly HSBC France (Spolka Akcyjna) Oddzial w Polsce. The amended overdraft facility provides for borrowings of up to Zloty 30 million (approximately $8 million). Availability under the amended facility commences in March 2022 and ends in June 2022, with automatic three-month renewals until June 2027, subject to cancellation by either party, at its sole discretion, at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the three-month renewal period. Borrowings under the overdraft facility will bear interest at a rate equal to WIBOR + 1.5% and are guaranteed by Standard Motor Products, Inc., the ultimate parent company. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, borrowings under the overdraft facility were Zloty 12.3 million (approximately $3 million) and Zloty 0.4 million (approximately $0.1 million), respectively.
In order to reduce our accounts receivable balances and improve our cash flow, we are party to several supply chain financing arrangements, in which we may sell certain of our customers’ trade accounts receivable to such customers’ financial institutions. We sell our undivided interests in certain of these receivables at our discretion when we determine that the cost of these arrangements is less than the cost of servicing our receivables with existing debt. Under the terms of the agreements, we retain no rights or interest, have no obligations with respect to the sold receivables, and do not service the receivables after the sale. As such, these transactions are being accounted for as a sale.
Pursuant to these agreements, we sold $818.8 million and $695.1 million of receivables for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was reflected as a reduction of accounts receivable in the consolidated balance sheet at the time of sale. Receivables presented at financial institutions and not yet collected as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were approximately $1.3 million and $50 million, respectively, and remained in our accounts receivable balance for those periods. A charge in the amount of $11.5 million, $12.2 million and $22 million related to the sale of receivables is included in selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
To the extent that these arrangements are terminated, our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity could be adversely affected by extended payment terms, delays or failures in collecting trade accounts receivables. The utility of the supply chain financing arrangements also depends upon the LIBOR rate, as it is a component of the discount rate applicable to each arrangement. If the LIBOR rate increases significantly, we may be negatively impacted as we may not be able to pass these added costs on to our customers, which could have a material and adverse effect upon our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
In March 2020, our Board of Directors authorized the purchase of up to $20 million of our common stock under a stock repurchase program. Stock repurchases under this program, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 150,273 and 323,867 shares of our common stock, respectively, at a total cost of $6.5 million and $13.5 million, respectively, thereby completing the 2020 Board of Directors authorization.
Index
In February 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the purchase of up to an additional $20 million of our common stock under a stock repurchase program. Stock repurchases under this program, during the year ended December 31, 2021, were 464,992 shares of our common stock at a total cost of $20 million, thereby completing the 2021 Board of Directors authorization.
In October 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the purchase of up to an additional $30 million of our common stock under a stock repurchase program. Stock will be purchased under the programs from time to time, in the open market or through private transactions, as market conditions warrant. Stock repurchases under this program, during the year ended December 31, 2021, were 7,000 shares of our common stock, at a total cost of $0.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $29.7 million available for future stock purchases under the program. During the period from January 1, 2022 through February 17, 2022, we have repurchased an additional 64,482 shares of our common stock at a total cost of $3.1 million, thereby reducing the availability under the program to $26.6 million.
Material Cash Commitments
Material cash commitments as of December 31, 2021 consist of required cash payments to service our outstanding borrowings of $125.3 million under our amended revolving credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as agent, and the future minimum cash requirements of $44.9 million through 2031 under operating leases. All of our other cash commitments as of December 31, 2021 are not material. For additional information related to our material cash commitments, see Note 7, “Leases,” and Note 11, “Credit Facilities and Long-Term Debt,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
We anticipate that our cash flow from operations, available cash and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility, inclusive of the utilization of the $50 million accordion feature in the facility, will be adequate to meet our future liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months. Significant assumptions underlie this belief, including, among other things, that we will be able to mitigate the future impact, if any, of the COVID-19 pandemic, disruptions in the supply chain that may lead to a further increase in inventories to support our customers, and significant inflationary cost increases in raw materials, labor and transportation, and that there will be no material adverse developments in our business, liquidity or capital requirements. If material adverse developments were to occur in any of these areas, there can be no assurance that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations, or that future borrowings will be available to us under our revolving credit facility in amounts sufficient to enable us to pay the principal and interest on our indebtedness, or to fund our other liquidity needs. In addition, if we default on any of our indebtedness, or breach any financial covenant in our revolving credit facility, our business could be adversely affected.
For further information regarding the risks in our business, refer to Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have identified the two accounting policies and estimates below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies and estimates on our business operations is discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” where such policies and estimates affect our reported and expected financial results. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
You should be aware that preparation of our consolidated annual and quarterly financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We can give no assurances that actual results will not differ from those estimates. Although we do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates, or in the assumptions that we use in calculating the estimates, the uncertain future effects, if any, of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other unforeseen changes in the industry, or business, could materially impact the estimates, and may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Index
Valuation of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets and Goodwill
At acquisition, we estimate and record the fair value of purchased intangible assets, which primarily consist of customer relationships, trademarks and trade names, patents, developed technology and intellectual property, and non-compete agreements. Intangible assets acquired through business combinations are subject to potential adjustments within the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date. Valuing intangible assets requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. As related to valuing customer relationships, significant estimates and assumptions used include but are not limited to: (1) forecasted revenues attributable to existing customers; (2) forecasted earnings before interest and taxes (“EBIT”) margins; (3) customer attrition rates; and (4) the discount rate. Goodwill is the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in business combinations. Goodwill and certain other intangible assets having indefinite lives are not amortized to earnings, but instead are subject to periodic testing for impairment. Intangible assets determined to have definite lives are amortized over their remaining useful lives. We believe that the fair value of acquired identifiable net assets, including intangible assets, are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions.
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, identifiable intangibles assets and goodwill whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. With respect to goodwill and identifiable intangible assets having indefinite lives, we test for impairment on an annual basis or in interim periods if an event occurs or circumstances change that may indicate the fair value is below its carrying amount. Factors we consider important, which could trigger an impairment review, include the following: (a) significant underperformance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results; (b) significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business; and (c) significant negative industry or economic trends. We review the fair values using the discounted cash flows method and market multiples.
When performing our evaluation of goodwill for impairment, if we conclude qualitatively that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative impairment test would not be required. If we are unable to reach this conclusion, then we would perform a goodwill quantitative impairment test. In performing the quantitative test, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to its carrying amount. A charge for impairment is recognized by the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Identifiable intangible assets having indefinite lives are reviewed for impairment on an annual basis using a methodology similar with that used to evaluate goodwill. Intangible assets having definite lives and other long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events such as product discontinuance, plant closures, product dispositions or other changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, we compare the carrying value of such assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. When the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than their carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized equal to the difference between the assets fair value and their carrying value.
There are inherent assumptions and estimates used in developing future cash flows requiring our judgment in applying these assumptions and estimates to the analysis of identifiable intangibles and long-lived asset impairment including projecting revenues, interest rates, tax rates and the cost of capital. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside our control and it is reasonably likely that assumptions and estimates will change in future periods. These changes can result in future impairments. In the event our planning assumptions were modified resulting in impairment to our assets, we would be required to include an expense in our statement of operations, which could materially impact our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Index
Asbestos Litigation
In evaluating our potential asbestos-related liability, we have considered various factors including, among other things, an actuarial study of the asbestos related liabilities performed by an independent actuarial firm, our settlement amounts and whether there are any co-defendants, the jurisdiction in which lawsuits are filed, and the status and results of such claims. As is our accounting policy, we consider the advice of actuarial consultants with experience in assessing asbestos-related liabilities to estimate our potential claim liability; and perform an actuarial evaluation in the third quarter of each year and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that additional provisions may be necessary. The methodology used to project asbestos-related liabilities and costs in our actuarial study considered: (1) historical data available from publicly available studies; (2) an analysis of our recent claims history to estimate likely filing rates into the future; (3) an analysis of our currently pending claims; (4) an analysis of our settlements and awards of asbestos-related damages to date; and (5) an analysis of closed claims with pay ratios and lag patterns in order to develop average future settlement values. Based on the information contained in the actuarial study and all other available information considered by us, we have concluded that no amount within the range of settlement payments and awards of asbestos-related damages was more likely than any other and, therefore, in assessing our asbestos liability we compare the low end of the range to our recorded liability to determine if an adjustment is required. Future legal costs are expensed as incurred and reported in earnings (loss) from discontinued operations in the accompanying statement of operations.
We plan to perform an annual actuarial evaluation during the third quarter of each year for the foreseeable future and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that additional provisions may be necessary. Given the uncertainties associated with projecting such matters into the future and other factors outside our control, we can give no assurance that additional provisions will not be required. We will continue to monitor events and changes in circumstances surrounding these potential liabilities in determining whether to perform additional actuarial evaluations and whether additional provisions may be necessary, which will reported in earnings (loss) from discontinued operations in the accompanying statement of operations. At the present time, however, we do not believe that any additional provisions would be reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our liquidity or consolidated financial position. See Note 21, “Commitments and Contingencies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report for additional information.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a detailed discussion on recently issued accounting pronouncements and their impact on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Index