Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Report. This Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Readers are also urged to carefully review and consider these, and other disclosures made by us which attempt to advise interested parties of the factors which affect our business.
Introduction and Overview
Smith Micro provides software solutions that simplify and enhance the mobile experience to some of the leading wireless and cable service providers around the globe. From enabling the family digital lifestyle to providing powerful voice messaging capabilities, we strive to enrich today’s connected lifestyles while creating new opportunities to engage consumers via smartphones and consumer IoT devices. Our portfolio includes a wide range of products for creating, sharing, and monetizing rich content, such as visual voice messaging, retail content display optimization and performance analytics on any product set.
We continue to innovate and evolve our business to respond to industry trends and maximize opportunities in emerging markets, such as digital lifestyle services and online safety, “Big Data” analytics, automotive telematics, and the consumer IoT marketplace. The key to our longevity, however, is not simply technological innovation, but our never-ending focus on understanding our customers’ needs and delivering value.
In 2021, we increased revenues by 14% to $58.4 million, driven by the 46% increase in revenues in our family safety product line resulting from the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition in April 2021, partially offset by a decrease in the number of SafePath subscribers at Sprint, now owned by T-Mobile US, as the carrier accelerated its efforts during 2021 to migrate legacy Sprint subscribers to the T-Mobile network. This initiative also negatively impacted CommSuite revenues which decreased by $4.4 million during the year as T-Mobile began to wind down Sprint’s legacy premium visual voicemail service. We expect this CommSuite deployment to reach end-of-life sometime in 2022. Due to the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition, we did experience a decline in our gross margin during 2021, resulting in a gross profit of $45.7 million. Our operating expenses increased during the year by $34.1 million, primarily because of the acquisition. The largest driver of the increase was a non-recurring $12.9 million charge resulting from the earn-out provisions of the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition. In addition, we incurred approximately $1.7 million in transaction costs while amortization expenses increased by $5.2 million due to intangible assets obtained as part of the acquisition. The net loss for 2021 was $31.0 million, resulting in a net loss per diluted share of $0.61.
With the acquisition of the Family Safety Mobile Business, we now provide white label Family Safety applications to all three Tier 1 wireless carriers in the United States. We have been focused on migrating the customers acquired through our Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition and through our 2020 acquisition of Circle Media Labs Inc.’s (“Circle”) operator business to our SafePath platform. As a result, we experienced a decline in our gross margin during 2021, as we have continued to maintain multiple family safety platforms through this integration period. In addition, we have experienced higher development costs as part of our operating expenses to facilitate the migration to the SafePath platform. We believe that once we are able to fully migrate our customers onto our SafePath platform, which we have targeted for completion for our largest customers over the next year, our development costs should decline. In addition, we anticipate that certain costs of sales related to the acquired platforms will be eliminated once the SafePath migrations are complete, which is expected to result in an increase in our gross margins.
In future quarters, we expect our overall family safety platform revenue to increase because of our competitive positioning with U.S. Tier 1 carrier customers, as we believe that we are now strategically positioned to offer our market-leading family safety platform to the majority of U.S. mobile subscribers.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain consolidated statement operations data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
Revenues and Expense Components
The following is a description of the primary components of our revenues and expenses:
Revenues. Revenues are net of sales returns and allowances. Our operations are organized into one business segment: Wireless, which includes all of our existing core products, including Family Safety (including SafePath), CommSuite, and ViewSpot family of products.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues consists of direct product and hosting, maintenance, data center, royalties, and technical support expenses including personnel costs.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, advertising costs, including digital marketing expenses, sales commissions, and trade show expenses. These expenses vary significantly from quarter to quarter based on the timing of trade shows and product introductions.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, equipment costs, and external contract development costs required to conduct our software development efforts.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, professional services and fees paid for external service providers, space and occupancy costs, and legal and other public company costs.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. Change in fair value of contingent consideration consists of a contract extension becoming probable with a given customer designated in the earn-out provision of an acquisition purchase agreement.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets consists of the amortization expense based on the pattern of economic benefit generated from the use of the related assets.
Gain on sale of software products. Gain on sale of software products consists of gain resulting from the sale of the Moho and Motion Artist animation software.
Interest income (expense), net. Interest income is primarily related to interest earned on cash equivalents.
Other income (expense), net. Other income is primarily related to fixed asset disposals and other non-operating gains or losses.
Provision for income tax expense. The Company accounts for income taxes as required by Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic No. 740, Income Taxes. This statement requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. Measurement of the deferred items is based on enacted tax laws. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities result in a deferred tax asset; we are required to evaluate the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. The deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Establishing, reducing, or increasing a valuation allowance in an accounting period generally results in an increase or decrease in tax expense in the statement of operations. We must make significant judgments to determine the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, unrecognized tax benefits, and any valuation allowance to be recorded against deferred tax assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues. Revenues of $58.4 million in 2021 increased $7.1 million, or 14%, from $51.3 million in 2020. Family Safety revenues of $41.0 million increased $13.0 million from $28.0 million in 2020. This increase was primarily related to our acquisition of the Family Safety Mobile Business in April 2021, and partially offset by declines in our legacy Sprint Family Safety revenues as a result of Sprint’s merger with T-Mobile. Our CommSuite revenues declined by $4.4 million, or 24% as a result of the migration of Sprint customers onto the T-Mobile network.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues of $12.7 million in 2021 increased $7.5 million, or 144%, from $5.2 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in costs in connection with supporting the increased revenues associated with the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition and incremental costs associated with maintaining multiple Family Safety platforms.
Gross profit. Gross profit of $45.7 million, or 78% of revenues in 2021, decreased $0.4 million, or 1%, from $46.1 million, or 89% of revenues in 2020. This reduction in gross profit percentage was due to increased costs associated with operating multiple Family Safety platforms.
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing expenses of $11.6 million in 2021 increased $2.5 million, or 27%, from $9.1 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the additional marketing costs associated with operating the Family Safety Mobile Business, and an increase in headcount.
Research and development. Research and development expenses of $26.2 million in 2021 increased $8.4 million, or 47%, from $17.8 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the additional costs associated with supporting the Family Safety platform acquired through the acquisition of the Family Safety Mobile Business and additional headcount related expenses and external contract development costs to support SafePath development.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses of $17.9 million in 2021 increased $5.1 million, or 40%, from $12.8 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to transaction and professional service costs associated with our acquisition of the Family Safety Mobile Business, costs related to the acquisition of certain non-development intellectual property, increased headcount, and incremental costs related to the transition of our Chief Financial Officer.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. The change in fair value of contingent consideration of $12.9 million resulted from a contract extension becoming probable with a given customer designated in the earn-out provision of
the purchase agreement for the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition, resulting in an increase in the contingent consideration due and paid to Avast in 2021.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets of $8.1 million in 2021 increased $5.2 million, or 177% from $2.9 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the additional intangible assets acquired as a part of the Family Safety Mobile Business.
Gain on sale of software products. The gain on sale of software products of $0.7 million in 2020 resulted from the sale of the Company’s Moho and Motion Artist animation software in December 2020. There was no gain on sale of software products for 2021.
Interest expense, net. Interest income was $0 million and $0.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting from interest earned on cash equivalents during the respective years.
Provision for income tax expense. Because of our cumulative loss position, the current provision for income tax expense consists of state income taxes, foreign tax withholdings, and foreign income taxes. After consideration of the Company’s cumulative loss position as of December 31, 2021, the Company retained a valuation allowance related to its U.S.-based deferred tax assets of $57.3 million at December 31, 2021. During fiscal year 2021, both our valuation allowance and the related deferred tax assets increased by $7.9 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had $16.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and $19.3 million of net working capital.
Operating Activities
In 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $12.9 million, primarily due to the net loss of $31.0 million, coupled with a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $16.3 million, partially offset by add-backs of non-cash expenses totaling $28.2 million. The decrease in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities was driven by the $12.9 million disbursement of contingent consideration associated with the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition. The primary sources of operating cash were net addbacks for depreciation and amortization, non-cash rent expense, and non-cash stock compensation totaling $15.4 million, the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $12.9 million. The primary uses of cash were a net loss of $31.0 million, and the payment of the contingent consideration, as well as a remaining decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.3 million, an increase in prepaid expenses of $0.3 million, and a decrease in deferred revenue of $1.4 million.
In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $7.9 million, primarily due to net income of $4.2 million and add-backs of non-cash expenses totaling $7.2 million, offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $1.3 million and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.9 million.
Investing Activities
In 2021, cash used in investing activities was $57.5 million, relating primarily to a $56.9 million net cash payment for the acquisition of the Family Safety Mobile Business and $0.8 million in capital expenditures, offset by $0.2 million of proceeds received from the sale of the Moho and Motion Artist animation software during 2020.
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $14.7 million, due to $13.5 million in payments related to the Circle acquisition in February 2020, $1.3 million in capital expenditures, and a $0.2 million equity investment, offset by proceeds of $0.4 million from the sale of the Moho and Motion Artist animation software.
Financing Activities
In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $60.7 million, primarily due to proceeds from the March 2021 common stock offering of $59.7 million and $2.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants, offset by $1.1 million of payments of contingent consideration related to the Family Safety Mobile Business acquisition.
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $4.2 million, primarily due to proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants during the year.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
During our normal course of business, we have made certain indemnities, commitments, and guarantees under which we may be required to make payments in relation to certain transactions. These include: intellectual property indemnities to our customers and licensees in connection with the use, sale and/or license of our products; indemnities to various lessors in connection with facility leases for certain claims arising from such facility or lease; indemnities to vendors and service providers pertaining to claims based on the negligence or willful misconduct; indemnities involving the accuracy of representations and warranties in certain contracts; and indemnities to directors and officers of the Company to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Delaware. We may also issue a guarantee in the form of a standby letter of credit as security for contingent liabilities under certain customer contracts. The duration of these indemnities, commitments and guarantees varies, and in certain cases, may be indefinite. The majority of these indemnities, commitments and guarantees may not provide for any limitation of the maximum potential for future payments we could be obligated to make. We have not recorded any liability for these indemnities, commitments and guarantees in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Real Property Leases
Our corporate headquarters is located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where we currently lease approximately 35,621 square feet of space under a lease that expires on April 30, 2026. Prior to January 1, 2022, our leased space in Pittsburgh included an additional 19,965 square feet, which we subleased to a third party under an agreement that commenced on February 1, 2015 and expired on December 31, 2021. We lease and occupy approximately 8,513 square feet of space in Aliso Viejo, California under a lease that expires on October 31, 2024. Internationally, we lease approximately 12,728 square feet in Belgrade, Serbia under a lease that expires July 31, 2026, we lease approximately 1,500 square feet in Stockholm, Sweden under a lease that expires on September 30, 2023, and we lease approximately 3,200 square feet in Braga, Portugal under a lease that expires July 31, 2024.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an on-going basis, we review our estimates to ensure that they appropriately reflect changes in our business or new information as it becomes available.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Business Combinations
We apply the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 805, Business Combinations, in the accounting for our acquisitions, which requires recognition of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values, separately from goodwill. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain
and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period that exists up to twelve months from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the tangible and specifically identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed with a corresponding adjustment to goodwill in the reporting period in which the adjusted amounts are determined. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, the impact of any subsequent adjustments is included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Costs to exit or restructure certain activities of an acquired company or our internal operations are accounted for as a one-time termination and exit cost pursuant to FASB ASC Topic No. 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations, and are accounted for separately from the business combination. A liability for costs associated with an exit or disposal activity is recognized and measured at its fair value in our consolidated statement of operations in the period in which the liability is incurred.
Uncertain income tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances that are acquired in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, with any adjustments to the preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if such adjustments occur within the 12-month measurement period. Subsequent to the end of the measurement period or our final determination of the value of the tax allowance or contingency, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances will affect the provision for income taxes in the consolidated statement of operations and could have a material impact on results of our operations and financial position.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We measure and disclose fair value measurements as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures.
Fair value is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received upon the sale of an asset or the amount that would be paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value is a market-based measurement that is determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or a liability. As a basis for considering such assumptions, the FASB establishes a three-tier value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in the valuation methodologies in measuring fair value:
•
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
•
Level 2 - Include other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
•
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activity.
The fair value hierarchy also requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 820, we measure our cash equivalents and short-term investments at fair value. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are classified within Level 1 by using quoted market prices utilizing market observable inputs.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 825, Financial Instruments, an entity can choose to measure at fair value many financial instruments and certain other items that are not currently required to be measured at fair value. Subsequent changes in fair value for designated items are required to be reported in earnings in the current period. This Topic also establishes presentation and disclosure requirements for similar types of assets and liabilities measured at fair value.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, for goodwill and other intangibles impairment analysis, we may utilize fair value measurements which are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
As required by FASB ASC Topic No. 805, we measure acquisition-related contingent consideration at fair value on a recurring basis and may include the use of significant unobservable inputs, and therefore, these instruments represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy.
Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets to be held are reviewed for events or changes in circumstances which indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. They are tested for recoverability using undiscounted cash flows to determine whether or not impairment to such value has occurred.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents purchase consideration from a business combination that exceeds the value assigned to the net assets of the acquired businesses. We are required to periodically assess the recoverability of the carrying value of our goodwill at least annually during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year or whenever events or circumstances indicate a potential impairment. If the carrying amount of our single reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss equal to the excess of carrying value over fair value is recorded.
We have no indefinite-lived intangible assets. Amortization expense related to our definite-lived intangible assets resulting from acquisitions is calculated based on the pattern of economic benefit expected to be generated from the use of that asset. Intangible assets are tested for impairment if events or circumstances occur indicating that the respective asset might be impaired.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with FASB ASC Topic No. 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we recognize the sale of goods and services based on the five-step analysis of transactions as provided in Topic 606, which requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for such goods and services.
We transfer software licenses to our customers on a royalty free, non-exclusive, non-transferrable, limited use basis during the term of the agreement. In some instances, we perform customization services to ensure the software operates within our customer’s operating platforms as well as the operating platforms of the mobile devices used by their end customers, before transferring the license. Revenue related to these services is recognized at a point in time upon acceptance of the software license by the customer. We also earn usage-based revenue on our platforms. Usage based revenue is generated based on active licenses used by our customer’s end customers, the provision of hosting services, revenue share based on media placements on our platform, and use of our cloud-based services. We recognize our usage-based revenue when we have completed our performance obligation and have the right to invoice the customer. This revenue is generally recognized monthly or quarterly. Finally, we ratably recognize revenue over the contract period when customers pay in advance of our service delivery.
On February 12, 2020, we acquired certain assets from Circle Media Labs, Inc., including a source code license to Circle’s parental control software solution and two customer contracts. Pursuant to these contracts, the customer parties thereto license the parental control software solution for distribution to their respective subscribers in designated markets. In each case, the contracts allow the customer to take possession of the software solution and to host it on their platform or with an independent third-party hosting service provider without significant cost. We also provide significant services that are required by the customer to ensure they have the utility of the license. As the license to the software solution and the services we provide are highly interrelated, we have concluded that the license and our services are a single performance obligation. The license fee is earned and recognized on a pro-rata basis over the contract term based on our customer’s continued use of the license and our services.
In April 2021, we acquired certain assets and liabilities from Avast plc and certain of its affiliates and all of the outstanding membership interests of its then subsidiary, Location Labs, LLC. Acquired assets include the source code to Avast’s family safety mobile software solution and cloud-based services (a portion of which was acquired through a perpetual license grant), and the acquired subsidiary’s existing contracts for the solution with five customers. Each contract involves the grant of software licenses and provision of cloud-based services. We do not allow our customers to take possession of the software solution, and since the utility of the license comes from the cloud-based services
that we provide, we consider the software license and the cloud-based services to be a single performance obligation.
We also provide consulting services to develop customer-specified functionality that are generally not on our software development roadmap. We recognize revenue from our consulting services upon delivery and acceptance by the customer of our software enhancements and upgrades. For certain customers we provide maintenance and technology support services for which the customer either pays upfront or as we provide the services. When the customer pays upfront, we record the payments as contract liabilities and recognize revenue ratably over the contract period as this is our stand ready performance obligation that is satisfied ratably over the maintenance and technology services period.
We have received upfront payments from customers from services to be provided under our ViewSpot contracts. The advance receipts were deferred and subsequently recognized ratably over the contract period. We also provide consulting services to configure ad hoc targeted promotional content for our customers upon request. These requests are driven by our customers’ marketing initiatives and tend to be short term “bursts” of activity. We recognize these revenues upon delivery of the configured promotional content to the cloud platform.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for all stock-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on their fair values and recognizes such awards as compensation expense over the vesting period using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for each award as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which replaces the “incurred loss” credit losses framework with a new accounting standard that requires management’s measurement of the allowance for credit losses to be based on a broader range of reasonable and supportable information for lifetime credit loss estimates. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and the adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.