ITEM 7.	MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of Stryve’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Stryve’s consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect Stryve’s plans, estimates and beliefs. Stryve’s actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere particularly in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this report.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this report to “Stryve,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” herein refer to the parent entity formerly named Andina Acquisition Corp. III, after giving effect to the Business Combination, and as renamed Stryve Foods, Inc., and where appropriate, our consolidated subsidiaries, and references in this report to “Andina” refer to Andina Acquisition Corp. III before giving effect to the Business Combination.
Overview
Stryve is an emerging healthy snacking company which manufactures, markets and sells highly differentiated healthy snacking products that Stryve believes can disrupt traditional snacking categories. Stryve’s mission is “to help Americans snack better and live happier, better lives.” Stryve offers convenient snacks that are lower in sugar and carbohydrates and higher in protein than other snacks. Stryve offers all-natural, delicious snacks which it believes are nutritious and offer consumers a convenient healthy snacking option for their on-the-go lives.
Stryve’s current product portfolio consists primarily of air-dried meat snack products marketed under the Stryve®, Kalahari®, Braaitime®, and Vacadillos® brand names. Biltong is a process for preserving meat through air drying that originated centuries ago in South Africa. Unlike beef jerky, Stryve’s all-natural air-dried meat snack products are made of beef and spices, are never cooked, most contain zero grams of sugar, and are free of monosodium glutamate (MSG), gluten, nitrates, nitrites, and preservatives. As a result, Stryve’s products are Keto and Paleo diet friendly. Further, based on protein density and sugar content, Stryve believes that its air-dried meat snack products are some of the healthiest shelf-stable snacks available today.
Stryve distributes its products in major retail channels, primarily in North America, including grocery, club stores and other retail outlets, as well as directly to consumers through its e-commerce websites, which officially launched in 2020, as well as direct to consumer through the Amazon platform.
Stryve believes increased consumer focus in the U.S. on health and wellness will continue to drive growth of the healthy snacking category and increase demand for Stryve’s products. Stryve has shown strong sales growth since its inception in 2017. Stryve has made substantial investments since its inception in product development, establishing its manufacturing facility, and building its marketing, sales and operations infrastructure to grow its business. As a result, Stryve has reported net losses since its inception. Stryve intends to continue to invest in product innovation, improving its supply chain, enhancing and expanding its manufacturing capabilities, and expanding its marketing and sales initiatives to drive continued growth. Additionally, moving forward management anticipates additional expenses not previously experienced related to internal controls, regulatory compliance, and other expenses relating to its go-forward operations as a public company.
Comparability of Financial Information
The Company’s results of operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable between periods as a result of the Business Combination and becoming a public company.
Business Combination
On July 20, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Andina completed the a business combination (the "Business Combination") pursuant to that certain Business Combination Agreement (the "Business Combination Agreement") by and among the Company, Andina Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Company (“Holdings”), B. Luke Weil, in the capacity from and after the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement (the “Closing”) as the representative for the shareholders of the Company (other than the Seller), Stryve Foods, LLC, a Texas limited liability company, Stryve Foods Holdings, LLC, a Texas limited liability company (the “Seller”), and R. Alex Hawkins, in the capacity from and after the Closing as the representative for the members of the Seller.
As contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, on or before the Closing Date, the following occurred: (i) the Seller and Stryve Foods, LLC (“Stryve LLC”) conducted a reorganization via a merger pursuant to which the Seller became a holding company for Stryve LLC, the former owners of Stryve LLC became the owners of the Seller, and the former holders of convertible notes of Stryve LLC became holders of convertible notes of the Seller, and pursuant to which Stryve LLC retained all of its subsidiaries, business, assets and liabilities, and became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Seller (the “Merger”), (ii) the Company was transferred by way of continuation out of the Cayman Islands and domesticated as a corporation in the State of Delaware, (iii) the Seller contributed to Holdings all of the issued and outstanding equity interests of Stryve LLC in exchange for 11,502,355 newly issued non-voting Class B common units of Holdings (the "Seller Consideration Units") and voting (but non-economic) Class V common stock of the Company (that was previously subject to a post-Closing working capital true-up), (iv) the Company contributed all of its cash and cash equivalents to Holdings, approximately $37.9 million, after the payment of approximately $7.8 million to the Company’s shareholders that elected to have their shares redeemed in connection with the Closing (the “Redemption”) and the payment of approximately $10.4 million of the Company’s expenses and other liabilities due at the Closing, in exchange for newly issued voting Class A common units of Holdings and (v) the Company issued $10.9 million of Class A common stock, satisfied by the offset of principal and accrued interest under $10.6 million of outstanding unsecured promissory notes (the "Bridge Notes") issued by Stryve LLC to certain investors in a private placement on the Closing Date (the "Bridge Investors"); and (vi) the Company changed its name to “Stryve Foods, Inc.” In addition, the Company’s ordinary shares converted into shares of Class A common stock, par value of $0.0001 per share, without any action of the holder. On March 25, 2022, the Company finalized the post-closing adjustments under the Business Combination Agreement, which resulted in the release of all 115,023 escrowed shares of Class V common stock, an equal number of Holdings Class B common units, and the net payment of approximately $238,000 by the Company to the Seller. As a result, no additional post-closing adjustments remain outstanding.
Following the consummation of the Business Combination, the combined company is organized in an “Up-C” structure in which the business of Stryve LLC and its subsidiaries is held by Holdings, which is a subsidiary of the Company. By virtue of the “Up-C” structure, the Company’s only direct assets consist of its equity interests in Holdings, an entity of which the Company maintains 100% voting control. As the sole voting member of Holdings, the Company has full, exclusive and complete discretion to manage and control the business of Stryve LLC and to take all action it deems necessary, appropriate, advisable, incidental, or convenient to accomplish the purposes of Stryve LLC and, accordingly, the financial statements are prepared on a consolidated basis.
On July 20, 2021, in connection with the completion of the Business Combination and as contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, the Company: (i) issued 4,250,000 shares of Class A common stock to private placement investors for aggregate consideration of $42.5 million; and (ii) the Company issued 1,357,372 shares of Class A common stock to the Bridge Investors satisfied by the offset of $10.9 million of principal and accrued interest under outstanding Bridge Notes issued by Stryve LLC, as part of the Business Combination.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse capitalization in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP"). Under this method of accounting, Stryve LLC is treated as the acquirer and Andina is treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes. Because Stryve LLC was deemed the accounting acquirer, the historical financial statements of Stryve LLC became the historical financial statements of the combined company, upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
COVID-19
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues and new variants emerge, we continue to prioritize the safety of our employees while navigating the evolving operating environment. Despite facing increased commodity costs, supply chain and transportation constraints, and labor challenges through the pandemic, we have capitalized on our competitive advantages in manufacturing to drive significant growth in consumer adoption of our products leading to an increased retail footprint and ultimately growth in net sales.
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented certain challenges and opportunities for the Company. The unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, creates continued uncertainty around vaccination mandates, economic recovery, labor and other inflationary pressures. The COVID-19 pandemic also creates uncertainty around customer demand within retail distribution as some retail partners’ willingness to reset distribution (which involves refreshing and reorganizing their product mix) and bring on new products may be affected. As distribution resets are an important way for us to secure new retail distribution for our products, this dynamic delayed our entry into many retail locations over the course of the pandemic. We anticipate that, although there is still a risk that distribution resets of certain retailers may be affected by the pandemic, we believe that many of the retailers will conduct resets as scheduled. That said, in early 2020 we positioned ourselves to drive growth despite the delays in retail distribution with our robust direct to consumer (“DTC”) e-commerce strategy. Additionally, COVID-19 created certain operational complexities that we have sought to overcome by seeking to better optimize our supply chain, and implementing safety measures including social distancing, mask requirements, and increased sanitation at its facilities.
Through the majority of the pandemic, we have been successful at avoiding disruptions to our supply chain and operations through these measures and have been able to maintain continuity of supply for its customers. However, in the second half of 2021, we experienced certain supply chain challenges that negatively affected our ability to supply the demands to all of our channels of trade and negatively impacted our gross margins.
We believe that most supply chain disruptions we experienced in our operations due to the pandemic are temporary but may persist in the near term. In the second half of 2021, we experienced higher costs throughout the business, including higher overall raw material, beef, transportation, labor, and advertising costs that we anticipate continuing into 2022. We continue to track new developments and ongoing impacts from the pandemic as we execute on our mitigating strategies to lessen the impact of these challenges and cost increases including but not limited to, price increases, improving our manufacturing yields through capacity enhancements, investing in further automation, and rationalizing and optimizing marketing spend to drive greater returns and retail velocities.
Results of Operations -Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth selected items in our consolidated financial data in dollar amounts and as a percentage of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net sales. Net sales increased by $13.1 million from $17.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 to $30.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 representing growth of 76.9% for the comparable periods. The primary drivers of the increase in net sales are the full-year benefit and continuation of our DTC e-commerce sales platform, increased sales of our products to existing wholesale and private label accounts, and net new sales related to additional distribution secured in 2021 at a number of key retailers.
We drove growth through our targeted DTC e-commerce initiatives, which generated $10.9 million in net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Despite the strong growth in DTC e-commerce revenues from 2020 to 2021 on a full-year basis, the performance of our e-commerce business in the latter part of 2021 the digital advertising behind our DTC business became significantly more expensive and less effective due to industry wide changes related to data privacy and app tracking that took hold in late 2021 affecting nearly all DTC advertisers. As a result, we elected to significantly scale back digital advertising midway through the fourth quarter of 2021. We anticipate that these trends in digital advertising will continue for the foreseeable future, and as such, plan to proceed with what we believe to be a more prudent approach to DTC spending in 2022.
Net sales to wholesale customers increased to $13.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Further, we added a significant number of new doors of distribution in the year ended December 31, 2021 across most of our brands, which contributed meaningfully to our growth. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 we secured new distribution with several marquee customers in the club, mass, grocery, and convenience channels. Further, we garnered expanded distribution with a number of its existing retail relationships. We believe that outside of the new and expanded distribution, the growth in the wholesale channel is, in part, attributable to increased sell-through velocities of our products at retailers supported by increased
foot traffic in retail stores following an easing of pandemic related restrictions and associated consumer behavior. In late 2021, we were faced with certain supply chain, labor, and transportation related challenges that negatively affected our net sales performance that we did not experience in 2020.
The following table shows the net sales of the Company disaggregated by channel for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold increased by $8.7 million from $11.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $19.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily driven by increased sales volume followed by significant increases in direct labor and commodity input costs, including beef, packaging, and other ingredients. Overall commodity beef prices have increased significantly year-over-year due to what we believe are the direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically labor shortages and inefficiencies in the meat processing supply chain resulting in inflationary pressures, which may persist for the foreseeable future.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $4.4 million from $5.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $10.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percent of net sales, gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 34.1% which is slightly lower than comparable period ended December 31, 2020 of 34.7%. A few primary factors contribute to this performance:
•As described above, overall net sales increased by $13.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 while gross profit increased by approximately $4.4 million over the same time period.
•In the first quarter of 2021, we added certain capabilities to our manufacturing process allowing us to prepare raw meat inputs exactly to our required specifications for production. This enabled us to purchase substantially the same cuts and quality of meat without paying the incremental cost for meat suppliers to prepare the meat to our specification prior to delivery. Given that our beef costs have increased materially due to the aforementioned supply chain challenges, this revised manufacturing process has allowed the Company to partially offset the impact of those pressures.
•In the third quarter of 2021, Stryve closed its Business Combination with Andina. In doing so, it secured capital to support its growth initiatives. Some of these initiatives have an impact on gross profit margin including but not limited to trade discounts and promotional spending to support increased velocity and distribution.
•Stryve’s wholesale customer mix of business shifted from 2020 to 2021 with latter half of the most recent year experiencing a greater volume from club and mass channels than in the prior year which offset some of the margin enhancement achieved in the first half of 2021.
•As 2021 progressed, we experienced increasing pressure on direct labor wage rates. These inflationary pressures necessitated several increases to our direct labor rates throughout 2021. We are hopeful that our investments in automation and process improvements will help to offset some of these pressures moving forward.
•Aside from the effects of mix and increases in trade promotions, the net prices in place for our products during the year ending December 31, 2021 were materially the same as those in place for the prior year period. In late 2021, we initiated several strategies to increase the average net price of our products sold
but the impact on 2021 was minor as based by our estimate, most of the strategies will begin to take effect throughout 2022.
Operating Expenses.
•Selling, and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses increased by $15.3 million from $10.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $26.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. Stryve increased its spend with respect to its marketing efforts including digital media, advertising, and paid search during 2021 compared to the prior year, 2020. While digital media will continue to be a key piece of our marketing strategy, we intend to temper this spending for the foreseeable future and increase our focus on strategies to support retail velocities. Further, management anticipates experiencing operating leverage on these expenses as the Company continues to add points of retail distribution, which has the potential to facilitate more efficient marketing spend. Other factors driving the overall increase in selling, and marketing expenses include volume driven increases in platform/broker fees.
•Operations expenses. Operations expenses increased by $2.2 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. The ramp-up of our DTC web fulfillment operation and growth of wholesale volumes contributed primarily to an increase in freight-out expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Further, increases in rates across most modes of transportation have contributed to the increase. Additionally, expenses related to supplies, maintenance, and equipment increased from 2020 compared to 2021 primarily due to increased overall volumes.
•Salaries and wages. Salaries and wages increased $1.8 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, increasing from $5.8 million to $7.6 million. This increase is in part attributable to certain non-recurring retention bonus compensation related to a prior acquisition as well as to key contributors within the organization incurred in 2021. Stryve’s management anticipates some growth in administrative headcount to accommodate the increased reporting and compliance responsibilities of being a public company going forward.
•Non-cash compensation expense. In conjunction with the Business Combination, notes receivable were forgiven resulting in a non-cash compensation expense of $1.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased $0.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021 and is primarily attributable to the timing of capital expenditures and dispositions of assets.
Operating Loss. Operating loss increased by $17.0 million from $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and is primarily attributable to increased selling and marketing expenses as well as increased operations expense, all of which is partially offset by growth in net sales and gross profit.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased by $0.3 million from $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. While we relied, in part, on debt capital to support the business throughout 2020 and during the first half of 2021, we significantly deleveraged the business upon the consummation of the Business Combination in the third quarter of 2021 thus reducing the overall interest expense of the business year-over-year.
Net Loss. Net loss increased $14.5 million from $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $32.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and is primarily attributable to the expenses related to increased selling and marketing expenses as well as increased operations expense, all of which is partially offset by growth in net sales and gross profit.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use non-GAAP financial information and believe it is useful to investors as it provides additional information to facilitate comparisons of historical operating results, identify trends in operating results, and provide additional insight on how the management team evaluates the business. Our management team uses EBITDA to make operating and strategic decisions, evaluate performance and comply with indebtedness related reporting requirements. Below are details on this non-GAAP measure and the non-GAAP adjustments that the management team makes in the definition of EBITDA. We believe this non-GAAP measure should be considered along with net income (loss), the most closely related GAAP financial measure. Reconciliations between EBITDA and net income are below, and discussion regarding underlying GAAP results throughout this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
EBITDA. Stryve defines EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), and depreciation and amortization.
The table below provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to its most directly comparable GAAP measure, which is net income (loss), for the years December 31, 2021 and 2020.
EBITDA. We achieved EBITDA of $(27.3) million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $(13.0) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview. We have historically funded our operations with cash flow from operations, equity capital raises, and note payable agreements from shareholders and private investors, in addition to bank loans. Our principal uses of cash have been debt service, capital expenditures and working capital, and funding operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred an operating loss of $31.3 million and used cash in operations of $38.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, we have working capital of $3.2 million which compares favorably to the $26.3 working capital deficit we maintained as of December 31, 2020. On January 11, 2022, we closed private placement offering in which we raised $35.0 million of gross proceeds to significantly strengthen our liquidity position. We anticipate using the funds raised for things including but not limited to working capital to support near term growth, capital expansion projects, including potentially increasing manufacturing capacity and adding manufacturing capabilities by building or procuring other manufacturing facilities and making other process improvements, and general corporate purposes, including marketing and sales initiatives and repaying debt.
On May 26, 2021, the Company entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement with OK Biltong Facility, LLC (the “Buyer”), an entity controlled by Ted Casey, a member of the Company’s Board of Directors, pursuant to which the parties consummated a sale and leaseback transaction (the “Sale and Leaseback Transaction). Under the terms of the Sale and Leaseback Transaction, the Company agreed to sell its manufacturing facility and the surrounding property in Madill, Oklahoma (the “Real Property”). The Sale and Leaseback Transaction was consummated on June 4, 2021 for a total purchase price of $7.5 million. The consummation of the Sale and Leaseback Transaction provided the Company with net proceeds (after transaction related costs) of approximately $7.3 million. The net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes and to retire the following debt facilities (as described in Note 10 to Stryve’s audited financial statements included herein): the Mortgage, the Lender Agreement, and the Lender Agreement 2 for an aggregate amount of $6.5 million.
On May 24, 2021, Stryve entered into a note purchase agreement with an accredited investor whereby Stryve sold an unsecured promissory note in the principal amount of $2.3 million having a 15% original issue discount to the purchase price, resulting in net proceeds of $2.0 million. The promissory note accrues interest at a rate of 18% per annum starting on the 45th day following the issuance of the note and all principal and accrued interest is due at maturity. The promissory note matures on the 45th day following the issuance of the note, subject to extension upon prior written notice by Stryve to the noteholder at the earlier of (i) the Closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement and (ii) the 90th day following the issuance of the note. This note was paid off in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination.
On June 30, 2021, the Company entered into a note payable agreement (“ICBT Agreement”) with ICBT Holdings, Ltd. for the principal amount of up to $1.7 million at a 10% discount, bearing interest at 10% per annum, with all principal and accrued interest thereon due and payable at maturity of June 30, 2024. Of the $1.7 limit, $0.8 million of principal had been drawn from the lender as of June 30, 2021. This note was paid off in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination.
On June 30, 2021, the Company entered into a note payable agreement (“MCA #4 Agreement”) with Montgomery Capital Partners IV, LP. for the principal amount of up to $2.9 million, bearing interest at 16% per annum, with all principal and accrued interest thereon due and payable at maturity of June 30, 2022. This note was paid off in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination.
In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, on July 20, 2021, the Company raised proceeds of $37.9 million (net of Andina’s transaction costs and expenses). Following the Closing, Stryve retired the following debt facilities (as described in Note 10 to Stryve’s financial statements included herein): the Promissory Note, the VM Agreement 2, the CVI Agreement, the ICBT Agreement, and the MCA #4 Agreement for an aggregate amount of approximately $11.1 million including principal and interest. The Company believes the cash proceeds from the Business Combination, net of the $11.1 million of debt reduction described below, combined with the private offering in January 2022 described above will be sufficient to fund the Company’s cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Cash Flows. The following tables show summary cash flows information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Net Cash used in Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities increased $22.4 million from $15.8 million through the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $38.2 million through the year ended December 31, 2021. The majority of this increase is attributable to the increase in net loss in the year ended December 31, 2021 as
compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 with the balance of the increase stemming from considerable investment in net working capital.
Net Cash used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities decreased from $2.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a $1.1 million decrease in cash consumed when comparing the same period year over year. This decrease is primarily attributable to the acquisition of the Kalahari brand assets that took place in 2020 which represents approximately $1.5 million of the change year-over-year. We anticipate increased investment in manufacturing and fulfillment assets moving forward, in order to ensure we have adequate capacities to meet the potential demand for our products.
Net Cash provided by Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities generated $22.4 million more cash in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash from financing activities of $18.8 million from a combination of the issuance of convertible notes, short-term borrowings, equity capital raised from private investors, and repayment of debt. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated cash from financing activities of $41.2 million from a combination of the issuance of the Bridge Notes, additional short-term borrowings, repayment of debt, and the consummation of the transactions in connection with the Business Combination.
Debt and credit facilities. The information below represents an overview of the Company’s debt and credit facilities. The Company’s outstanding indebtedness as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 is as follows:
Future minimum principal payments on the notes payable as of December 31, 2021, are as follows for the years ending December 31:
On January 28, 2022, we paid off approximately $6.8 million of outstanding principal and interest owed to Origin bank.
Certain Factors Affecting Our Performance
Stryve’s management believes that the Company’s future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
Ability to Expand Distribution in both Online and Traditional Retail Channels. Stryve is currently growing its consumer base through both paid and organic means both online as well as by expanding its presence in a variety of physical retail distribution channels. Online consumer acquisitions typically occur through the Company’s portfolio of DTC e-commerce websites and Amazon.com. The Company’s online consumer acquisition program includes paid and unpaid social media, search, and display media. Stryve’s products are also sold through a growing number of traditional retail channels where the Company has an opportunity to acquire new consumers. Traditional retail channels include grocery chains, natural food outlets, club stores, convenience stores, and drug stores, all either direct or through distribution partners.
Ability to Acquire and Retain Consumers at a Reasonable Cost. Stryve’s management believes an ability to consistently acquire and retain consumers at a reasonable cost relative to projected life-time value will be a key factor affecting future performance. To accomplish this goal, Stryve intends to strategically allocate advertising spend between online and offline channels favoring digital media, as well as emphasizing more targeted and measurable “direct response” digital marketing spend with advertising focused on increasing consumer awareness and driving trial. Further, we acknowledge that changes to third-party algorithms that may be utilized directly, or indirectly, by Stryve in its advertising efforts may impact the effectiveness of Stryve's advertising which may increase its overall cost to acquire and retain consumers.
Ability to Drive Repeat Usage of Our Products. Stryve accrues substantial economic value from repeat consumers who consistently purchase its products either online or in traditional retail. The pace of Stryve’s growth rate will be affected by the repeat usage dynamics of existing and newly acquired customers. The Company utilizes a number of methods to drive repeat behavior including intelligent e-mail and text campaigns, targeted digital media, and subscribe and save incentives.
Ability to Expand Gross Margins. Stryve’s overall profitability will be impacted by its ability to expand gross margins through effective sourcing of raw materials, managing production yields and drying times, controlling labor and shipping costs, as well as spreading other production-related costs over greater manufacturing volumes. Additionally, Stryve's ability to expand gross margins will be influenced by its revenue channel and customer mix as well as by Stryve's ability to pass price increases to its customers.
Ability to Expand Operating Margins. The Company’s ability to expand operating margins will be impacted by its ability to effectively manage its fixed and variable operating expenses as net sales increase.
Ability to Manage Supply Chain and Expand Production In-line with Demand. Stryve’s ability to grow and meet future demand will be affected by its ability to effectively plan for and source inventory from a variety of suppliers located inside and outside the United States. Additionally, efficiently scaling production capacity ahead of growth in net sales will be critical to the Company’s meet future demand without disruption.
Ability to Optimize Key Components of Working Capital. Stryve’s ability to reduce cash burn in the near-term and eventually generate positive cash flow will be partially impacted by the Company’s ability to effectively manage the key components of working capital which have a direct impact on the cash conversion cycle.
Seasonality. Because Stryve is so early in its lifecycle of growth, it is difficult to discern the exact magnitude of seasonality affecting its business. Any evidence of seasonality is not clearly discernable from the Company’s historical growth. However, understanding potential trends in seasonality will be key in Stryve’s management of its expenses, liquidity, and working capital.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose
of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
In connection with the consummation of the Sale and Leaseback Transaction, Stryve entered into a lease agreement (the “Lease Agreement”) with Buyer pursuant to which Stryve leased back the Real Property from Buyer for an initial term of twelve (12) years unless earlier terminated or extended in accordance with the terms of the Lease Agreement. Under the Lease Agreement, Stryve’s financial obligations include base rent of approximately $60,000 per month, which rent will increase on an annual basis at two percent (2%) over the initial term. Stryve is also responsible for all monthly expenses related to the leased facility, including insurance premiums, taxes and other expenses, such as utilities.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures of Market Risks
Stryve’s future income, cash flows and fair values relevant to financial instruments are dependent upon prevalent market interest rates. Market risk refers to the risk of loss from adverse changes in market prices and interest rates.
Concentration of credit risk. The balance sheet items that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk are primarily cash, accounts receivable, and accounts payable. The Company continuously evaluates the credit worthiness of its customers’ financial condition and generally does not require collateral. The Company maintains cash balances in bank accounts that may, at times, exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) limits of $250,000 per institution. The Company incurred no losses from such accounts and management considers the risk of loss to be minimal.
As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, customer and vendor concentrations in excess of 10% consolidated sales, purchases, accounts receivable, and accounts payable are as follows:
Interest rate risk. Stryve is subject to interest rate risk in connection with borrowing based on a variable interest rate. Derivative financial instruments, such as interest rate swap agreements and interest rate cap agreements, are not currently but may be used for the purpose of managing fluctuating interest rate exposures that exist from Stryve’s variable rate debt obligations that are expected to remain outstanding. Interest rate changes do not affect the market value of such debt, but could impact the amount of Stryve’s interest payments, and accordingly, Stryve’s future earnings and cash flows, assuming other factors are held constant. Additionally, changes in prevailing market interest rates may affect Stryve’s ability to refinance existing debt or secure new debt financing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, management acknowledges that both foreign and domestic central bank actions as well as geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, such as Russia's recent invasion of Ukraine, may have unpredictable effects on the Company's exposure to interest rate risk either directly or indirectly.
Foreign currency risk. Stryve is exposed to changes in currency rates as a result of its revenue generated in currencies other than U.S. dollars. Revenue and profit generated by international operations will increase or decrease compared to prior periods as a result of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. However, the operations that are impacted by foreign currency risk are less than 5% of Stryve’s net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and therefore, the risk of this is insignificant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, management acknowledges that both foreign and domestic central bank actions as well as geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, such as Russia's recent invasion of Ukraine, may have unpredictable effects on the Company's exposure to foreign currency risk either directly or indirectly.
Raw material risk. Stryve’s profitability depends, among other things, on its ability to anticipate and react to raw material costs, primarily beef. The price of beef and other raw materials are subject to many factors beyond Stryve’s control, including general economic conditions, inflation, processing labor shortages, cost of feed, demand, natural disasters, weather and other factors that may affect beef supply chain participants. Changes in the prices of beef and other raw materials have already negatively affected Stryve's results of operations, and any continued or further changes could have a material impact on Stryve’s business, financial condition and results of operations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, management acknowledges that both foreign and domestic central bank actions as well as geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, such as Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine, may have unpredictable effects on the Company's exposure to raw material commodity risks.
Inflation risk. Inflation may impact Stryve’s revenue and cost of services and products, Stryve believes the effects of inflation, if any, on its business, financial condition and results of operations have been material to date which management hopes to alleviate through mitigating strategies. However, there can be no assurance that any mitigation strategies management employs will be effective or that its business, financial condition and results of operations will not be materially impacted by continued inflation in the future. Notwithstanding the foregoing, management acknowledges that both foreign and domestic central bank actions as well as geopolitical uncertainty and conflict, such as Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine, may have unpredictable effects on the Company's exposure to inflation risk either directly or indirectly.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported revenue, results of operations, and comprehensive net income or loss, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet during, and as of, the reporting periods. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are necessary and are made based on our historical experience, market trends and on other assumptions and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances because future events and their effects on our results of operations and value of our assets cannot be determined with certainty. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained. We may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates or assumptions.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts, Returns, and Deductions. Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company records accounts receivable at their net realizable value, which requires management to estimate the collectability of the Company’s receivables. Judgment is required in assessing the realization of these receivables, including the credit worthiness of each counterparty and the related aging of past due balances. Management provides for an allowance for doubtful accounts equal to the estimated uncollectable amounts, in addition to a general provision based on historical experience. Management provides for the customer accommodations based upon a general provision of a percentage of sales in addition to known deductions. The percentage provided was increased from 8% to 11% during 2021 based upon the level of deductions processed. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the allowance for doubtful accounts and returns and deductions totaled $1,236,497 and $1,603,069 respectively. Total bad debt expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $1,078,302 and $744,863 respectively.
Reporting Unit Analysis
The Company presents a single segment for purposes of financial reporting and prepared its consolidated financial statements upon that basis. The Company considered ASC 350-20-35-35 related to reporting unit determination and the aggregation of components into one reporting unit.
The economic characteristics considered were whether:
1) The nature of the products and services are similar
2) The type of class of customer for products and services are similar
3) The methods used to distribute the products or provide the services are similar
4) The manner in which an entity operates and the nature of those operations is similar
Currently, the Company has one reporting unit due to the similarity of its components when evaluated against the aforementioned economic characteristics.
Fair Value Analysis
The following table provides a summary of certain assumptions that drive the fair value of the Company (reporting unit):
Since inception, the Company has increased revenues, improved gross profit and reduced net losses each year. In addition to reviewing the financial performance of the Company, Stryve management also reviewed various events or circumstances that may affect fair value in the following categories: macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, and other relevant entity-specific events. In doing so, Stryve management determined if each event or circumstance would have an adverse, neutral, or positive impact on the business and assessed the relative impact of each.
Based on this analysis, Stryve management has determined that it is more than likely that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount as of December 31, 2021. As a result, no impairments were made to Goodwill.