ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The discussion in this Annual Report contains certain forward-looking statements that relate to future plans, events, financial results or performance. You can identify forward-looking statements by those that are not historical in nature, particularly those that use terminology such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “predict,” “intend,” “potential,” “continue” or the negative of these or similar terms. These statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from our historical experience and our present expectations or projections. These risks and uncertainties include, among others:
•Current and future general and industry economic trends and consumer confidence;
•Risks inherent in outbreaks of pandemics or contagious disease, including the COVID-19 pandemic;
•Risks inherent in global sourcing activities, including tariffs, outbreaks of pandemics or contagious diseases, strikes and the potential for shortages in supply or disruption or delay of production and delivery of materials and products in our supply chain;
•Risks of disruption in the operation of any of our manufacturing, distribution, logistics, home delivery, product development, or customer service facilities or operations;
•Our manufacturing processes with minimal levels of inventory, which may leave us vulnerable to shortages in supply;
•Our dependence on significant suppliers and third parties and our ability to maintain relationships with key suppliers or third parties, including several sole-source suppliers or service providers;
•Rising commodity costs and other inflationary pressures;
•The effectiveness of our marketing messages;
•The efficiency of our advertising and promotional efforts;
•Our ability to execute our Total Retail distribution strategy;
•Our ability to achieve and maintain acceptable levels of product and service quality, and acceptable product return and warranty claims rates;
•Our ability to continue to improve and expand our product line, and consumer acceptance of our products, product quality, innovation and brand image;
•Industry competition, the emergence of additional competitive products and the adequacy of our intellectual property rights to protect our products and brand from competitive or infringing activities;
•Claims that our products, processes, advertising, or trademarks infringe the intellectual property rights of others;
•Availability of attractive and cost-effective consumer credit options;
•Increasing government regulation;
•Pending or unforeseen litigation and the potential for adverse publicity associated with litigation;
•The adequacy of our and third-party information systems to meet the evolving needs of our business and existing and evolving risks and regulatory standards applicable to data privacy and security;
•The costs and potential disruptions to our business related to upgrading or maintaining our information systems;
•The vulnerability of our and third-party information systems to attacks by hackers or other cyber threats that could compromise the security of our systems, result in a data breach or disrupt our business;
•Environmental risks, including increasing environmental regulation and the broader impacts of climate change such as from weather-related events; and
•Our ability, and the ability of our suppliers and vendors, to attract, retain and motivate qualified management, executive and other key team members, including qualified retail sales professionals and managers.
33 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Additional information concerning these and other risks and uncertainties is contained under the caption “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to provide a reader of our consolidated financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. Our MD&A is presented in the following sections:
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Overview
Business Overview
At Sleep Number, our purpose is to improve the health and wellbeing of society through higher quality sleep. We are committed to leveraging the power of sleep, and sleep science, to improve lives and create a healthier, kinder, more inclusive world. And because our more than 5,500 team members are dedicated to our mission as well as the disciplined execution of our vertically integrated business model and differentiated strategy, Sleep Number is at the forefront of sleep innovation. As the exclusive designer, manufacturer, marketer, retailer and servicer of Sleep Number 360 smart beds and SleepIQ technology, Sleep Number is uniquely equipped to offer the life-changing benefit of high-quality, individualized sleep solutions and services. To date, we have improved almost 14 million lives.
With our enterprise-wide investments in innovation, technology, logistics, marketing and customer service, Sleep Number has created a highly relevant, competitively advantaged strategy and has become a beloved brand built on a foundation of individuality and wellbeing. Together with our expertise in sleep research, commitment to data science and analytics, and deep understanding of consumers - including structural shifts in their behavior that we have anticipated since the 2012 inception of our consumer innovation strategy and which were accelerated by the global pandemic - we are driving profitable growth and delivering superior value for all our stakeholders.
COVID-19 Pandemic - Impact on our Business
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in mid-March 2020, government restrictions resulted in the temporary closure of most of our retail stores, with 47% of our stores closed on average during the second quarter of 2020. While prioritizing the safety of our team, serving our customers and ensuring business continuity, we swiftly took decisive actions to strengthen our liquidity, cash flows and financial position, and mitigate the future impact on our operations and financial performance. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic challenges, we continue to design, manufacture, sell and service Sleep Number products, invest in our business, develop and launch new products, and deliver innovative customer solutions.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our 2020 and 2021 financial performance. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic mainly impacted our second-quarter financial performance, as we generated strong demand and financial performance during the full-year of 2020. In 2021 we continued to generate strong demand; however, our financial performance was impacted by: (i) global supply constraints which affected our ability to deliver products to our customers; and (ii) incremental costs from labor and material inflation, and expediting costs resulting from current-period supply chain shortages. The pandemic's future effects on our global supply chain, consumer demand and our ongoing financial performance remains uncertain. See Part I: Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional discussion on the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on our business.
34 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Summary
Financial highlights for fiscal 2021 were as follows:
•Net sales for 2021 increased 18% to $2.2 billion, compared with $1.9 billion in 2020, and increased 29% compared with $1.7 billion in 2019. While customer order demand remained strong during 2021, global supply constraints limited our ability to deliver products to our customers, shifting more than $125 million of net sales to future periods. 2020 included 53 weeks compared with 52 weeks in 2021 and 2019, with the extra week benefiting 2020 net sales by $41 million. Total Retail comparable sales increased 17% and sales from net opened/closed stores in the past 12 months, and other (including the additional 53rd week in 2020) added 1.0 percentage point (ppt.) of growth in 2021. For additional details, see the components of total net sales growth on page 36.
•Sales per store in 2021 (sales for stores open at least one year, Total Retail, including online, phone and chat, adjusted for the additional 53rd week in 2020) on a trailing twelve-month basis totaled $3.6 million, 18% higher than 2020.
•2021 operating income of $194 million increased by $9 million, or 5%, compared with $185 million in the prior year, driven by the strong increase in net sales. Our 2021 operating income rate decreased to 8.9% of net sales, compared with 10.0% of net sales in 2020. Our 2021 operating income rate was impacted by the 1.9 ppt. decrease in our gross profit rate, partially offset by the leveraging impact of the 18% increase in net sales.
•We continued to prioritize investments in near- and long-term growth drivers in 2021, including a 43% increase in our innovation driving R&D expenses.
•Net income in 2021 increased 10% to $154 million, compared with net income of $139 million in 2020, and increased 88% compared with net income of $82 million in 2019. Net income per diluted share increased 26% to $6.16, compared with $4.90 per diluted share in 2020, and increased 128% compared with $2.70 per diluted share in 2019. Diluted earnings per share for 2020 benefited from the profits generated during the additional 53rd week ($0.30 per diluted share).
•We achieved a return on invested capital (ROIC) of 27.6% in 2021, compared with 25.0% in 2020.
•Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 increased by 7% to $300 million, compared with $280 million for the prior year. Purchases of property and equipment for 2021 increased to $67 million, compared with $37 million in 2020. Purchases of property and equipment in 2020 were temporarily reduced based on the economic uncertainties associated with the pandemic.
•On December 3, 2021, we amended our revolving credit facility to expand the aggregate availability from $600 million to $825 million. We also replenished our outstanding share repurchase authorization to $600 million effective April 4, 2021, the beginning of our fiscal second quarter. We remain committed to our capital deployment priorities focused on performance drivers.
•We ended 2021 with $383 million of borrowings under our credit facility, compared with $244 million at the end of 2020. Net liquidity available under our credit facility was $439 million at January 1, 2022. Our leverage ratio as defined in our credit agreement was 2.6x as of January 1, 2022. The maximum leverage ratio under our credit agreement is 4.5x.
•In 2021, we invested $364 million to repurchase 3.1 million shares of our common stock ($116.79 per share, based on trade dates) under our Board-approved share repurchase program. As of January 1, 2022, the remaining authorization under our Board-approved share repurchase program was $403 million.
35 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
The following table sets forth our results of operations expressed as dollars and percentages of net sales. Figures are in millions, except percentages and per share amounts. Amounts may not add due to rounding differences.
The percentage of our total net sales, by dollar volume, was as follows:
The components of total net sales change, including comparable net sales changes, were as follows:
____________________
(1)Stores are included in the comparable-store calculation in the 13th full month of operations. Stores that have been remodeled or repositioned within the same shopping center remain in the comparable-store base. Fiscal 2020 included 53 weeks, as compared to 52 weeks for the other periods presented. Total Retail comparable sales have been adjusted to remove the estimated impact of the additional week.
36 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Other sales metrics were as follows:
____________________
(1)Trailing-twelve months Total Retail comparable sales per store open at least one year.
(2)Trailing-twelve months for stores open at least one year (excludes online, phone and chat sales).
(3)Represents Total Retail net sales divided by Total Retail smart bed units.
(4)Fiscal 2020 included 53 weeks, as compared to 52 weeks in fiscal 2021 and 2019. The additional week in 2020 was in the fiscal fourth quarter. Total Retail comparable sales have been adjusted to remove the estimated impact of the additional week on those metrics.
The number of retail stores operating was as follows:
Comparison of 2021 and 2020
Net sales
Net sales in 2021 increased 18% to $2.2 billion, compared with $1.9 billion in 2020, and increased 29% compared with $1.7 billion in 2019. 2020 included 53 weeks compared with 52 weeks in 2021 and 2019, with the extra week benefiting 2020 net sales by $41 million. While customer order demand remained strong during 2021, global supply constraints limited our ability to deliver products to our customers, shifting more than $125 million of net sales to future periods. The 18% net sales increase was driven by a 17% comparable sales increase in Total Retail and 1.0 percentage point (ppt.) of growth from net opened/closed stores in the past 12 months, and other (including the additional 53rd week in 2020). Online, phone and chat sales (included in comparable sales noted above) made up 13% and 15% of total net sales in 2021 and 2020, respectively, compared with 8% in 2019 as consumers embraced transacting remotely with Sleep Number as well as in our stores. For additional details, see the components of total net sales growth on page 36.
The $328 million net sales increase compared with the same period one year ago was primarily comprised of: (i) a $297 million increase in our Total Retail comparable net sales; (ii) a $30 million increase resulting from net store openings; and (iii) a $1 million increase in phone, online, chat and other sales. Total Retail smart bed unit sales increased 12% compared with the prior year. Average revenue per smart bed unit in Total Retail increased by 5% to $5,102, compared with $4,856 in the prior-year period.
Gross profit
Gross profit for 2021 of $1.3 billion increased by $163 million, or 14%, compared with $1.2 billion in 2020. The 2021 gross profit rate decreased to 60.4% of net sales, compared with 62.3% for the prior-year period. The 1.9 ppt. decrease in the gross profit rate was mainly due to: (i) incremental costs due to rapid inflation related to labor and materials, and expediting costs resulting from current-period supply chain shortages (3.2 ppt.); partially offset by (ii) the leverage from the 18% net sales increase, including price increases to offset inflation pressures, combined with a more favorable sales mix of higher-margin products. In addition, our gross profit rate will fluctuate from year to year due to a variety of other factors, including return and exchange costs, and changes in performance-based incentive compensation.
37 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses totaled $905 million in 2021, compared with $771 million last year. The sales and marketing expense rate decreased to 41.4% of net sales, compared with 41.5% for the same period one year ago. The current-year sales and marketing expenses rate decrease of 0.1 ppt. was primarily due to: (i) the leveraging impact of the 18% net sales increase; (ii) efficiency gains through our digital ecosystem and operating initiatives; partially offset by (iii) restored marketing expenses which were temporarily reduced last year when we implemented appropriate expense management actions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Efficiency gains and operating initiatives included improved store operating productivity.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative (G&A) expenses increased $2 million to $161 million in 2021, compared with $159 million in the prior year, but decreased to 7.4% of net sales, compared with 8.6% of net sales one year ago. The $2 million increase in G&A expenses mainly consisted of the following: (i) $3 million of additional professional and consulting fees; partially offset by (ii) a $1 million net reduction in employee compensation resulting from a year-over-year decrease in Company-wide performance-based incentive compensation, partially offset by increased employee compensation to support the growth of our business (prior year included the temporary and permanent elimination of certain roles due to changing business needs based on the COVID-19 pandemic). The G&A expenses rate decreased by 1.2 ppt. in 2021, compared with 2020 due to the leveraging impact of the 18% net sales increase, partially offset by the items discussed above.
Research and development expenses
Research and development (R&D) expenses increased by 43% to $59 million in 2021, compared with $41 million in 2020. The R&D expense rate for 2021 increased to 2.7% of net sales, compared with 2.2% of net sales for the prior year. The 43% spending level increase supports our ongoing consumer innovation strategy.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net decreased to $6 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $9 million for the same period one year ago. The $3 million decrease was mainly driven by a lower level of outstanding borrowings during 2021 compared with 2020. In March 2020, we fully drew down our credit line and secured a $75 million term loan to increase liquidity and preserve financial flexibility during the COVID-19 pandemic disruption. We repaid the $75 million term loan in September 2020.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $34 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $37 million for the same period one year ago. The effective income tax rate for the year ended January 1, 2022 was 17.9% compared with 20.9% for the year ended January 2, 2021. Both years’ effective tax rates were positively impacted by stock-based compensation excess tax benefits.
Comparison of 2020 and 2019
For a discussion of our 2020 versus 2019 results, see our 2020 Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Managing our liquidity and capital resources is an important part of our commitment to deliver superior shareholder value over time.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows provided by operating activities and cash available under our $825 million revolving credit facility (increased from $600 million to $825 million as of December 3, 2021). As of January 1, 2022, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing other than our $4 million in outstanding letters of credit. The cash generated from ongoing operations and cash available under our revolving credit facility are expected to be adequate to maintain operations and fund anticipated expansion, strategic initiatives and contractual obligations such as lease payments and
38 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
capital commitments for new retail store locations for the foreseeable future. See Notes 7, Leases, and 12, Commitments and Contingencies, for further details on our contractual obligations.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $2 million and $4 million at January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Significant changes in cash and cash equivalents during 2021 included $300 million of cash provided by operating activities and $145 million increase in short-term borrowings, which were offset by $67 million of cash used to purchase property and equipment, and $382 million of cash used to repurchase our common stock.
The following table summarizes our cash flows (dollars in millions). Amounts may not add due to rounding differences:
Cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was $300 million compared with $280 million for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. Significant components of the $20 million year-over-year increase in cash from operating activities included: (i) a $15 million increase in net income in 2021 compared with 2020; (ii) a $71 million fluctuation in accounts payable with both years impacted by business changes and timing of payments; (iii) a $62 million fluctuation in the amount of compensation and benefits accrued and timing of the related payments resulting from year-over-year changes in Company-wide performance-based incentive compensation; and (iv) a $30 million change in inventories with both years’ changes in inventory balances driven by forecasted future customer demand and anticipated supply chain constraints. In addition, the 2021 balance included $10 million higher purchase costs due to rapid inflation pressures and increased inbound transportation expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities was $67 million for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $39 million in 2020. Investing activities in 2021 included $67 million of property and equipment purchases, compared with $37 million last year. The $30 million year-over-year increase was primarily due to higher property and equipment purchases for new and remodeled stores. In addition, prior-year property and equipment purchases reflect actions taken to temporarily reduce capital spending based on the economic uncertainties associated with the pandemic.
Net cash used in financing activities was $235 million for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $238 million in 2020. During the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, we repurchased $382 million of our common stock (based on settlement dates, $364 million under our Board-approved share repurchase program and $18 million in connection with the vesting of employee restricted stock grants), compared with $236 million in 2020. Short-term borrowings increased by $145 million during 2021 due to a $138 million increase in borrowings under our credit facility to $383 million, in addition to a $7 million increase in book overdrafts which are included in the net change in short-term borrowings. Short-term borrowings decreased by $12 million during 2020 due to a $13 million increase in borrowings under our credit facility to $244 million, which was more than offset by a $25 million decrease in book overdrafts. Financing activities for both years reflect the cash proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options.
Under our Board-approved share repurchase program, we repurchased 3.1 million shares at a cost of $364 million (based on trade dates, $116.79 per share) during the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022. During 2020, we repurchased 3.4 million shares at a cost of $228 million ($66.49 per share). As of January 1, 2022, the remaining authorization under our Board-approved share repurchase program was $403 million. There is no expiration date governing the period over which we can repurchase shares.
On December 3, 2021, we amended our revolving credit facility to increase our net aggregate availability from $600 million to $825 million. We maintain the accordion feature which allows us to increase the amount of the credit facility from $825 million to $1.2 billion, subject to lenders’ approval. The amended credit facility matures in December 2026. There were no other significant changes to the credit facility’s terms and conditions. As of January 1, 2022, we had $383 million of borrowings under our credit facility. We also had $4 million in outstanding letters of credit. Net liquidity available under our credit facility was $439 million at January 1, 2022. The credit agreement provides the lenders with a collateral security interest in substantially all of our assets and those of our subsidiaries and requires us to comply with,
39 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
among other things, a maximum leverage ratio (4.5x) and a minimum interest coverage ratio (3.0x). Our leverage ratio as defined in our credit agreement was 2.6x as of January 1, 2022. Under the terms of the credit agreement, we pay a variable rate of interest and a commitment fee based on our leverage ratio. The credit agreement is for general corporate purposes, to meet our seasonal working capital requirements and to repurchase our common stock. As of January 1, 2022, the weighted-average interest rate on borrowings under the credit facility was 1.6% and we were in compliance with all financial covenants.
We have an agreement with Synchrony Bank to offer qualified customers revolving credit arrangements to finance purchases from us (Synchrony Agreement). The Synchrony Agreement contains certain financial covenants, including a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum interest coverage ratio consistent with our Credit Agreement. As of January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with all financial covenants.
Under the terms of the Synchrony Agreement, Synchrony Bank sets the minimum acceptable credit ratings, the interest rates, fees and all other terms and conditions of the customers’ accounts, including collection policies and procedures, and is the owner of the accounts. As the accounts are owned by Synchrony Bank, at no time are the accounts purchased or acquired from us. We are not liable to Synchrony Bank for our customers’ credit defaults.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses and the related disclosures. Predicting future events is inherently an imprecise activity and as such requires the use of judgment. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which are included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes the accounting policies discussed below are the most critical because they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and estimates, and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board.
Our critical accounting policies and estimates relate to stock-based compensation, warranty liabilities and revenue recognition.
40 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Description Judgments and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results
Differ from Assumptions
Stock-Based Compensation
We have stock-based compensation plans, which include non-qualified stock options and stock awards.
See Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 8, Shareholders’ Deficit, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a complete discussion of our stock-based compensation programs.
Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the volatility of our stock price, future employee forfeiture rates and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimates or future earnings adjustments.
Performance-based stock awards require management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving performance targets. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to determine stock-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in stock-based compensation expense that could be material.
In addition, if actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the stock-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the stock-based compensation. Finally, if the actual forfeiture rates, or the actual achievement of performance targets, are not consistent with the assumptions used, we could experience future earnings adjustments.
A 10% change in our stock-based compensation expense for the year ended January 1, 2022, would have affected net income by approximately $1.7 million in 2021.
Warranty Liabilities
We provide a limited warranty on most of the products we sell.
See Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a complete discussion of our warranty program and liabilities.
The majority of our warranty claims are incurred within the first year. However, our warranty liability contains uncertainties because our warranty obligations cover an extended period of time. A revision of estimated claim rates or the projected cost of materials and freight associated with sending replacement parts to customers could have a material adverse effect on future results of operations.
We have not made any material changes in our warranty liability assessment methodology during the past three fiscal years. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our warranty liability. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material.
A 10% change in our warranty liability at January 1, 2022, would have affected net income by approximately $0.8 million in 2021.
41 | 2021 FORM 10-K
SLEEP NUMBER CORPORATION
Description Judgments and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results
Differ from Assumptions
Revenue Recognition
Certain accounting estimates relating to revenue recognition contain uncertainty because they require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding the effects of future events.
See Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 9, Revenue Recognition, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a complete discussion of our revenue recognition policies.
Our estimates of sales returns contain uncertainties as actual sales return rates may vary from expected rates, resulting in adjustments to net sales in future periods. These adjustments could have an adverse effect on future results of operations. We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to establish our sales returns allowance during the past three fiscal years. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our sales returns allowance. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to additional losses or gains in future periods.
A 10% change in our sales returns allowance at January 1, 2022 would have affected net income by approximately $1.7 million in 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 1, Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - “New Accounting Pronouncements” for recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial reporting.