Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
On October 6, 2021, Science 37 Holdings, Inc. consummated a merger (“Merger Transaction”) by and among LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. (“LSAQ”), LifeSci Acquisition II Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. (“Merger Sub”) and Science 37, Inc. (“Legacy Science 37”). A business combination (“Business Combination”) between LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. and Legacy Science 37 was effected through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Science 37, with Legacy Science 37 as the surviving company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. In conjunction with the merger, LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. changed its name to Science 37 Holdings, Inc.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 805, Business Combinations. Under this method of accounting, LifeSci Acquisition II Corp. was treated as the “acquired” company and Legacy Science 37 was treated as the acquirer for financial reporting purposes. Except as otherwise provided herein, our financial statements presentation includes (1) the results of Legacy Science 37 as our accounting predecessor for periods prior to the completion of the Business Combination and (2) the results of Science 37 Holdings, Inc. for periods after the completion of the Business Combination.
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for many reasons, including the risks faced by us described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we,” “us,” “our,” and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Legacy Science 37 prior to the Business Combination and to Science 37 Holdings, Inc. following the closing of the Business Combination.
A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been reported previously in our final prospectus dated January 25, 2022, filed with the SEC on February 10, 2022 pursuant to Rule 424(b) of the Securities Act, under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview of Our Business and Services
Science 37 is a leading provider of technology-based solutions that enable agile clinical trials and decentralized approaches on behalf of biopharmaceutical sponsors. The Company pioneered agile and decentralization methods and developed the industry’s first Agile Clinical Trial Operating System™ (“OS”) combining its unified technology platform, which orchestrates workflows, generates evidence and harmonizes data seamlessly, with its expansive centralized networks of patient communities, telemedicine investigators, mobile nurses, provider communities, remote coordinators and data and device. By bringing research to patients and providers more directly, we believe the OS helps sponsors speed patient enrollment, enable better retention and increase accessibility for representative patient populations, all of which helps accelerate the development of potentially life-saving treatments through faster study timelines and a more representative and diverse patient population.
Key Factors Affecting Science 37’s Performance
We derive our revenue primarily from contractual arrangements to enable and enhance clinical trials through technology and services as well as licensing our proprietary technology platform to a variety of life science institutions. Thus, the following factors have been important to our business and we expect them to impact our business, results of operations and financial condition in future periods:
Core business growth and expansion of technology capabilities
Our sustained growth will require continued adoption and utilization of our products and service offerings by new and existing customers. Our revenue growth rate and long-term profitability are affected by our ability to expand our customer base through market penetration and drive broader adoption of our technology platform. Our financial performance will depend on our ability to attract, retain and sell additional solutions to our customers under favorable contractual terms.
Expansion into adjacent markets
Maintaining our growth will require additional expansion of our offerings across key verticals, including CRO partnerships, electronic clinical outcome assessment capabilities, real-world evidence, clinical care, and diversity in clinical
research. Our financial performance will depend on our ability to continue to execute our expansion across these key verticals with favorable contractual terms.
Continued investment in growth
We plan to continue investing in our business, including our internally developed OS, so we can capitalize on our market opportunity and increase awareness of the value that can be realized with decentralized clinical trials. We also expect to continue to make focused investments in marketing to drive brand awareness, increase the number of opportunities and further penetrate the market. We also intend to make certain investments in our general and administrative functions as we scale to meet our reporting, compliance and other obligations as a public company. Although we expect these activities will negatively impact our results in the near term, we believe that these investments will contribute to our long-term growth and positively impact our business and results of operations.
Key Performance Measures
We review certain key performance measures, discussed below, to evaluate our business and results, measure performance, identify trends, formulate plans and make strategic decisions. We believe that the presentation of such metrics is useful to the Company’s investors because they are used to measure and model the performance of companies such as ours.
Backlog and Net Bookings
Our backlog represents anticipated revenue for work not yet completed or performed (i) under signed contracts, letters of intent and, in some cases, bookings that are supported by other forms of written communication and (ii) where there is sufficient or reasonable certainty about the customer’s ability and intent to fund and commence the services within six months. Backlog and backlog conversion (defined as quarterly revenue for the period divided by opening backlog for that period) vary from period to period depending upon new authorizations, contract modifications, cancellations and the amount of revenue recognized under existing contracts.
We continually evaluate our backlog to determine if any previously awarded work is no longer expected to be performed. If we determine that previously awarded work is no longer probable of performance, we will remove the value from our backlog based on the risk of cancellation. We recognize revenue from these bookings as services are performed, provided the Company has received proper authorization from the customer. We exclude from backlog revenues that have been recognized and reported in the statement of operations.
Although an increase in backlog will generally result in an increase in future revenue to be recognized over time (depending on future contract modifications, contract cancellations and other adjustments), an increase in backlog at a particular point in time does not necessarily correspond to an increase in revenue during a particular period. The timing and extent to which backlog will result in revenue depends on many factors, including the timing of commencement of work, the rate at which services are performed, scope changes, cancellations, delays, receipt of regulatory approvals and the nature, duration, size, complexity, and phase of the studies. The Company’s contracts generally have terms ranging from several months to several years. In addition, delayed projects remain in backlog unless they are canceled. As a result of these and other factors, our backlog might not be a reliable indicator of future revenue and we might not realize all or any part of the revenue from the authorizations in backlog as of any point in time.
Net bookings represent new business awards, net of contract modifications, contract cancellations, and other adjustments. Net bookings represent the minimum contractual value for the initial planned duration of a contract as of the contract execution date. The minimum fixed fees, upfront implementation fees and technology and support fees are included in net bookings. Estimates of variable revenue for utilization in excess of the contracted amounts is not included in the value of net bookings. Net bookings vary from period to period depending on numerous factors, including customer authorization volume, sales performance and the overall health of the life sciences industry, among others.
Our backlog as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and net bookings for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
The increase in net bookings for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the increase in backlog as of December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior period were primarily due to new business as a result of increased demand for the
Company’s remote clinical trial support. We expect this growth to continue as companies are pursuing and realizing the many benefits of decentralized trials.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
The Company derives its revenues primarily from two sources: (i) contractual arrangements to enable and enhance clinical trials through technology and services, and (ii) licensing of its proprietary technology platform to a variety of life science institutions.
Total revenues are comprised of revenues from the provision of the Company’s decentralized services, including enhanced services from the use of the Company’s hosted proprietary software. Revenues also include reimbursable and out of pocket expenses provided for in the Company’s contracts with its customers.
See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition,” below, for a more detailed discussion of our revenue recognition policy.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues include the direct costs to conduct the Company’s trials remotely and make available the Company’s technology solutions. Cost of revenues consist primarily of compensation, benefits, and other employee-related costs, including expenses for stock-based compensation, contract labor, trial advertising and marketing, investigator payments, and reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses directly related to delivering on the Company’s contracts. Cost of revenues is driven primarily by the number of clinical trials in which the Company is contracted to provide services, and it typically increases or decreases with changes in revenue but may fluctuate from period to period as a percentage of revenue due to project labor utilization and mix, the type of services, changes to the timing of work performed and project inefficiencies, among other factors. Our business and operational models are designed to be highly scalable and leverage variable costs to support revenue-generating activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses include costs related to sales, marketing, and administrative functions (including human resources, legal, finance, and general management) such as compensation and benefits, travel, professional services, facilities, recruiting and relocation, training, sales commissions and expenses for stock-based compensation, and information technology.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization represent the costs charged for the Company’s property, equipment and capitalized software development. The Company records depreciation and amortization on property and equipment using the straight-line method, based on the estimated useful lives of the respective assets. The Company depreciates leasehold improvements over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful lives of the improvements. The Company amortizes software development costs over three years. We will continue to invest additional resources in our technology platform, to expand its capabilities and ensure that customers are realizing the full benefit of our offerings. The level and timing of investment in these areas could affect our depreciation and amortization expense in the future.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs consist of employee severance and benefits. The Company carried out a reduction in force in administrative positions in the first quarter of 2020 to better align resources with its then-current needs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists of interest income, sublease income, and the change in the fair value of the earn-out liability.
We determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Legacy Science 37 shareholders is not indexed to our stock under ASC Topic 815-40 and is therefore required to be accounted for as a liability and remeasured at fair value each reporting period, with changes in fair value reported as a component of other income (expense), net.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Revenue increased $35.9 million, or 151.4%, to $59.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $23.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by organic volume growth seen in higher opening backlog at the beginning of the period as compared to the prior year, as well as from more bookings and associated revenue related to significant and continuing growth in demand for the Company’s core competency, decentralized clinical trial and clinical trial support.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Cost of revenues increased $19.8 million, or 87.6% to $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily to support revenue growth during 2021. To support this growth, the Company experienced increases in compensation-related expenses including pass-through costs and costs for nurses for trial-related patient activity. Staffing also increased to enable more rapid expansion of our offerings across key verticals and new markets.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $44.8 million, or 157.9%, to $73.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly due to investments to support significant company growth and becoming a publicly traded company in conjunction with the merger with LSAQ. This resulted in increased headcount leading to increases in salaries and benefits, web services, software, employee recruiting costs, and transaction costs. Stock-based compensation also increased due to an increase in the value of the Company’s stock during 2021 in anticipation of the merger with LSAQ and the issuance of Earn-Out Shares to existing Legacy Science 37 option holders in conjunction with the Merger Transaction. Consulting services increased to support further enhancement and development of the Company’s internal proprietary technology, human resources consulting to assist with the Company’s expansion, and non-facilitative merger related consulting. Capitalized sales commissions amortization expense increased due to significantly more bookings and related revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $3.4 million, or 75.4%, to $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to amortization on a larger capitalized software balance year over year consistent with the Company’s focus on continuous development of new features and functionality within its proprietary software.
Restructuring Costs
There were no restructuring activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and approximately $0.8 million in activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. Restructuring costs decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a reduction in force in administrative positions in early 2020 to better align resources with then-current needs and future growth strategy.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was an expense of $30.6 million as compared to income of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other income was primarily due to the loss on the change in fair value of the earn-out liability for the period of $31.3 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss), all of which are non-GAAP financial measures, are useful in evaluating our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
We use these non-GAAP measures to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively with GAAP financial information, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, nor superior to, results reported in accordance with GAAP. Since adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) are not measurements determined in accordance with GAAP, they are susceptible to varying methods of calculation. These metrics, as presented, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss), adjusted for income tax benefit (expense), franchise tax expense, depreciation and amortization, interest expense (net), stock-based compensation, other income (expense), net, restructuring and related charges, and certain other non-cash or non-recurring items impacting net income (loss) such as those associated with the Business Combination.
Adjusted gross profit is defined as gross profit (loss) adjusted for stock-based compensation included in direct labor.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) (including adjusted diluted earnings per share) is defined as net income (loss) excluding transactions that the Company believes are not representative of our core operations, including, restructuring, transaction and integration-related expenses, share-based compensation expense, other income (expense), net; and gain or loss on extinguishment of debt, when applicable.
Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) are intended as supplemental measures of the Company’s performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. The Company believes that the use of Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends since they are used as a metric by management to track business performance and compensation related incentives. They may also be used by investors in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that, when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss), the Company may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, the Company’s presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that the Company’s future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. The Company’s computation of Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. The Company compensates for these limitations by relying primarily on the Company’s GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted gross profit, and adjusted net income (loss) on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, gross profit to adjusted gross profit, and net loss to adjusted net loss below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate the Company’s business.
The following tables reconcile net loss to Adjusted EBITDA, gross profit to adjusted gross profit, and net loss to adjusted net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Adjusted EBITDA
______________
(1)Includes $31.3 million associated with the change in the fair value of the earn-out liability.
Adjusted gross profit
Adjusted net loss
______________
(1)Includes $31.3 million associated with the change in the fair value of the earn-out liability.
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $214.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $94.3 million and used $36.5 million and $20.6 million of net cash in operating and investing activities, respectively, while financing activities provided $238.2 million of net cash. The Company’s net loss and negative cash flows from operations are due to the start-up and growing nature of our business.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and through the date of the merger with LSAQ, on October 6, 2021, the Company had primarily been financed with net proceeds from the issuance of multiple series of redeemable preferred stock in the private market. In conjunction with the merger of the Company with LSAQ, which was consummated on October 6, 2021, the Company received $200.0 million in PIPE financing from leading institutional and strategic investors to further fund the Company’s decentralized clinical trial technology platform and extend into new adjacencies. As a result of the Merger Transaction and inclusive of the PIPE financing, the Company received $233.5 million, net of fees and expenses paid in connection with the closing of the Business Combination.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s principal source of liquidity was cash and cash equivalents provided from the Merger Transaction and PIPE financing. Science 37 is required to perform an evaluation of its ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months after the issuance of its financial statements, and the Company believes that its cash flows from financing combined with its current cash level will be adequate to support its ongoing operations, capital expenditures and working capital for at least the next twelve months. Future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including investments in growth and technology. In the future, the Company may enter arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies which may require it to seek additional equity or debt financing.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (amounts in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $36.5 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $94.3 million and changes in working capital of $8.9 million offset by non-cash charges of $48.9 million. The changes in working capital were primarily due to increases in accounts payable, deferred revenue, and accrued expenses partially offset by increases in prepaid expenses. Changes in working capital were impacted by the timing of and receipt of payments in conjunction with the overall continued growth of our operations. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of a loss recorded from the change in fair value of the earn-out liability, stock-based compensation expense, depreciation, and amortization.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25.5 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $31.7 million and changes in working capital of $0.3 million offset by net non-cash charges of $6.5 million. The changes in working capital were primarily due to an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and a decrease in accounts receivable due to timing of and receipt of payments in conjunction with the growth of our operations. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization as well as stock-based compensation.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20.6 million consisting of $19.3 million in capitalized software development costs and $1.2 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.2 million consisting of $5.8 million in capitalized software development costs and $0.4 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 reflect the Company’s continued focus on the development of new features and functionality within its proprietary software platform, and the year ended December 31, 2021 also reflects computer purchases due to headcount increases as the Company continued to scale and expand its operations.
We expect to make expenditures for additions and enhancements to our proprietary technology platform and for purchases of property and equipment. The amount, timing and allocation of capital expenditures are largely discretionary and within management’s control. Depending on market conditions, we may choose to defer a portion of our budgeted expenditures until later periods to achieve the desired balance between sources and uses of liquidity and prioritize capital projects that we believe have the highest expected returns and potential to generate cash flow.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $238.2 million consisting primarily of net proceeds from the Merger Transaction, inclusive of the PIPE financing, of $236.7 million and $1.4 million cash received from stock option exercises.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $36.3 million consisting of net proceeds of $39.9 million from the issuance of Series D-1 redeemable preferred stock offset by the repurchase of common stock of $3.7 million.
Inflation
Our long-term contracts generally include inflation or cost of living adjustments for the portion of the services to be performed beyond one year from the contract date. In the event actual inflation rates are greater than our contractual inflation rates or cost of living adjustments, inflation could have a material adverse effect on our operations or financial condition.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Please refer to Note 7 in the notes to consolidated financial statements for details surrounding lease commitments and Note 16 in the notes to consolidated financial statements for information regarding the contingent obligation regarding the Earn-Out shares.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us
to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our contracts are service contracts for clinical trial support that represent a single performance obligation. Science 37 provides a significant integration service resulting in a combined output, which is clinical trial data that meets the relevant regulatory standards and can be used by the customer to progress to the next phase of a clinical trial or solicit approval of a treatment by the applicable regulatory body. The performance obligation is satisfied over time as the output is captured in data and documentation that is available for the customer to consume over the course of the arrangement and furthers progress of the clinical trial. We recognize revenue over time using a cost-based input method since there is no single output measure that would fairly depict the transfer of control over the life of the performance obligation. Progress on the performance obligation is measured by the proportion of actual costs incurred to the total costs expected to complete the contract. Costs included in the measure of progress include direct labor and third-party costs (such as payments to investigators and other pass-through expenses related to clinical activities). This cost-based method of revenue recognition requires us to make estimates of costs to complete projects on an ongoing basis. Significant judgment is required to evaluate assumptions related to these estimates as they are based on various assumptions to project future outcomes of events that often span several years. The effect of revisions to estimates related to the transaction price or costs to complete a project are recorded in the period in which the estimate is revised. Most contracts may be terminated upon 30 to 90 days’ notice by the customer; however, in the event of termination, most contracts require payment for services rendered through the date of termination, as well as for subsequent services rendered to close out the contract.
Capitalized Software and the Recognition of Related Amortization to Expense
Science 37’s internal use proprietary software organizes workflows, captures real-time evidence, and harmonizes data during clinical trial support or enhancement. As such, we capitalize software development costs related to the development of our proprietary platform in accordance with ASC Topic 350-40, Internal Use Software. Capitalized software is recorded at cost less accumulated amortization. Costs incurred during the development stage are capitalized and consist of payroll labor and benefits, to the extent of time spent directly on the development of software, and external direct costs of materials and labor. Payroll and benefits are allocated based on the percentage of technical employees’ time spent directly on the software which involves some level of estimation. Vacation, holidays, sick time, extended leave, training, and administrative meetings are considered and excluded from the percent capitalized. Training and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Amortization commences once the respective assets are placed into service. The amortization of these capitalized software costs for internal use proprietary software is included in depreciation and amortization over an estimated life of three years. The determination of the useful life for capitalized software involves some level of judgment. Amortization expense can be affected by various factors, including new software releases, acquisitions or divestitures of software, and/or impairments.
The Company reviews capitalized software for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the expected undiscounted future cash flow from the use of the capitalized software and its eventual disposition is less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized and measured using the fair value of the related asset. No impairments were recognized in 2021 or 2020.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize the cost of share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We reverse previously recognized costs for unvested awards in the period that forfeitures occur. We determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•Expected Term-We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data.
•Expected Volatility-Given the limited market trading history of our common stock, volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the traditional CRO and health technology industries.
•Expected Dividend Yield-We have not paid any cash dividends on common stock and do not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Prior to the Merger Transaction, due to the absence of an active market for Legacy Science 37’s common stock, the fair value of the common stock for purposes of determining the common stock price for stock option grants was determined by Science 37’s Board of Directors. Science 37’s Board of Directors set the exercise price of stock options at least equal to the fair value of its common stock on the date of grant. Legacy Science 37’s Board of Directors exercised judgment while considering numerous objective and subjective factors in order to determine the fair market value on each date of grant in accordance with the guidance in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Technical Practice Aid entitled, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the AICPA Practice Aid, including the receipt of a valuation prepared by an independent third party with extensive experience valuing common stock of privately held companies.
Earn-Out Shares
Former holders of shares of Legacy Science 37 common stock (including shares received as a result of the conversion of Legacy Science 37 preferred stock) and former holders of options to purchase shares of Legacy Science 37 are entitled to receive their respective pro rata shares of up to 12,500,000 additional shares of SNCE Common Stock (the “Earn-Out Shares”) if, during the period beginning on the Merger Transaction date and ending on October 6, 2024, the share price equal to the volume weighted average price of Science 37’s Common Stock for a period of at least 20 days out of 30 consecutive trading days (each, a “Triggering Event”):
•is equal to or greater than $15.00, a one-time aggregate issuance of 5,000,000 Earn-Out Shares will be made; and
•is equal to or greater than $20.00, a one-time aggregate issuance of 7,500,000 Earn-Out Shares will be made.
In respect of former holders of Legacy Science 37 options, receipt of the Earn-Out Shares is subject to continued services to the Company or one of its subsidiaries at the time of the applicable Triggering Event. If there is a change of control of Science 37 within the three-year period following the closing of the Business Combination that will result in the holders of Science 37 Common Stock receiving a per share price equal to or in excess of any Triggering Event threshold, then immediately prior to such change of control, any Triggering Event that has not previously occurred shall be deemed to have occurred and Science 37 shall issue the Earn-Out Shares to the former holders of shares of Legacy Science 37 Common Stock and former holders of Legacy Science 37 options in accordance with their respective pro rata shares. The estimated fair value of the Earn-Out Shares was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model using a distribution of potential outcomes over the earn-out period using the most reliable information available.
The Company determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Legacy Science 37 shareholders is not indexed to the Company's stock under ASC Topic 815-40 and therefore equity treatment is precluded. The Triggering Event(s) that determine the issuance of the Earn-Out Shares include terms that are not solely indexed to our common stock, and as such liability classification is required. Equity-linked instruments classified as liabilities are recorded at their estimated fair value on the date of issuance and are revalued at each subsequent balance sheet date, with fair value changes recognized in other income (expense), net in the accompanying statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
The Company determined that the contingent obligation to issue Earn-Out Shares to existing Legacy Science 37 option holders falls within the scope of ASC Topic 718, Share-based Compensation, because the option holders are required to continue providing service until the occurrence of the Triggering Event(s). The fair value of the option holder Earn-Out Shares is recorded as share-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the derived service period determined using the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model and recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act (“JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable.
The Company is an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act and has elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. The Company expects to remain an emerging growth company at least through the end of 2022 and expects to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although it may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information relating to recently issued accounting standards is included in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.