ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Impacts of COVID-19
Although COVID-19 has not significantly affected our results of operations, this disclosure discusses the actions the Company has taken in response to the COVID-19 crisis and the impacts that the situation has had on our business, as well as related known or expected trends.
The continued impact of COVID-19 on the macroeconomy and our business will depend significantly on the effectiveness and distribution of the vaccine, the potential cyclicality and duration of the health crisis and the related public policy actions, market or regulatory needs or demands, the length and severity of the global economic slowdown, and whether and how our customers change their behaviors over the longer term. As a result, the demand for our products and services, as well as our overall results of operations, may be materially and adversely impacted by the pandemic for 2022 and beyond, and we are unable to predict the duration or degree of such impact with any certainty.
In response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to execute our business continuity plans and evolve our operations to protect the safety of our employees while continuing to provide critical products and services to our customers. Some of the key initiatives the Company continues to execute include:
•Working safely and effectively with new and existing customers to continue to provide our products and services through the pandemic.
•Continuing to enhance and modify our safety protocols for our employees.
•Adjusting business operations to address circumstances created by COVID-19.
•Maintaining effective governance and internal controls in a remote work environment.
As the pandemic continues, we may revise our approach to these initiatives or take additional actions to meet the needs of our employees, customers and the Company and to continue to provide our products and services.
Revenues
We generate most of our revenues on a subscription or per transaction basis, which is derived from contracts that extend up to 60 months from execution.
The future success of our business depends on the continued growth of Business-to-Business and Business-to-Business-to-Consumer driving customer transactions, and continued expansion of our platforms into the TMT market globally through Cloud, Messaging and Digital markets. As such, the volume of transactions and our ability to expand our footprint in TMT and globally may result in revenue fluctuations on a quarterly basis.
Most of our revenues are recorded in U.S. dollars but as we continue to expand our footprint with international carriers, we will become subject to currency translation that could affect our future net sales as reported in U.S. dollars.
The Company’s top five customers accounted for 68.2%, 68.0% and 69.2% of net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Contracts with these customers typically run for three to five years. Of these customers, Verizon accounted for more than 10% of the Company’s revenues in 2021, 2020, and 2019. The loss of Verizon as a customer would have a material negative impact on our company. However, we believe that the costs incurred and subscriber disruption by Verizon to replace Synchronoss’ solutions would be substantial.
Current Trends Affecting Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and cash flows are subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates relative to U.S. dollars, our reporting currency, as well as changes in interest rates. Volatile market conditions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have and may continue to negatively impact our results of operations and cash flows, due to a weakening
of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which may cause our revenues to decline relative to our costs. We are monitoring the developments relating to rising geopolitical tensions.
Business from our Synchronoss Personal Cloud™ solution has been driven by the growth in mobile devices globally that are becoming content rich. As these devices replace other traditional devices like PCs, the ability to securely back up content from mobile devices, sync it with other devices and share it with family, friends and business associates have become an essential need and subscriber expectation. Such devices include smartphones, connected cars, personal health and wellness devices and connected home devices. The need for the contents from these devices to be stored in a common cloud is also expected to drive our business in the longer term.
Business from our traditional Synchronoss Messaging business (Email) has been driven by a resurgence in the need for white label secure messaging platforms that favor the Mobile Network Operator’s (“MNO”) business objectives and are not beholden to the objectives of a sponsoring over-the-top (“OTT”) platform. We believe that messaging drives higher subscriber engagement than any other application in the market today and holds the potential to stimulate new revenue from traditional services and third-party brands. OTT global success has driven MNOs to look at opportunities to preempt and compete with the OTTs which provides a potential opportunity for Synchronoss’ future growth to be driven by the need of TMT companies including (and especially) MNOs to embrace Messaging as a Platform (“MaaP”). MaaP will allow TMT and MNOs to converse with subscribers in an efficient, automated way by streamlining the costs and increasing the effectiveness of self-care, as well as yielding cross-sell upselling of service plans, devices, bundles, etc. The Synchronoss Advanced Messaging Platform provides state of the art RCS-driven features including the ability to support advanced Peer to Peer communications and introduce new revenue streams driven by commerce and advertising via Application-to-Person capabilities.
Companies in the TMT market all face the dilemma of attempting to pivot their businesses to digital execution in order to create experiences that meet the expectations of their subscribers, generate new revenue and streamline costs creating healthier margins at a faster time to market than they have ever operated before. Their challenges feature the lack of skill sets to conceptualize and run day to day digital operations and the lack of resources to integrate their legacy back end systems to enact digital experiences that achieve their business objectives. We expect the growth of Synchronoss Digital Platforms will be driven by the ability to provide TMT companies’ desire to obtain digital transformation solutions as quickly as possible while educating them on the ability to operate a digital business efficiently. Our Platform as a Service (“PaaS”) model provides a desirable alternative to heavy capital expenditure options often tried internally. The ability for our platforms to create low/no code, new customer digital journeys, virtually on the fly, gives TMT companies the ability to operate new experiences and businesses without heavily investing in development resources.
To support our growth, which we expect to be driven by these favorable industry trends mentioned above, we plan to leverage modular components from our existing software platforms to build new products. We believe that these opportunities will continue to provide future benefits and position us for future revenue growth. We are also making investments in research and development of new products designed to enable us to grow rapidly in the mobile wireless market. Our purchase of capital assets and equipment may also increase based on aggressive deployment, subscriber growth and promotional offers for free or bundled storage by our major Tier 1 carrier customers.
We continue to expand our platforms into the converging TMT, MNO, and Digital spaces to enable connected devices to do more things across multiple networks, brands and communities. Our initiatives with our customers continue to grow both with regard to our current business as well as our new product offerings. We are also exploring additional opportunities to support our customer, product and geographic diversification strategies.
Discussion of the Consolidated Statements of Operations
The following table presents an overview of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands).
________________________________
1 Cost of revenues excludes depreciation and amortization which are shown separately.
Net revenues decreased $11.1 million to $280.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The overall change is due to:
•a $3.8 million increase in Cloud revenues is primarily due to increased subscriber growth and a non-recurring license sale in the fourth quarter, partially offset by a decrease in professional services revenue.
•a $1.6 million decrease in Digital revenues is primarily driven by a reduction in professional service and transaction business, partially offset by an uptick in subscription services.
•a $13.2 million decrease in Messaging revenues was primarily driven by non-recurring Advanced Messaging license and professional services revenue in the prior period.
Net revenues decreased $17.1 million to $291.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The overall change is due to:
•a $0.5 million decrease in Cloud revenues was primarily due to the extension of a significant commercial arrangement which extended recognition of deferred revenue across the term of the new contract, partially offset by increased subscriber growth and professional services revenue.
•a $2.3 million increase in Digital revenues was primarily driven by an uptick in subscription services partially offset by a reduction in professional service business.
•an $18.8 million decrease in Messaging revenues was primarily driven by a significant 2019 non-recurring license and professional services revenue deal in advanced messaging. This revenue change was partially offset by favorable license renewals in 2020.
Cost of revenues decreased $12.8 million to $109.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in 2021 is primarily attributable to the year over year reduction in variable costs as a result of lower Messaging revenue, partially offset by a favorable shift toward a more profitable revenue mix and cost savings from strategic initiatives implemented throughout the year.
Cost of revenues decreased $28.6 million to $121.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The 2020 decrease was primarily attributable to the year over year reduction in revenue and the cost savings from strategic initiatives implemented in the year driven mainly by data center consolidation and operating expense savings.
Research and development expense decreased $12.7 million to $64.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in 2021 is primarily attributable to the implementation of cost savings initiatives to streamline our workforce, increased investment in product development and capitalization of associated labor costs, and the prior year impairment costs.
Research and development expense increased $1.5 million to $77.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to the costs associated with the impairment of the right of use assets. Excluding the impairment charges incurred in 2020, the research and development costs decreased year over year mainly as a result of executed cost savings initiatives to streamline our workforce and reduce vendor spend.
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $4.3 million to $85.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. Our selling, general and administrative expense excluding legal reserves and one-time impairment costs, decreased $15.3 million period over period as a result of the continued fixed cost savings initiatives executed in year which included headcount reductions, reduced vendor spending and lower facility costs.
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $23.5 million to $89.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The 2020 decrease was primarily attributable to significant cost cutting initiatives executed in year which included headcount reductions, reduced vendor spending and lower facility costs offset by impairments to our right of use assets.
Restructuring charges were $5.2 million, $8.0 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The 2021 and 2020 restructuring charges were primarily driven by our strategic cost savings initiatives to streamline our business operations and reduce headcount.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $7.6 million to $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The 2021 decrease was primarily attributable to the expiration of amortizable acquired assets and a reduction in capital expenditures. These changes were partially offset by the increased amortization of capitalized software.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $33.4 million to $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The 2020 decrease was primarily attributable to the expiration of amortizable acquired assets and a reduction in capital expenditures. These changes were partially offset by the increased amortization of capitalized software.
Income tax. The Company recognized approximately $7.2 million in related income tax benefit and $27.1 million in related income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective tax rate was approximately 23.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was higher than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to the tax benefit attributable to the CARES Act provision allowing for a 5 year carryback of Net Operating Losses arising in 2018, 2019 and 2020. This tax benefit was partially offset in our effective tax rate by unfavorable permanent book-tax differences. The Company’s effective tax rate was approximately 72.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which higher than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the benefit of the CARES Act provision allowing for a 5 year carryback of Net Operating Losses arising in 2018, 2019 and 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operations. Our cash and cash equivalents balance was $31.5 million at December 31, 2021. We anticipate that our principal uses of cash and cash equivalents will be to fund our business, including technology expansion and working capital.
At December 31, 2021, our non-U.S. subsidiaries held approximately $7.5 million of cash and cash equivalents that are available for use by all of our operations around the world. At this time, we believe the funds held by all non-U.S. subsidiaries will be permanently reinvested outside of the U.S. However, if these funds were repatriated to the U.S. or used for U.S. operations, certain amounts could be subject to U.S. tax for the incremental amount in excess of the foreign tax paid. Due to the timing and circumstances of repatriation of these earnings, if any, it is not practical to determine the unrecognized deferred tax liability related to the amount.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, financing sources, and our ability to manage working capital and expected positive cash flows generated from operations in combination with continued expense reductions will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months from the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations as well as geopolitical developments, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs. Given the economic uncertainty as a result of the pandemic, we have taken actions to improve our current liquidity position, including, reducing working capital, reducing operating costs and substantially reducing discretionary spending. Even with these actions however, an extended period of economic disruption as a result of COVID-19 could materially affect our business, results of operations, ability to meet debt covenants, access to sources of liquidity and financial condition. Our liquidity plans are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including those described in the "Forward-Looking Statements" section of this MD&A and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”, some of which are outside of our control.
Offering of 2021 Senior Notes due 2026
On June 30, 2021, the Company closed its underwritten public offering of $120.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.375% senior notes due 2026 at a par value of $25.00 per senior note (the “Senior Notes”). The offering was conducted pursuant to an underwriting agreement (the “Notes Underwriting Agreement”) dated June 25, 2021, by and among the Company and B. Riley Securities, Inc., as representative of the several underwriters (the “Notes Underwriters”). At the closing, the Company issued $125.0 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes, inclusive of $5.0 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes issued pursuant to the full exercise of the Notes Underwriters’ option to purchase additional Senior Notes.
The Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and rank equally in right of payment with all of the Company’s existing and future senior unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The Senior Notes are effectively subordinated in right of payment to all of the Company’s existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness and structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness of the Company’s subsidiaries, including trade payables. The Senior Notes bear interest at the rate of 8.375% per annum. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable quarterly in arrears on January 31, April 30, July 31 and October 31 of each year, commencing on July 31, 2021. The Senior Notes will mature on June 30, 2026, unless redeemed prior to maturity.
The Company may, at its option, at any time and from time to time, redeem the Senior Notes for cash in whole or in part (i) on or after June 30, 2022 and prior to June 30, 2023, at a price equal to $25.75 per Senior Note, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, (ii) on or after June 30, 2023 and prior to June 30, 2024, at a price equal to $25.50 per Senior Note, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, (iii) on or after June 30, 2024 and prior to June 30, 2025, at a price equal to $25.25 per Senior Note, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, and (iv) on or after June 30, 2025 and prior to maturity, at a price equal to 100% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. On and after any redemption date, interest will cease to accrue on the redeemed Senior Notes.
On October 25, 2021, the Company entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) between the Company and B. Riley Securities, Inc. (the “Agent”), a related party, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, up to $18.0 million of the Company’s 8.375% Senior Notes due 2026. Sales of the additional Senior Notes pursuant to the Sales Agreement, if any, may be made in transactions that are deemed to be “at the market offerings” as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Under the Sales Agreement, the Agent will be entitled to compensation of 2.0% of the gross proceeds of all notes sold through it as the Company’s agent.
During the fourth quarter, the Company sold $16.1 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes under the Sales Agreement. The additional Senior Notes sold have terms identical to the initial Senior Notes and are be fungible and vote together with the initial Senior Notes immediately upon issuance. The Senior Notes and initial Senior Notes are listed and trade on The Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “SNCRL.”
The total fair value of the outstanding Senior Notes was $134.1 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company is in compliance with its debt covenants as of December 31, 2021.
For further details, see Note 11. Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
2014 Convertible Senior Notes due 2019
The Company paid off the remaining carrying amount of the convertible senior notes on August 15, 2019. For further details, see Note 11. Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
2019 Revolving Credit Facility
On October 4, 2019, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement with Citizens Bank, N.A., for a $10.0 million Revolving Credit Facility. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bore interest at a rate equal to, at the Company’s option, either (1) the arithmetic average of the LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the interest period (one, three or six months (or 12 months if agreed to by all applicable Lenders)) as selected by the Company relevant to such borrowing plus the applicable margin, or (2) a base rate determined by reference to the greatest of the
federal funds rate plus 0.5%, the prime commercial lending rate as determined by the Agent, and the daily LIBOR rate plus 1.0%, in each case plus an applicable margin and subject to a floor of 0.0%.
On June 30, 2021, the Company paid off the outstanding balance and closed the Revolving Credit Facility.
Series B Non-Convertible Preferred Stock
On June 30, 2021, the Company closed a private placement of 75,000 shares of its Series B Perpetual Non-Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, with an initial liquidation preference of $1,000 per share (the “Series B Preferred Stock”), for net proceeds of $72.8 million (the “Series B Transaction”). The sale of the Series B Preferred Stock was pursuant to the Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of June 24, 2021 (the “Series B Purchase Agreement”), between the Company and B. Riley Principal Investments, LLC (“BRPI”).
In connection with the closing of the Series B Transaction, the Company (i) filed a Certificate of Designation with the State of Delaware setting forth the rights, preferences, privileges, qualifications, restrictions and limitations on the Series B Preferred Stock (the “Series B Certificate”) and (ii) entered into an Investor Rights Agreement with B. Riley Financial, Inc. (“B. Riley Financial”) and BRPI setting forth certain governance and registration rights of B. Riley Financial with respect to the Company.
Certificate of Designation of the Series B Preferred Stock
The rights, preferences, privileges, qualifications, restrictions and limitations of the shares of Series B Preferred Stock are set forth in the Series B Certificate. Under the Series B Certificate, the holders of the Series B Preferred Stock are entitled to receive, on each share of Series B Preferred Stock on a quarterly basis, an amount equal to the dividend rate, as described in the following sentence, divided by four and multiplied by the then-applicable Liquidation Preference per share of Series B Preferred Stock (collectively, the “Preferred Dividends”). The dividend rate is (1) 9.5% per annum for the period commencing on June 30, 2021 and ending on and including December 31, 2021, (2) 13% per annum for the year commencing on January 1, 2022 and ending on and including December 31, 2022; and (3) 14% per annum for the year commencing on January 1, 2023 and thereafter. The Preferred Dividends will be due in cash on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year (each, a “Series B Dividend Payment Date”). The Company may choose to pay the Series B Preferred Dividends in cash or in additional shares of Series B Preferred Stock. In the event the Company does not declare and pay a dividend in cash on any Series B Dividend Payment Date, the unpaid amount of the Preferred Dividend will be added to the Liquidation Preference. As of December 31, 2021, the Liquidation Value and Redemption Value of the Series B Preferred Shares was $78.6 million.
On and after the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance, holders of shares of Series B Preferred Stock will have the right to cause the Company to redeem each share of Series B Preferred Stock for cash in an amount equal to the sum of the current liquidation preference and any accrued dividends. Each share of Series B Preferred Stock will also be redeemable at the option of the holder upon the occurrence of a “Fundamental Change” at (i) par in the case of a payment in cash or (ii) 1.5 times par in the case of payment in shares of Common Stock (such shares being, “Registrable Securities”), subject to certain limitations on the amount of stock that could be issued to the holders of Series B Stock. In addition, the Company will be permitted to redeem outstanding shares of the Series B Preferred Stock at any time for the sum of the then-applicable Liquidation Preference and the accrued but unpaid dividends. Pursuant to the Series B Certificate, the Company will be required to use (i) the first $50.0 million of proceeds from certain transactions (i.e., disposition, sale of assets, tax refunds) received by the Company to redeem for cash, shares of the Series B Preferred Stock, on a pro rata basis among each holder of Series B Preferred Stock and (ii) the next $25.0 million of proceeds from certain transactions received by the Company may be used by the Company to buy back shares of Common Stock and to the extent, not used for such purpose by the Company, to redeem, for cash, shares of the Series B Preferred Stock, on a pro rata basis among each holder of the Series B Preferred Stock.
The Company shall be required to obtain the prior written consent of the holders holding at least a majority of the outstanding shares of the Series B Preferred Stock before taking certain actions, including: (i) certain dividends, repayments and redemptions; (ii) any amendment to the Company’s certificate of incorporation that adversely affects the rights, preferences, privileges or voting powers of the Series B Preferred Stock; and (iii) issuances of stock ranking senior or equivalent to shares of the Series B Preferred Stock (including additional shares of the Series B Preferred Stock) in the priority of payment of dividends or in the distribution of assets upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company. Other than with respect to the foregoing consent rights, the Series B Preferred Stock is non-voting stock.
Investor Rights Agreement
On June 30, 2021, the Company, B. Riley Financial and BRPI entered into an Investor Rights Agreement (the “Investor Rights Agreement”). Pursuant to the Investor Rights Agreement, for so long as affiliates of B. Riley Financial beneficially own
at least 10% of the outstanding shares of common stock (unless such equity threshold percentage is not met due to dilution from equity issuances), B. Riley Financial is entitled to nominate one Class II director (the “B. Riley Nominee”) to the Company’s board of directors (the “Board”), who shall be an employee of B. Riley Financial or its affiliates and is approved by the Board, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. For so long as affiliates of B. Riley Financial beneficially own 5% or more but less than 10% of the outstanding shares of common stock (unless such equity threshold percentage is not met due to dilution from equity issuances), B. Riley Financial is entitled to certain board observer rights.
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
In accordance with the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement dated as of October 17, 2017 (the “PIPE Purchase Agreement”), with Silver Private Holdings I, LLC, an affiliate of Siris (“Silver”), on February 15, 2018, the Company issued to Silver 185,000 shares of its newly issued Series A Convertible Participating Perpetual Preferred Stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”), par value $0.0001 per share, with an initial liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, in exchange for $97.7 million in cash and the transfer from Silver to the Company of the 5,994,667 shares of the Company’s common stock held by Silver (the “Preferred Transaction”). In connection with the issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock, we (i) filed the Series A Certificate and (ii) entered into an Investor Rights Agreement with Silver setting forth certain registration, governance and preemptive rights of Silver with respect to us (the “Investor Rights Agreement”). Pursuant to the PIPE Purchase Agreement, at the closing, we paid to Siris $5.0 million as a reimbursement of Silver’s costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Preferred Transaction.
Redemption of Series A Preferred Stock
The net proceeds from the common stock public offering, Senior Note offering and the Series B Transaction were used in part to fully redeem all outstanding shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock on June 30, 2021 (the “Redemption”). The Company redeemed in full all of the 268,917 outstanding shares of the Series A Preferred Stock for an aggregate Redemption Price of $278.7 million and all rights under the Investor Rights Agreement relating to the Series A Preferred Stock were terminated effective with the Redemption. No Series A Preferred Stock remains outstanding or authorized as of December 31, 2021.
Discussion of Cash Flows
A summary of net cash flows follows (in thousands):
Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are personnel and related costs, telecommunications and facility costs related primarily to our cost of revenue and general operating expenses including professional service fees, consulting fees, building and equipment maintenance and marketing expense.
Cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a $4.9 million of cash provided by operating activities, as compared to $0.6 million of cash used by operating activities for the same period in 2020. The increase of cash provided by operating activities of $5.5 million was primarily due to positive operating results partially offset by the continued run-off of the deferred revenue balance, which is in line with our business as our customers shift away from larger prepayments of services.
Cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a $0.6 million of cash used by operating activities, as compared to $32.6 million of cash provided by operating activities for the same period in 2019. The decrease of cash used by operating activities of $33.1 million was primarily due to favorable changes in cash earnings of $21.4 million offset by an unfavorable change in working capital of $70.2 million. The main driver of the unfavorable movement in working capital was the continued run-off of the deferred revenue balance which is in line with our business as our customers shift away from larger prepayments of services.
Cash flows from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $23.9 million of cash used by investing activities, as compared to $14.3 million in cash used by investing activities during the same period in 2020. The change in cash used for investing activities in the current year was primarily related to increased investment in product development for our Cloud offering and capitalization of associated labor costs.
Cash flows from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $14.3 million of cash used by investing activities, as compared to $19.4 million in cash provided by investing activities during the same period in 2019. The cash used for investing in 2020 was primarily related to the $16.7 million investment in capitalized software offset by the sale of certain IP address assets. The net decrease in cash from investing activities from 2019 mainly related to the net proceeds from the purchases and sales of marketable securities in 2019 that were not present in 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.2 million of cash provided by financing activities, as compared to $10.0 million of cash provided for the same period in 2020. In 2021, the net proceeds from our public offering of common stock, Senior Note offering and Series B Transaction was primarily used to fully redeem all outstanding shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock and repay and close the Revolving Credit Facility on June 30, 2021. The remaining increase in cash provided from financing activities is primarily attributable to the $16.1 million of additional Senior Notes sold in the fourth quarter of 2021 pursuant to the Sales Agreement.
Cash flows from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.0 million of cash provided, as compared to $121.3 million of cash used by financing activities for the same period in 2019. The cash provided from financing activities was attributable to the $10.0 million drawdown from our Revolving Credit Facility. The net change in cash provided from financing activities from the prior year was primarily attributable to the cash provided from the Revolving Credit Facility offset by repayments for our Convertible Senior Notes in 2019.
Effect of Inflation
While inflationary increases in certain input costs, such as occupancy, labor and benefits, and general and administrative costs, have an impact on our operating results, inflation has had minimal net effect on our results of operations during 2021, 2020 and 2019. We cannot assure you, however, that we will not be affected by general inflation in the future.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations consist of office and laptop leases, notes payable and related interest as well as contractual commitments under third-party hosting, software licenses and maintenance agreements. The following table summarizes our long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands).
________________________________
1 Amount represents obligations associated with colocation agreements and other customer delivery related purchase obligations.
Uncertain Tax Positions
Unrecognized tax positions are $4.5 million at December 31, 2021. We are not able to reasonably estimate when we would make any cash payments required to settle these liabilities, but we do not believe that the ultimate settlement of our obligations will materially affect our liquidity. We do not expect that the balance of unrecognized tax benefits will significantly increase or decrease over the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial
statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to utilize accounting policies and make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingencies as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during a fiscal period. We have discussed the selection and development of the critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee, and the Audit Committee has reviewed our related disclosures in this Form 10-K. Although we believe that our judgments and estimates are appropriate, correct and reasonable under the circumstances, actual results may differ from those estimates. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected. See Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K for certain matters bearing risks on our future results of operations.
We believe the following to be our critical accounting policies because they are important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations and they require critical management judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain.
Significant accounting policies that we employ are presented in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. There were no significant changes in our critical accounting policies and estimates discussed in our Form 10-K during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
The Company generates revenue from the delivery of a range of products, solutions and services for operators, enterprises, OEMs and technology providers. We offer services principally on a Transactional or Subscription basis (SaaS) or in the form of Professional Services or Software Licenses. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to the Company’s customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company generates all of its revenue from contracts with customers.
Subscription and Transaction revenues consist of revenues derived from the processing of transactions through the Company’s service platforms, providing enterprise portal management services on a subscription basis and maintenance agreements on software licenses. The Company generates revenue from Subscription services from monthly active user fees, software as a service (“SaaS”) fees, hosting and storage fees, and fees for the related maintenance support for those services. In most cases, the subscription or transaction arrangement is a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). The Company applies a measure of progress (typically time-based) to any fixed consideration and allocates variable consideration to the distinct periods of service based on usage, under Topic 606 Section 10-25-14(b). When the Company does not allocate variable consideration to distinct periods of service, the total estimated transaction price is recognized ratably over the term of the contract, where the level of service provided to the customer does not vary significantly from one period to another.
Transaction service arrangements include services such as processing equipment orders, new account setup and activation, number port requests, credit checks and inventory management. Transaction revenues are principally based on a contractual price per transaction and are recognized based on the number of transactions processed during each reporting period. Revenues are recorded based on the total number of transactions processed at the applicable price established in the relevant contract.
Many of the Company’s contracts guarantee minimum volume transactions from the customer. In these instances, if the customer’s total estimated transaction volume for the period is expected to be less than the contractual amount, the Company records revenues at the minimum guaranteed amount on a straight line based over the period covered by the minimum. Setup fees for transactional service arrangements are deferred until set up activities are completed and recognized on a straight-line basis over remaining expected customer relationship period. Revenues are presented net of discounts, which are volume level driven.
In accordance with Topic 606 Section 10-50-20, any credits due to customers, which are generally performance driven and based upon system availability or response times to incidents, are determined and accounted for in the period in which the services are provided. The Company recognizes revenues from support and maintenance performance obligations over the service delivery period.
The Company’s software licenses typically provide for a perpetual or term right to use the Company’s software. The Company has concluded that in most cases its software license is distinct as the customer can benefit from the software on its own. Software revenue is typically recognized when the software is delivered to the customer. Contracts that include software customization or specified upgrades may result in the combination of the customization services with the software license as
one performance obligation. The Company does not have a history of returns, or refunds of its software licenses, however, in limited instances, the Company may constrain consideration to high-risk customers, until collection is resolved.
The Company’s professional services include software development and customization. The contracts generally include project deliverables specified by each customer. The performance obligations in the agreements are generally combined into one deliverable and generally result in the transfer of control over time. The underlying deliverable is owned and controlled by the customer and does not create an asset with an alternative use to us. The Company recognizes revenue on fixed fee contracts on the proportion of labor hours expended to the total hours expected to complete the contract performance obligation.
Most of the Company’s contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations which generally include either 1) a perpetual software license with support and maintenance and sometimes a hosting agreement or 2) a term SaaS agreement, frequently sold along with professional services. For these contracts, the Company accounts for individual goods and services separately if they are distinct performance obligations. This often requires significant judgment based upon knowledge of the products, the solution provided and the structure of the sales contract. In SaaS agreements, the Company provides a service to the customer which combines the software functionality, maintenance and hosting into a single performance obligation when the customer doesn’t have the ability to take possession of the underlying software license. The Company may also sell the same three goods and services in a contract, but there may be three performance obligations, where the customer has the right to take possession of the software license without significant penalty.
The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. The Company estimates standalone selling prices of software based on observable inputs of past transactions to similarly situated customers. When such observable data is not available for certain software licenses because there is a limited number of transactions or prices are highly variable, the Company will estimate the standalone selling price using the residual approach. Standalone selling prices of services are typically determined based on observable transactions when these services are sold on a standalone basis to similarly situated customers or estimated using a cost-plus margin approach.
Estimating the transaction price of variable consideration including the variable quantity subscription or transaction contracts in a multiple performance obligation arrangement requires significant judgment. The Company generally estimates this variable consideration at the most likely amount to which the Company expects to be entitled and in certain cases based on the expected value. The Company includes estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The Company’s estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of the Company’s anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. The Company reviews and updates these estimates on a quarterly basis.
Income Taxes
In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures, including temporary changes regarding the prior and future utilization of net operating losses. The CARES Act amends the Net Operating Loss provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”), allowing for the carryback of losses arising in tax years 2018, 2019 and 2020, to each of the five taxable years preceding the taxable year of loss.
Since the Company conducts operations on a global basis, its effective tax rate has and will depend upon the geographic distribution of pre-tax earnings among locations with varying tax rates. the Company accounts for the effects of income taxes that result from its activities during the current and preceding years. Under this method, deferred income tax liabilities and assets are based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse or be utilized. The realization of deferred tax assets is contingent upon the generation of future taxable income. A valuation allowance is recorded if it is “more likely than not” that a portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
In evaluating our ability to recover the Company’s deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, the Company considered all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, the Company begins with historical results and incorporate assumptions including the amount of future state, federal and foreign pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax-
planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates the Company is using to manage the underlying businesses.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The amount of the accrual for which an exposure exists is measured by determining the amount that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon the settlement of the position. Components of the reserve are classified as current or a long-term liability in the Consolidated Balance Sheets based on when the Company expects each of the items to be settled. The Company recorded interest and penalties accrued in relation to uncertain tax benefits as a component of interest expense.
While the Company believes it has have identified all reasonably identifiable exposures and that the reserve it has established for identifiable exposures is appropriate under the circumstances, it is possible that additional exposures exist and that exposures may be settled at amounts different than the amounts reserved. It is also possible that changes in facts and circumstances could cause the Company to either materially increase or reduce the carrying amount of our tax reserves. In general, tax returns for the year 2017 and thereafter are subject to future examination by tax authorities. Additionally, to the extent the Company utilizes our NOL carryforwards in the future, the tax years in which the attribute was generated may still be adjusted upon examination by the tax authorities in the future period when the attribute is utilized.
The Company’s policy has been to leave its cumulative unremitted foreign earnings invested indefinitely outside the United States, and the Company intends to continue this policy. Although distributions to the U.S. are generally not subject to U.S. federal taxes, the Company continues to assert permanent reinvestment of foreign earnings. Due to the timing and circumstances of repatriation of such earnings, if any, it is not practicable to determine the unrecognized deferred tax liability relating to such amounts.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired, including other definite-life intangible assets. Our policy is to perform an impairment test of goodwill at least annually, and more frequently if events or circumstances occurred that would indicate a reduced fair value in our reporting units could exist. Typically, we perform a qualitative assessment in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. As part of this qualitative assessment, we perform a quantitative assessment where necessary in substantiating our qualitative assessment.
During our qualitative assessment we make significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, around the financial performance of the Company, changes in our share price, and forecasts of earnings, working capital requirements, and cash flows. We consider each reporting unit's historical results and operating trends as well as any strategic difference from our historical results when determining these assumptions.
If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill, we perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. Fair value estimates used in the quantitative impairment test are calculated using a combination of the income and market approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of future cash flows of each reporting unit, while the market approach is based on certain multiples of selected guideline public companies or selected guideline transactions. The approaches incorporate a number of market participant assumptions including future growth rates, discount rates, income tax rates and market activity in assessing fair value and are reporting unit specific. If the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value, we recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value.
The fair value measurement associated with the quantitative goodwill impairment test is based on significant inputs that are not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 measurement. Significant changes in the underlying assumptions used to value goodwill could significantly increase or decrease the fair value estimates used for impairment assessments.
For our 2021 impairment tests, the Company identified one reporting unit, Core. The Company performed a quantitative impairment assessment, as of October 1, 2021, for the Core reporting unit. The amounts below represent the results of our quantitative assessment.
We use the average of our fair values for purposes of our comparison between carrying value and fair value for the quantitative impairment test. The table below depicts the methods employed, assumptions used and percentage fair value in excess of carrying value.
The 2021 fair value of the reporting unit was estimated using a combination of the income approach, which incorporates the use of the discounted cash flow method, and the market approach, which incorporates the use of earnings and revenue multiples based on market data. We generally applied an equal weighting to the income and market approaches for our analysis when both are applied.
For the income approach, we used projections, which require the use of significant estimates and assumptions specific to the reporting unit as well as those based on general economic conditions. Factors specific to each reporting unit include revenue and cost growth, profit margins, terminal value growth rates, capital expenditures projections, assumed tax rates, discount rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management.
For the market approach, we used judgment in identifying the relevant comparable-company market multiples. These estimates and assumptions may vary between each reporting unit depending on the facts and circumstances specific to that unit. If sufficient comparable data is not present, the market approach will not be employed. The discount rate for each reporting unit is influenced by general market conditions as well as factors specific to the reporting unit.
Factors influencing the revenue growth rates include the nature of the services the reporting unit provides for its clients, the maturity of the reporting unit and any known concentrated customer contract renewals. We believe that the estimates and assumptions we made are reasonable, but they are susceptible to change from period to period. Actual results of operations, cash flows and other factors will likely differ from the estimates used in our valuation, and it is possible that differences and changes could be material.
A deterioration in profitability, adverse market conditions, significant client losses, changes in spending levels of our existing clients or a different economic outlook than currently estimated by management could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units and could result in an impairment charge in the future.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
Software development costs are accounted for in accordance with either ASC 985-20, “Software - Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed,” or ASC 350-40, “Internal-Use Software.” Costs associated with the planning and designing phase of software development are classified as research and development costs and are expensed as incurred. The amounts capitalized include external direct costs of services used in developing internal-use software and employee compensation and related expenses of personnel directly associated with the development activities. Once technological feasibility has been determined, a portion of the costs incurred in development, including coding, testing and quality assurance, are capitalized until available for general release to clients.
Amortization is calculated on a solution-by-solution basis and is recognized over the estimated economic life of the software, typically ranging two to three years. Amortization begins when the software is substantially completed for its intended use. Costs incurred during the preliminary and post-implementation stages are expensed as incurred. The amounts capitalized include external direct costs of services used in developing internal-use software, employee compensation and related expenses of personnel directly associated with the development activities. Software development costs are evaluated for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. Unrecoverable costs are reviewed annually and recognized in the period they become unrecoverable, as needed, and are recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as depreciation and amortization expense.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting standards see Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.