ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Certain information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K constitutes “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “would,” “intend,” “could,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate” or “continue” or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology. Examples of forward-looking statements, include, without limitation, those relating to the Company’s future business prospects and strategies, financial results, working capital, liquidity, capital needs and expenditures, interest costs, insurance availability and contingent liabilities. Forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause the Company’s actual results and financial condition to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, additional proceeds from debt financings or refinancings, capital raises from issuance of additional equity securities and proceeds from the sale of assets to satisfy its short- and long-term debt and to fund the Company’s capital improvement projects to expand, redevelop and/or reposition its senior living communities; the Company’s ability to obtain additional capital on terms acceptable to it; the Company’s ability to extend or refinance its existing debt as such debt matures; the Company’s compliance with its debt agreements and leases, including certain financial covenants and the risk of cross-default in the event non-compliance occurs; the Company’s ability to complete acquisitions and dispositions upon favorable terms or at all; the risks related to an epidemic, pandemic or other health crisis (such as the outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)) or any resurgence or variants thereof, including impacts on residents' abilities to afford resident fees and costs and expenses incurred in the Company's COVID-19 response efforts, including increased equipment, supplies, labor, litigation, testing, vaccination clinic, health plan and other expenses; the development, availability, utilization and efficacy of COVID-19 testing, therapeutic agents and vaccines and the prioritization of such resources among business and demographic groups; the risk of oversupply and increased competition in the markets where the Company operates; the risk of increased competition for skilled workers due to wage pressure and changes in regulatory requirements; potentially greater use of contract labor and overtime due to COVID-19 and general labor market conditions; the departure of the Company’s key officers and personnel; the cost and difficulty of complying with applicable licensure, legislative oversight or regulatory changes; the risks associated with a general decline in economic conditions; the adequacy and continued availability of the Company’s insurance policies and the Company’s ability to recover any losses it sustains under such policies; changes in accounting principles and interpretations; and the other risks and factors identified from time to time in the Company’s reports filed with the SEC.
Overview
The following discussion and analysis addresses (i) the Company’s results of operations on a historical consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and (ii) liquidity and capital resources of the Company, and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s historical consolidated financial statements and the selected financial data contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company is one of the leading owner-operators of senior housing communities in the United States. The Company’s operating strategy is to provide value to its senior living residents by providing quality senior living services at reasonable prices, while achieving and sustaining a strong, competitive position within its geographically concentrated regions, as well as continuing to enhance the performance of its operations. The Company provides senior living services to the 75+ population, including independent living, assisted living and memory care services at reasonable prices. Many of the Company’s communities offer a continuum of care to meet each of their resident’s needs as they change over time. This continuum of care, which integrates independent living, assisted living and memory care that may be bridged by home care through independent home care agencies, sustains our residents’ autonomy and independence based on their physical and mental abilities.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company operated 75 senior housing communities in 18 states with an aggregate capacity of approximately 9,500 residents, including 60 senior housing communities that the Company owned and 15 communities that the Company managed on behalf of third parties.
Recent Events and Transactions
Investment Agreement
On October 1, 2021, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Investment Agreement (the "A&R Investment Agreement") with the Conversant Dallas Parkway (A) LP (“Conversant Fund A”) and Conversant Dallas Parkway (B) LP ("Conversant Fund B" and, together with Conversant Fund A, the “Conversant Investors”), affiliates of Conversant Capital LLC, which amended and restated in its entirety an Investment Agreement that the Company entered into with the Conversant Investors on July 22, 2021 and was subsequently amended (the “Original Investment Agreement”). Pursuant to the A&R Investment Agreement, (i) the Conversant Investors agreed to purchase from the Company, and the Company agreed to sell to the Conversant Investors, in a private placement (the “Private Placement”) pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), 41,250 shares of newly designated Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) at a price per share equal to $1,000; and 1,650,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a price per share equal to $25; (ii) subject to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the A&R Investment Agreement, the Conversant Investors would receive 1,031,250 warrants, each evidencing the right to purchase one share of common stock at a price per share of $40 and with an exercise expiration date of five years after the Closing Date; (iii) the Company amended the terms of its previously announced rights offering under the Original Investment Agreement to allow the holders of record of its outstanding shares of common stock at the close of business on September 10, 2021 the right to purchase at $30 per share, 1.1 shares of common stock for each share of common stock held, which would result in gross cash proceeds to the Company of approximately $72.3 million (the “Rights Offering”), in each case as more fully described in the A&R Investment Agreement.
In addition, pursuant to the A&R Investment Agreement, the Conversant Investors agreed to partially backstop the Amended Rights Offering up to $50.5 million through the purchase of additional shares of the Company's common stock at $30 per share. In consideration for the backstop commitments of the Conversant Investors, the Company agreed to pay to the Conversant Investors, as a premium, 174,675 shares of common stock. On or after the closing date under the A&R Investment Agreement, the Company may from time to time request additional investments from the Conversant Investors in shares of Series A Preferred Stock for future investment in accretive capital expenditures and acquisitions post-closing up to an aggregate amount equal to $25.0 million, subject to certain conditions.
Simultaneously with the entry into the Original Investment Agreement, the Company and the Conversant Investors entered into a $17.3 million secured promissory note (the “Promissory Note”) to provide interim debt financing which was scheduled to mature in July 2022 and was subsequently amended. The Promissory Note was amended to reduce the aggregate indebtedness outstanding by $1.3 million, resulting in an amended secured promissory note in the amount of $16.0 million. The Promissory Note was fully repaid upon closing of the transactions contemplated by the A&R Investment Agreement and the Company recognized a $1.0 million loss on extinguishment of the Promissory Note. See "Note 8- Notes Payable."
The transactions contemplated by the A&R Investment Agreement were subject to stockholder approval, which was received on October 22, 2021. The Rights Offering expired on October 27, 2021 with subscription rights to purchase 1,133,941 shares exercised. The transactions contemplated by the A&R Investment Agreement closed (the “Closing”) on November 3, 2021 and resulted in net proceeds to the Company of $141.4 million after paying customary transaction and closing costs of approximately $13.4 million. The Conversant Investors and Arbiter Partners QP, LP (“Arbiter”) backstopped the Rights Offering, pursuant to which they purchased an additional 1,160,806 shares of common stock and 114,911 shares of common stock, respectively, and received a backstop fee of 174,675 shares of common stock and 17,292 shares of common stock, respectively.
At the Closing, the Company, the Conversant Investors and Silk Partners LP (“Silk”) entered into an Investor Rights Agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, the Company's board of directors was reconstituted to consist of six new directors designated by the Conversant Investors and Silk and three continuing directors.
At the Closing, all outstanding performance-based stock based compensation including restricted shares were converted at target award levels to time-based restricted stock awards that will vest on the applicable scheduled vesting dates or the relevant award termination date applicable to such performance shares. See “Note 11- Stock-Based Compensation.”
Corporate Name Change
On November 9, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended, with the Delaware Secretary of State to effect the change of the Company’s name from "Capital Senior Living Corporation" to “Sonida Senior Living, Inc.” effective as of November 15, 2021. In addition, the Company’s board of directors adopted an amendment to the Company’s Second Amended and Restated Bylaws to reflect the Company’s new legal name, effective as of November 15, 2021.
In conjunction with the Name Change, the ticker symbol of the Company’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange changed from "CSU" to “SNDA.” The CUSIP number for the Company’s common stock following the effectiveness of the Name Change remained unchanged.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The United States broadly continues to experience the pandemic caused by COVID-19, which significantly disrupted the nation’s economy, the senior living industry and the Company’s business. The COVID-19 pandemic caused a decline in the occupancy levels at the Company’s communities, which negatively impacted the Company’s revenues and operating results, that depend significantly on such occupancy levels. In an effort to protect its residents and employees and slow the spread of COVID-19 and in response to quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and other limitations imposed by federal, state and local governments, the Company had previously restricted or limited access to its communities, including limitations on in-person prospective resident tours and, in certain cases, new resident admissions. As of December 31, 2021, all of the Company's senior living communities were open for new resident move-ins. Although vaccines are now widely available, we cannot predict the duration of the pandemic or its ongoing impact on our business. If the COVID-19 pandemic worsens, including the transmission of highly contagious variants of the COVID-19 virus, the Company may have to impose or revert to restricted or limited access to its communities.
The COVID-19 pandemic has required the Company to incur significant additional operating costs and expenses in order to implement enhanced infection control protocols and otherwise care for its residents, including increased costs and expenses relating to supplies and personal protective equipment, testing of the Company’s residents and employees, labor and specialized disinfecting and cleaning services, which has increased the costs of caring for the residents and resulted in reduced occupancy at such communities. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $1.9 million and $9.4 million, respectively, in direct costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In November 2020 and January 2021, the Company accepted $8.1 million and $8.7 million of cash, respectively, through grants from the Public Health and Social Services Emergency Fund’s (the “Provider Relief Fund”) Phases 2 and 3 General Distribution, which was expanded by the CARES Act to provide grants or other funding mechanisms to eligible healthcare providers for healthcare related expenses or lost revenues attributable to COVID-19. The $8.7 million Phase 3 Provider Relief Funds were recorded as other income in the year ended December 31, 2021. On April 13, 2022, subsequent to year end, the Company accepted $9.1 million of cash for grants from the Provider Relief Fund’s Phase 4 General Distribution. The CARES Act Phase 2, Phase 3 and Phase 4 funds are grants that do not have to be repaid provided we satisfy the terms and conditions of the CARES Act. In addition, the Company had received approximately $1.9 million in relief from state agencies in the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company elected to utilize the CARES Act payroll tax deferral program to delay payment of a portion of its payroll taxes incurred from April 2020 through December 2020. The Company repaid one-half of the deferral amount in December 2021 and the other half will become due on December 31, 2022. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $3.7 million in deferred payroll taxes, which is included in accrued expenses in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
CARES Act Provider Relief Funds are subject to the terms and conditions of the program, including stringent restrictions that funds may only be used to reimburse COVID-19 related expenses or lost revenue that are attributable to COVID-19 and have not been reimbursed from other sources or that other sources are not obligated to reimburse. While we intend to pursue additional funding that may become available, there can be no assurances that we will qualify for, or receive, any additional relief funds in the future.
We cannot, at this time, predict with reasonable certainty the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately have on our business, results of operations, cash flow and liquidity, and our response efforts may delay or negatively impact our strategic initiatives, including plans for future growth. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on many factors, many of which cannot be foreseen, including: (i) the duration, severity and geographic concentrations of the COVID-19 pandemic and any resurgence, additional waves and highly contagious variants and strains of the disease; (ii) the impact of COVID-19 on the nation’s economy and debt and equity markets at large and the local economies in our markets; (iii) the development and availability of COVID-19 infection and antibody testing, therapeutic agents and vaccines and the prioritization of such resources among businesses and demographic groups, including within the geographic areas in which the Company operates and derives material revenue; (iv) governmental financial and regulatory relief efforts that may become available to businesses and individuals; (v) concerns over, and the perceptions of, the safety of senior living communities during and after the pandemic; (vi) changes in demand for senior living communities and our ability to adapt our sales and marketing efforts to meet that demand; (vii) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our residents’ and their families’ ability to afford our resident fees, including those related to changes in unemployment rates, consumer confidence and equity markets; (viii) changes in the acuity levels of our new residents; (ix) the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on seniors generally and those residing in our communities; (x) the duration and costs of our preparation and response efforts, including increased supplies, labor, litigation and other expenses; (xi) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to (1) complete equity and debt financings, refinancings or other transactions (including dispositions) and (2) generate sufficient cash flow to cover required debt service payments and to satisfy financial and other covenants in our debt documents; (xii) increased regulatory requirements and enforcement actions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including those that may limit our collection efforts for delinquent accounts; and (xiii) the frequency and magnitude of legal actions and liability claims that may arise due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our associated response efforts.
Significant Financial and Operational Highlights
The Company derives its revenue primarily by providing senior living and healthcare services to seniors. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated resident revenue of approximately $190.2 million compared to resident revenue of approximately $357.1 million in the prior year representing a decrease of approximately $166.9 million. The decrease in revenue is generated from significant property dispositions throughout 2021 and 2020, including (1) the sale of two owned properties, one of which transitioned to a management agreement with the buyer; (2) the transition of 39 leased communities to different operators in conjunction with the Company exiting its master lease agreements; (3) the transition of seven leased communities to management agreements; and (4) the process of transferring legal ownership of 18 communities to the Federal National Mortgage Association ("Fannie Mae") the holder of nonrecourse debt related to such communities begun on August 1, 2020. Together, these actions accounted for a decrease in revenue of approximately $150.0 million. The Company also experienced a decline in resident revenue due to the impact of COVID-19 on its occupancy in early 2021 and 2020. Beginning in March 2021, the Company was able to begin to improve its overall resident occupancy to an average of 81.6% for the month ended December 31, 2021 compared to the low of 75.3% for the month ended February 28, 2021. The decreases in resident revenue were also partially offset by increases in management fees and community reimbursement revenue of $1.8 million and $16.4 million, respectively, which were due to the Company’s management of communities during all of 2021 compared to management of communities for a portion of 2020.
Ventas
As of December 31, 2019, the Company leased seven senior housing communities from Ventas, Inc. ("Ventas"). The term of the Ventas lease agreement was previously scheduled to expire on September 30, 2025. On March 10, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Ventas (as amended, the “Ventas Agreement”), providing for the early termination of its Master Lease Agreement with Ventas covering the seven communities. Pursuant to the Ventas Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Ventas rent of approximately $1.0 million per month from February 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020 for such communities, as compared to approximately $1.3 million per month that would otherwise have been due and payable under the Master Lease Agreement. In addition, the Ventas Agreement provided that the Company would not be required to comply with certain financial covenants of the Master Lease Agreement during the forbearance period, which terminated on December 31, 2020. In conjunction with the Ventas Agreement, the Company released to Ventas $4.1 million in security deposits and $2.5 million in escrow deposits held by Ventas, and Ventas reduced the amounts and term of the Company’s lease payments, and effectively eliminated the Company’s lease termination obligation, which was $11.4 million at December 31, 2019. Pursuant to the Ventas Agreement, the Master Lease Agreement terminated on December 31, 2020.
In accordance with ASC Topic 842, the reduction in the monthly minimum rent payable to Ventas and the modification of the lease term pursuant to the Ventas Agreement was determined to be a modification of the Master Lease Agreement. As such, the Company reassessed the classification of the Master Lease Agreement with Ventas based on the modified terms and determined that the lease continued to be classified as an operating lease until the communities transitioned to a different operator or management agreement, at which time the lease would terminate. The modification resulted in a reduction to the lease termination obligation, lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets by approximately $11.4 million, $51.6 million and $47.8 million, respectively, during the first quarter of 2020. The Company recognized a net gain of approximately $8.4 million on the transaction, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to the impact of the change in lease term on certain of the right-of-use asset balances. As a result of the lease modification, the Company assessed the operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment during the first quarter of 2020. See “Note 3- Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.”
Under the terms of the Ventas Agreement, Ventas elected on December 31, 2020 to enter into a property management agreement with the Company as manager that provides for a management fee based on gross revenues of the applicable community payable to the Company and other customary terms and conditions. As a result of these transactions, the Company had no remaining lease transactions with Ventas as of January 1, 2021.
Welltower
As of December 31, 2019, the Company leased 24 senior housing communities from Welltower, Inc ("Welltower"). The initial terms of the Welltower lease agreements were previously scheduled to expire on various dates from April 2025 through April 2026. On March 15, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Welltower (the “Welltower Agreement”), providing for the early termination of three Master Lease Agreements between the Company and Welltower covering all 24 communities. Pursuant to the Welltower Agreement, among other things, from February 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020, the Company agreed to pay Welltower rent of approximately $2.2 million per month for such communities as compared to approximately $2.8 million per month that would otherwise have been due and payable under the Master Lease Agreements. In addition, the Welltower Agreement provided that the Company was not required to comply with certain financial covenants of the Master Lease Agreements during the forbearance period, which terminated on December 31, 2020. In conjunction with the Welltower Agreement, the Company agreed to release $6.5 million in letters of credit to Welltower, which were released during the second quarter of 2020. The Welltower Agreement provided that Welltower could terminate such agreement with respect to any or all communities upon 30 days’ notice, but no later than December 31, 2020. Upon termination, Welltower could elect to enter into a property management agreement with the Company as manager or to transition the properties to a new operator. The Welltower Agreement also provided that the Company was not obligated to fund certain capital expenditures under the Master Lease Agreements during the applicable forbearance period and that Welltower would reimburse the Company for certain specified capital expenditures.
In accordance with ASC Topic 842, the reduction in the monthly minimum rent payable to Welltower under the then existing Master Lease Agreements with Welltower and modification to the lease term pursuant to the Welltower Agreement was determined to be a modification of the Master Lease Agreements. As such, the Company reassessed the classification of the Master Lease Agreements based on the modified terms and determined that each of the leases continued to be classified as an operating lease until the applicable communities transitioned to a different operator or management agreement, at which time such lease would terminate. The modification resulted in a reduction to the lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets by approximately $129.9 million, and $121.9 million, respectively, during the first quarter of 2020. The Company recognized a gain of approximately $8.0 million on the transaction, which is included in gain (loss) on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the lease modification, the Company assessed the operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment during the first quarter of 2020. See “Note 3- Impairment of Long-Lived Assets.”
During the third quarter of 2020, Welltower elected to terminate the Welltower Agreement with respect to five communities, all of which transferred to a different operator on September 10, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, Welltower elected to terminate the Welltower Agreement with respect to 14 communities. The Company recorded a loss of approximately $0.7 million, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Under the terms of the Welltower Agreement, on December 31, 2020, Welltower elected to enter into a property management agreement with the Company that provided for the Company to serve as manager of the remaining five communities that had not been transitioned to other operators for a management fee based on gross revenues of the applicable community payable to the Company and other customary terms and conditions. At December 31, 2021, the Company managed four communities on behalf of Welltower.
Healthpeak
On March 1, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with Healthpeak Properties, Inc. ("Healthpeak") (the “Healthpeak Agreement”), effective February 1, 2020, providing for the early termination of one of its Master Lease Agreements with Healthpeak, that was previously scheduled to mature in April 2026. Such Master Lease Agreement terminated and was converted into a Management Agreement under a Real Estate Investment Trust Investment Diversification and Empowerment Act structure (a “RIDEA structure”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to manage the six communities that were subject to the Master Lease Agreement until such communities are sold by Healthpeak. Pursuant to the Management Agreement, the Company received a management fee based on gross revenues realized at the applicable senior living communities plus reimbursement for its direct costs and expenses related to such communities. In conjunction with the Healthpeak Agreement, the Company released to Healthpeak approximately $2.6 million of security deposits held by Healthpeak. The Company remeasured the lease liability and operating lease right-of-use asset recorded in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2019 to zero, resulting in a net loss of $7.0 million on the transaction, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for year ended December 31, 2020.
On May 20, 2020, the Company entered into an additional agreement with Healthpeak (the “Amended Healthpeak Agreement”) effective from April 1, 2020 until the end of the lease term. Pursuant to the Amended Healthpeak Agreement, the Company began paying Healthpeak rent of approximately $0.7 million per month for eight senior housing communities subject to the Amended Healthpeak Agreement in lieu of approximately $0.9 million of monthly rent due and payable under the Master Lease Agreement before the agreement covering such communities. The rents paid to Healthpeak represent approximately 75% of their scheduled rates, with the remaining rent being subject to payment by the Company pursuant to a three-year note payable with final payment including accrued interest from November 1, 2021, to be made on or before November 1, 2023. At December 31, 2020, the Company had deferred $2.1 million in rent payments, which is included in notes payable, net of deferred loan costs and current portion on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. Given that the total minimum lease payments and the lease term remain unchanged, the Company has elected not to evaluate the deferral as a rent concession and did not account for the deferral as a modification to the existing lease agreement. The Company concluded the concessions provided to the Company were not contemplated by the existing lease. The Company accounted for the concession in the form of a deferral as if the lease terms were unchanged. Accordingly, accrued interest on the deferral amount is recorded in interest expense and accrued interest payable on the portion of the deferral amount that has yet to be paid on a monthly basis until such interest payments become due.
In November 2020, upon the expiration of the other Master Lease Agreement with Healthpeak, the Company entered into a short-term excess cash flow lease amendment pursuant to which the Company agreed to manage the seven communities that were then subject to the such lease amendment until the earlier of such time that the communities are sold by Healthpeak or until April 30, 2021. Pursuant to such agreement, the Company began paying Healthpeak monthly rent equal to any excess cash flow of the communities and earning a management fee for management of the seven communities.
In April 2021, the Company executed an agreement with Healthpeak to amend and extend its existing agreement for the remaining three properties managed by the Company on behalf of Healthpeak. In addition to a management fee based on a percentage of revenue, the Company received a monthly flat fee for three months with such fee increasing thereafter until such properties were sold or December 31, 2021, whichever was earlier. On September 30, 2021, Healthpeak sold the three remaining properties and terminated all agreements with the Company related to those three properties.
Dispositions and Other Significant Transactions
Disposition of Boca Raton, Florida Community
Effective January 15, 2020, the Company’s leased senior living community located in Boca Raton, Florida, transitioned to a new operator. In conjunction with the transition, the Company paid the lessor, Healthpeak, a one-time $0.3 million termination payment as a prepayment against the remaining lease payments and was relieved of any additional obligation to Healthpeak with regard to such property and the lease was terminated as to the property. The Company recorded a gain on the transaction of $1.8 million, which is included in gain on facility lease modification and termination, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for year ended December 31, 2020.
Disposition of Merrillville, Indiana Community
Effective March 31, 2020, the Company sold one community located in Merrillville, Indiana for a total purchase price of $7.0 million and received approximately $6.9 million in cash proceeds after paying customary closing costs. The community was unencumbered by any mortgage debt. The Company recognized a loss of $7.4 million on the disposition, which is included in gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Disposition of Canton, Ohio Community
On November 24, 2020, the Company closed on the sale of one senior housing community located in Canton, Ohio, for a total purchase price of $18.0 million and received approximately $6.4 million in net proceeds after retiring outstanding mortgage debt of $10.8 million and paying customary transaction and closing costs. The Company recorded a $2.0 million gain on the sale of the property, which is included in gain (loss) on disposition of assets, net in the year ended December 31, 2020. In November 2020, the Company entered into a management agreement with the successor owner to manage the senior living community, pursuant to which the Company receives a management fee based on the gross revenues of the property.
Transactions Involving Certain Fannie Mae Loans
The CARES Act, among other things, permitted borrowers with mortgages from Government Sponsored Enterprises who experienced a financial hardship related to the COVID-19 pandemic to obtain forbearance of their loans for up to 90 days. On May 7, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance agreements with Berkadia Commercial Mortgage LLC, as servicer of 23 of its Fannie Mae loans covering 20 of the Company's properties. On May 9, 2020, the Company entered into a forbearance agreement with Wells Fargo Bank (“Wells Fargo”), as servicer of one Fannie Mae loan covering one of the Company's properties. On May 20, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance agreements with KeyBank National Association ("KeyBank"), as servicer of three Fannie Mae loans covering two of the Company's properties. The forbearance agreements allowed the Company to withhold the loan payments due under the loan agreements for the months of April, May and June 2020 and Fannie Mae agreed to forbear in exercising its rights and remedies during such period. During this three-month loan payment forbearance, the Company agreed to pay to Fannie Mae monthly net operating income, if any, as defined in the forbearance agreement, for the properties receiving forbearance.
On July 8, 2020, the Company entered into forbearance extension agreements with Fannie Mae, which provided for a one-month extension of the forbearance agreements between it and Fannie Mae covering 23 properties. The forbearance extension agreements extended the forbearance period until July 31, 2020, and Fannie Mae agreed to forbear in exercising its rights and remedies during such period. By July 31, 2020, the Company was required to repay to Fannie Mae the deferred payments, less payments made during the forbearance period.
On July 31, 2020, the Company made required payments to Fannie Mae totaling $0.6 million, which included the deferred payments, less payments made during the forbearance period, for five properties under forbearance agreements. The Company elected not to pay $3.8 million on the loans for the remaining 18 properties as of that date as it initiated a process intended to transfer the operations and ownership of such properties to Fannie Mae. Therefore, the Company was in default on such loans, which were non-recourse loans.
As a result of the default, Fannie Mae filed a motion with the United States District Court (the "District Court") requesting that a receiver be appointed over the 18 properties, which was approved by the District Court. The Company agreed to continue to manage the 18 communities, subject to earning a management fee, until management of the communities is transferred to a successor operator or legal ownership of the properties is transferred to Fannie Mae or its designee. Management fees earned from the properties are recognized as revenue when earned. In conjunction with the receivership order, the Company was required to obtain approval from the receiver for all payments and received reimbursements from Fannie Mae for reasonable operating expenses incurred on behalf of any of the 18 communities under the receivership order. As a result of the events of default and receivership order, the Company discontinued recognizing revenues and expenses related to the 18 properties effective August 1, 2020, which was the date of default. In addition, the Company concluded that it was no longer entitled to receive any existing accounts receivable or revenue related to the properties, all amounts held in escrow by Fannie Mae were forfeited, and the Company no longer has control of the properties in accordance with ASC 610-20.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Fannie Mae completed the transition of legal ownership of 16 of the Company's properties, and the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $200.9 million which is included in gain on extinguishment of debt in the Company's Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). At December 31, 2021, the Company included $32.0 million in outstanding debt in current portion of notes payable, net of deferred loan costs, and $2.7 million of accrued interest in accrued expenses on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets related to the remaining two properties. At December 31, 2021 the Company did not manage any properties on behalf of Fannie Mae.
Loan Extension and Debt Forbearance Agreement on PNC Bank (successor to BBVA) Loan
The Company also entered into a loan amendment with another lender, PNC Bank National Association (successor to BBVA) ("PNC Bank"), related to a loan covering three of the Company's properties pursuant to which the Company deferred monthly debt service payments for April, May and June 2020, which deferred payments were added to principal. The deferred monthly debt service payments were paid by the Company in June 2021. At December 31, 2021, no deferred payments remained outstanding.
In August 2021, the Company executed a one-year extension of the Company's $40.5 million loan agreement with PNC Bank, which extended the maturity date to December 10, 2022. The extension also included an additional six-month extension option if certain financial criteria are met. The loan agreement extension includes a waiver for non-compliance with certain financial ratios on December 31, 2020 and eliminated the compliance requirements for minimum financial ratios. The extension required a principal payment of $1.0 million in December 2021 and quarterly principal payments of $0.5 million beginning in March 2022 unless a certain financial ratio is attained. The required $1.0 million principal payment was made in December 2021. PNC Bank required a debt service reserve of $0.9 million as part of this extension, which is included in the restricted cash balances as of December 31, 2021. In March 2022, subsequent to year-end, the Company refinanced this loan with a different lender. See "Note 17- Subsequent Events."
Debt Forbearance Agreement on HUD Loan
The Company also entered into a debt forbearance agreement with ORIX Real Estate Capital, LLC (“ORIX”), related to a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) loan covering one property pursuant to which the Company deferred monthly debt service payments for April, May and June 2020, which deferred payments are added to the regularly scheduled payments in equal installments for one year following the forbearance period and were paid in the year ended December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, no deferred payments remained outstanding.
Protective Life Amendments to Loan Agreements and Loan Modification and Temporary Deferral Agreements
On May 21, 2020, the Company entered into amendments to its loan agreements with Protective Life Insurance Company related to loans covering ten properties. These amendments allowed the Company to defer principal and interest payments for April, May and June 2020 and to defer principal payments for July 2020 through March 2021. The Company made all required debt service payments in July, August and September 2020. On October 1, 2020, the Company entered into further amendments to its loan agreements with Protective Life Insurance Company. These amendments allowed the Company to defer interest payments for October, November and December 2020, and to extend the deferral period of principal payments through September 1, 2021, with such deferral amounts being added to principal due at maturity in either 2025, 2026 or 2031 depending upon the loan. At December 31, 2021, the Company had deferred payments of $7.2 million related to the Protective Life Insurance Company loans, of which $2.6 million was included in accrued expenses in the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. The remaining $4.6 million of deferred payments is included in notes payable, net of deferred loan costs and current portion, on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements and related notes. Management bases its estimates and assumptions on historical experience, observance of industry trends and various other sources of information and factors, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties, and potentially could result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The Company believes the following are our most critical accounting policies and/or typically require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Self-Insurance Liability Accruals
The Company offers full-time employees an option to participate in its health and dental plans. The Company is self-insured up to certain limits and is insured if claims in excess of these limits are incurred. The cost of employee health and dental benefits, net of employee contributions, is shared between the Company’s corporate office and its senior housing communities based on the respective number of plan participants. Funds collected are used to pay the actual program costs including estimated annual claims, third-party administrative fees, network provider fees, communication costs and other related administrative costs incurred by the plans. Claims are paid as they are submitted to the Company’s third-party administrator. The Company records a liability for outstanding claims and claims that have been incurred but not yet reported. This liability is based on the historical claim reporting lag and payment trends of health insurance claims. Management believes that the liability for outstanding losses and expenses is adequate to cover the ultimate cost of losses and expenses incurred at December 31, 2021; however, actual claims and expenses may differ. Any subsequent changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined.
The Company uses a combination of insurance and self-insurance for workers’ compensation. Determining the reserve for workers’ compensation losses and costs that the Company has incurred as of the end of a reporting period involves significant judgments based on projected future events, including potential settlements for pending claims, known incidents that result in claims, estimates of incurred but not yet reported claims, changes in insurance premiums, estimated litigation costs and other factors. The Company regularly adjusts these estimates to reflect changes in the foregoing factors. However, since this reserve is based on estimates, the actual expenses incurred may differ from the amounts reserved. Any subsequent changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they are determined.
Long-Lived Assets and Impairment
Property and equipment are stated at cost and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. At each balance sheet date, the Company reviews the carrying value of its property and equipment to determine if facts and circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable, or that the depreciation period may need to be changed. The Company considers internal factors such as net operating losses along with external factors relating to each asset, including contract changes, local market developments and other publicly available information to determine whether impairment indicators exist.
If an indicator of impairment is identified, recoverability of an asset group is assessed by comparing its carrying amount to the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group through operation or disposition, calculated utilizing the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. Projecting future cash flows involves predicting unknown future circumstances and events and requires significant management judgments and estimates, which include historic operating results, approved budgets, future demographic factors, expected growth rates, estimated asset holding periods and other factors. If this comparison indicates that the carrying amount of an asset group is not recoverable, we estimate fair value of the asset group and record an impairment loss when the carrying amount exceeds fair value.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company evaluated the carrying value of its long-lived depreciable assets and operating lease right-of-use assets and determined that the carrying amount of these assets exceeded the undiscounted cash flows for certain of its communities. Estimated fair values were determined for these properties and impairment charges were recorded for all communities for which carrying values exceeded fair values. The following is a summary of asset impairment expense for these assets.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company determined that the modifications of certain of its Master Lease Agreements (see “Significant Financial and Operational Highlights”) and adverse impacts on the Company’s operating results resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic were indicators of potential impairment of its long-lived assets and evaluated certain owned communities and all leased communities for impairment. The recoverability of these assets was evaluated by comparing projected undiscounted cash flows associated with these assets to their respective historical carrying values. For communities in which the historical carrying value was not recoverable, the Company compared the estimated fair value of the assets to their carrying amount and recorded an impairment charge for the excess of carrying amount over fair value. For the operating lease right-of-use assets, fair value was estimated utilizing a discounted cash flow approach based on historical and projected cash flows and market data, including management fees and a market supported lease coverage ratio. The fair values of the property and equipment, net of these communities, were primarily determined utilizing the cost approach, which determines the current replacement cost of the property being appraised and then deducts for the loss in value caused by physical deterioration, functional obsolescence and economic obsolescence the amount required to replace the asset as if new and adjusts to reflect usage. These fair value measurements are considered Level 3 measurements within the valuation hierarchy. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $6.2 million and $29.8 million to operating lease right-of-use assets, net and property and equipment, net, respectively.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $1.3 million and $1.1 million to operating lease right-of-use assets, net and property and equipment, net, respectively, due to a change in the useful life of 15 of its communities, all of which transferred to new operators during the fourth quarter of 2020. Due to the changes in useful lives, the Company concluded the assets related to those properties had indicators of impairment and the carrying values were not fully recoverable. The fair values of the right-of-use assets were estimated, using Level 3 inputs as defined in the accounting standards codification, utilizing a discounted cash flow approach based upon historical and projected cash flows and market data, including management fees and a market supported lease coverage ratio. In addition, during the third quarter of 2020 the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $0.8 million to property and equipment, net of one owned community. The fair value of the property and equipment, net of this community was determined using the sales comparison approach, which utilizes the sales of comparable properties, and the income capitalization approach, which reflects the property’s income-producing capabilities. This impairment charge is primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower than expected operating performance at the community and reflects the amount by which the carrying amount of these assets exceeded their fair value.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of $6.5 million to property and equipment, net of one owned community. Due to recurring net operating losses, the Company concluded the assets related to this community had indicators of impairment and the carrying value was not recoverable. The fair value of the property and equipment, net of this community was determined using an income capitalization approach considering stabilized facility operating income and market capitalization rates of 8.25%. This impairment charge is primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower than expected operating performance at the community and reflects the amount by which the carrying amount of these assets exceeded their fair value.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
The following table includes our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) data in thousands of dollars and expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
The decrease in revenues is primarily due to significant property dispositions in fiscal year 2020, including (1) the sale of two owned properties, one of which transitioned to a management agreement with the buyer; (2) the transition of 39 leased communities to different operators in conjunction with the Company exiting its master lease agreements; (3) the transition of seven leased communities to management agreements; and (4) the process of transferring legal ownership of 18 communities to Fannie Mae, the holder of non-recourse debt related to such communities on August 1, 2020. Together, these actions accounted for a decrease in revenue of approximately $150.0 million. The Company also experienced a decline in resident revenue due to the impact of COVID-19 on its occupancy in early 2021 and 2020. Beginning in March 2021, the Company was able to begin to improve its overall resident occupancy to an average of 81.6% for the month of December 31, 2021 compared to the low of 75.3% for the month ended February 28, 2021.
The decreases in resident revenue were partially offset by increases in management fees and community reimbursement revenue of $1.8 million and $16.0 million, respectively, which were due to the Company’s management of 12 communities during all of 2021 and three communities for a portion of 2021.
Expenses
Total expenses were $274.9 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to $439.5 million during fiscal year 2020, representing a decrease of $164.6 million. This decrease was primarily the result of the 2020 property dispositions, as described above, which reduced operating expense and facility lease expense by $97.4 million and $28.1 million, respectively, and a decrease in long-lived asset impairment of $35.3 million coupled with a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense of $22.4 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases of $1.6 million in general and administrative expenses, $1.1 million in stock compensation expense and $16.0 million in community reimbursement expense in 2021 as compared to 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses were lower than the prior year by $97.4 million. The decrease in operating expenses primarily results from the disposition of communities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as described above which generated reductions of $63.4 million in labor and employee-related expenses, $8.8 million decrease in food expenses, a $2.4 million decrease in promotion expenses, a $7.8 million decrease in property tax expense, a $7.9 million decrease in utilities and a $7.0 million decrease in all other operating expenses, all of which were primarily due to the property disposals described above and reduced occupancy levels at our continuing communities.
The increase in general and administrative expenses of $1.6 million is primarily due to a $4.7 million higher employee benefits and health insurance claims and $0.5 million in insurance and other expenses, which were partially offset by reductions of approximately $2.9 million in transaction costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the lease amendments and terminations in the prior year.
The $28.1 million decrease in facility lease expense is attributable to the termination of the Company's Master Lease Agreements during fiscal 2020.
The $22.4 million decrease in depreciation and amortization expense primarily results from a decrease in depreciable assets at the Company’s communities resulting from the disposition of communities since the first quarter of 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $6.5 million of non-cash impairment charges related to one owned community with decreased cash flow estimates as a result of recurring net operating losses. During the prior year, the Company recorded $41.8 million of non-cash impairment charges, which included $3.4 million related to property and equipment for two owned communities as a result of lower than expected operating performance at the communities driven by the COVID-19 pandemic, $30.9 million related to property and equipment for certain leased communities as a result of lease transactions and $7.5 million related to operating lease right-of-use assets.
The $16.0 million increase in community reimbursement expense includes reimbursements due from the owners of the communities for which the Company provides management services, which totaled 15 and 12 communities at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other income and expense.
Interest income generally reflects interest earned on the investment of cash balances and escrow funds or interest associated with certain income tax refunds or property tax settlements.
Interest expense decreased in fiscal 2021 when compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the (i) early repayment of mortgage debt associated with the sale of one community in the fourth quarter of 2020 and (ii) completion of the transition of the ownership of 16 communities to Fannie Mae during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The gain on extinguishment of debt of $200.9 million relates to the de-recognition of notes payable and liabilities as a result of the completion of the transition of the legal ownership of 16 of the Company's communities back to Fannie Mae, the holder of the non-recourse debt related to such properties, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Provision for income taxes.
Provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.6 million, or 0.46% of net income before income taxes, compared to a provision for income taxes of $0.4 million, or 0.13% of loss before income taxes, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 differ from the statutory tax rates due to state income taxes, permanent tax differences and changes in the deferred tax asset valuation allowance. The Company is impacted by the Texas Margin Tax, which effectively imposes tax on modified gross revenues for communities within the State of Texas. The Company consolidated 16 and 38 Texas communities at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which contributes to the overall provision for income taxes. Management regularly evaluates the future realization of deferred tax assets and provides a valuation allowance, if considered necessary, based on such evaluation. As part of the evaluation, management has evaluated taxable income in carryback years, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, feasible tax planning strategies and future expectations of income. At year end, the Company had a three-year cumulative operating loss for its U.S. operations and accordingly, has provided a full valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance reduces the Company’s net deferred tax assets to the amount that is “more likely than not” (i.e., a greater than 50% likelihood) to be realized.
Net income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
As a result of the foregoing factors, the Company reported net income and comprehensive income of $125.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss and comprehensive loss of $295.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In addition to approximately $78.7 million of unrestricted cash balances on hand at December 31, 2021, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations, proceeds from debt refinancings and/or proceeds from the sale of owned assets. During November 2021, the Company raised $154.8 million from the private placement of Series A Preferred Stock and common stock to the Conversant Investors and the Rights Offering that also provides for an additional $25 million equity investment to fund future growth (as defined in the A&R Investment Agreement). In March 2022, subsequent to year end, the Company completed the refinancing of certain existing mortgage debt. See "Note 17- Subsequent Events." This debt refinancing, together with the enhanced liquidity from the proceeds raised by the A&R Investment Agreement and other liquidity sources addressed the relevant conditions and events that previously raised substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
The Company, from time to time, considers and evaluates financial and capital raising transactions related to its portfolio, including debt refinancings, purchases and sales of assets and other transactions. There can be no assurance that the Company will continue to generate cash flows at or above current levels, or that the Company will be able to obtain the capital necessary to meet the Company’s short and long-term capital requirements.
Recent changes in the current economic environment, and other future changes, could result in decreases in the fair value of assets, slowing of transactions, and the tightening of liquidity and credit markets. These impacts could make securing debt or refinancings for the Company or buyers of the Company’s properties more difficult or on terms not acceptable to the Company. The Company’s actual liquidity and capital funding requirements depend on numerous factors, including its operating results, its capital expenditures for community investment, and general economic conditions, as well as other factors described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
In summary, the Company’s cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating activities.
The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily results from net income of $125.6 million and decreases from current liabilities of $3.0 million, offset by decreases and net non-cash charges of $150.0 million. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily results from net loss of $295.4 million, a decrease in cash flows from current assets of $2.9 million, increase from current liabilities of $13.0 million and net non-cash charges of $278.4 million.
Investing activities.
The net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily results from ongoing capital improvements and refurbishments at the Company’s senior housing communities of $10.4 million. The net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily results from the Company's receipt of $24.1 million in proceeds from the disposition of assets, partially offset by ongoing capital improvements and refurbishments at the Company’s senior housing communities of $15.6 million.
Financing activities.
The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily results from $141.4 million in proceeds from the transactions contemplated by the A&R Investment Agreement and $23.1 million of proceeds from debt which includes the $16.0 million proceeds from the Promissory Note, See "Note 4- Significant Transactions," partially offset by repayments of notes payable of $65.0 million, which includes paying off the amounts owed to Fifth Third Bank and the Conversant Promissory Note. The net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects proceeds from notes payable of $7.6 million, repayments of notes payable of $23.1 million, and payments on financing obligations of $0.4 million.
Debt Covenants
Certain of our debt agreements contain restrictions and financial covenants, such as those requiring us to maintain prescribed minimum debt service coverage ratios, in each case on a multi-community basis. The debt service coverage ratios are generally calculated as revenues less operating expenses, including an implied management fee, divided by the debt (principal and interest). Furthermore, our debt is secured by our communities and if an event of default has occurred under any of our debt, subject to cure provisions in certain instances. The respective lender would have the right to declare all of the related outstanding amounts of indebtedness immediately due and payable, to foreclose on our mortgaged communities and/or pursue other remedies available to such lender. We cannot provide assurance that we would be able to pay the debts if they became due upon acceleration following an event of default.
The Company was in compliance with all aspects of its outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2021.
Impact of Inflation
To date, inflation has not had a significant impact on the Company. However, continuation of the current inflationary environment could affect the Company’s future revenues and results of operations because of, among other things, the Company’s dependence on senior residents, many of whom rely primarily on fixed incomes to pay for the Company’s services. As a result, during inflationary periods, the Company may not be able to increase resident service fees to account fully for increased operating expenses. In structuring its fees, the Company attempts to anticipate inflation levels, but there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to anticipate fully or otherwise respond to any future inflationary pressures.