Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with “Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
For the discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations" and "-Liquidity and Capital Resources" included in the Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing an innovative pipeline of cancer therapies. Our two lead product candidates are SNDX-5613 and SNDX-6352, or axatilimab. We are developing SNDX-5613, targeting the binding interaction of menin with the mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) protein for the treatment of MLL-rearranged, or MLLr, acute leukemias and nucleophosmin 1, or NPM1, mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as axatilimab, a monoclonal antibody that blocks the colony stimulating factor 1, or CSF-1 receptor. We have deprioritized the development of entinostat, our once-weekly, oral, small molecule, Class I HDAC inhibitor, to focus resources on advancing the remainder of our pipeline. We plan to continue to leverage the technical and business expertise of our management team and scientific collaborators to license, acquire and develop additional therapeutics to expand our pipeline.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any product revenues from product sales to date. We continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. We have generated minimal license revenue, except for in 2021. Other than in 2021, we have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since our inception in 2005. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported a net profit of $24.9 million, and for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we reported a net loss of $73.2 million and $56.0 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported a net profit attributable to common stockholders of $24.9 million, and for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we reported a net loss attributable to common stockholders of $77.1 million and $56.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $543.7 million, which included non-cash charges for stock-based compensation, preferred stock accretion and extinguishment charges. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $439.9 million.
We continue to monitor our daily operations and program timelines during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The health and safety of our employees as well as the patients and people participating in and operating our clinical trials are of paramount importance. COVID-19, including its variants did not impact our financial guidance or changed our timelines for clinical data in 2021.
COVID-19 Business Update
We continue to address and mitigate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. While we are not experiencing financial impacts at this time, given the changes in global macroeconomic conditions, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems, potential limitations to the efficacy of vaccines for COVID-19, the evolution of multiple variants of the virus and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 situation as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy. In March 2020, our workforce transitioned to working remotely. We have gradually reopened our offices to allow employees to return to the office, while also supporting remote working options.
We are working closely our third-party manufacturers, distributors and other partners to manage our supply chain activities and mitigate potential disruptions to our product supplies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently expect to have adequate supplies of SNDX-5613 and axatilimab. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues to persist and if it impacts essential distribution systems such as FedEx and postal delivery or if it results in facility closures for cleaning and/or insufficient staff, we could experience disruptions to our supply chain and operations, and associated delays in the manufacturing and supply of our products, and to our clinical trial operations.
With respect to clinical development, we continue to take measures to implement remote and virtual approaches, including remote patient monitoring where possible, to maintain patient safety and trial continuity and to preserve study integrity. We have, and may continue to experience, disruptions and/or delays in our ability to initiate trial sites and enroll and assess patients. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, we anticipate an ongoing, though minimal, impact on our ability to maintain patient enrollment in the AUGMENT-101 and AGAVE trials. We could also see an impact on the ability to supply study drug, report trial results, or interact with regulators, ethics committees or other important agencies due to limitations in regulatory authority employee resources or otherwise. In addition, we rely on contract research organizations or other third parties to assist us with clinical trials, and we cannot guarantee that they will continue to perform their contractual duties in a timely and satisfactory manner as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues, we could experience significant disruptions to our clinical development timelines, which would adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects.
Financial Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any product revenues. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to obtain marketing approval of and successfully commercialize our product candidates. Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 have been solely derived from our license, development and commercialization agreements with Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd., or KKC, and with Incyte Pharmaceuticals, Inc, or Incyte.
We granted Incyte an exclusive license to develop and commercialize axatilimab in the United States and the rest of the world. In 2021, we received $152.0 million total consideration from the Incyte Agreements. We allocated $126.6 million of the total consideration received to the license, and such amount was recognized as license revenue upon transfer of license to Incyte in December 2021 .
We granted KKC an exclusive license to develop and commercialize entinostat in Japan and Korea, or the KKC license agreement. In 2015, we received a $25.0 million upfront payment from KKC, inclusive of an equity investment. We allocated $17.3 million of the upfront payment to the license fee, and such fee is being recognized as revenue ratably over our expected performance period (currently expected to be through 2029). The balance of the upfront payment of $7.7 million was allocated to KKC’s purchase of shares of our convertible preferred stock.
In September 2021, KKC informed us that they discontinued the entinostat program and cancelled the license to develop and commercialize entinostat. As a result, we recognized $12.4 million in revenue which was previously deferred.
Research and Development
Since our inception, we have primarily focused on our clinical development programs. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates and include:
•
expenses incurred under agreements related to our clinical trials, including the costs for investigative sites and contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct our clinical trials;
•
employee-related expenses associated with our research and development activities, including salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses;
•
manufacturing process-development, clinical supplies and technology-transfer expenses;
•
license fees and milestone payments under our license agreements;
•
consulting fees paid to third parties;
•
allocated facilities and overhead expenses; and
•
costs associated with regulatory operations and regulatory compliance requirements.
Internal and external research and development costs are expensed as they are incurred. Cost-sharing amounts received by us are recorded as reductions to research and development expense. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or other information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drug candidates in late stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of late-stage clinical trials. We plan to continue to spend a significant amount of our resources on research and development activities for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance the development of our product candidates. The amount of research and development expenses allocated to external spending will continue to grow, while we expect our internal spending to grow at a slower and more controlled pace.
It is difficult to determine, with certainty, the duration and completion costs of our current or future preclinical programs, clinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
per patient costs;
•
the number of patients that participate;
•
the number of sites;
•
the countries in which the studies and trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient monitoring;
•
the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidates; and
•
timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
In addition, the probability of success for each drug product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of our product candidates for the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these potential product candidates may commence. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation and travel expenses, for our employees in executive, finance, business development and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs not otherwise allocated to research and development expenses and accounting, tax, legal and consulting services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of the first product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on our term loan, operational and capital leases.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income includes income recorded for the change in fair value of derivative liability established based on the terms under of the Letter Agreement with connection with the share purchase agreement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, or other standard setting bodies and adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed in Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In making estimates and judgments, management employs critical accounting policies. Our critical accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have listed below our critical accounting estimates that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We enter into license agreements for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. License agreements may include non-refundable upfront payments, contingent payments based on the occurrence of specified events under our license arrangements, partial or complete reimbursement of research and development expenses, license fees and royalties on sales of entinostat if they are successfully approved and commercialized. Our performance obligations under the license agreements may include the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of licenses, obligations to provide research and development services and related materials and participation on certain development and/or commercialization committees.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer (“transaction price”). To the extent that the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the most likely amount method. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available.
We assessed the promises to determine if they are distinct performance obligations. Once the performance obligations are determined, the transaction price is allocated based on a relative standalone selling price basis. Milestone payments and royalties are typically considered variable consideration at the outset of the contract and are recognized in the transaction price either upon occurrence or when the constraint of a probable reversal is no longer applicable.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. Arrangements containing licenses to our intellectual property typically provide for a know-how transfer period. These arrangements may or may not also include rights to future updates of that intellectual property and related know-how. Revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the licenses are recognized as the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. This generally takes place over the related know-how transfer period, or if applicable, over the term of transfer of future updates to the intellectual property.
Development Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, the Company evaluates whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license fees and earnings in the period of adjustment. For development milestones related to the KKC Agreement, we do not take a substantive role or control the research, development or commercialization of any products generated by KKC. Therefore, we are not able to reasonably estimate when, if at all, any development milestone payments may be payable to us. As such, the development milestone payments associated with the KKC Agreement involve a substantial degree of uncertainty and risk that they may never be received.
Commercial Milestone Payments and Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of commercial sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties or commercial milestones relate, we will recognize revenue at the later of when the related sales occur or when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date no commercial milestone payments or royalties have been achieved.
When no performance obligations are required of us, or following the completion of the performance obligation period, such amounts are recognized as revenue upon transfer of control of the goods or services to the customer. Generally, all amounts received or due other than sales-based milestones and royalties are classified as license fees. Sales-based milestones and royalties will be recognized as royalty revenue at the later of when the related sales occur or when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Deferred revenue arises from amounts received in advance of the culmination of the earnings process and is recognized as revenue in future periods as performance obligations are satisfied. Deferred revenue expected to be recognized within the next twelve months is classified as a current liability. Upfront payment contract liabilities resulting from our license agreements do not represent a financing component as the payment is not financing the transfer of goods or services, and the technology underlying the licenses granted reflects research and development expenses already incurred by us.
For license fee revenues, we recorded revenues of $126.6 million relating to the Incyte Agreement and $13.3 million relating to the KKC Agreement.
We applied significant judgment to our Incyte Agreement. We evaluated whether our contractual obligations represented distinct performance obligations. Such evaluation required judgment since it was made from the customer’s perspective. We determined that the transfer of the license to Incyte was a distinct performance obligation, separate from the ongoing collaboration activities. As such, we estimated the standalone selling price to be $126.6 million which we recognized as $126.6 million of license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We applied significant judgment to our KKC Agreement. We evaluated whether our contractual obligations represented distinct performance obligations. Such evaluation required judgment since it was made from the customer’s perspective. We determined that our performance obligations under the collaboration at contract inception were not distinct and represented a single performance obligation. In September 2021, KKC informed us, that they have discontinued the entinostat program and have cancelled the license to develop and commercialize entinostat. As a result, we recognized $12.4 million in revenue which was previously deferred.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and vendor agreements, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to contract research organizations, or CROs, and investigative sites in connection with clinical studies and to vendors related to product manufacturing and development of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors out of our control, such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not experienced any significant adjustments to our estimates.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
License Fees
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized license fees of $139.7 million and $1.5 million, derived from the Incyte and KKC license agreements, respectively. For additional information on our agreement with Incyte and KKC, please refer to Note 4 Revenue, to these consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total research and development expenses increased by $37.8 million, or 75%, to $88.2 million from $50.4 million for the prior year due to increases in clinical trial activities expenses of $31.3 million, professional expenses of $1.2 million, and employee related expenses of $5.3 million. The increase in clinical activities expenses was due to increased study activities related to SNDX-5613 of $7.7 million, increased CMC batch production costs for the Menin program of $9.5 million, increased study activity related to axatilimab of $9.3 million, increased development activities for the Menin program of $4.1 million and for axatilimab of $1.1 million, and an increase in license fees of $2.3 million, which were offset by reduction in the entinostat program of $2.7 million. The increase in employee related expense is primarily due to salary and benefits of $3.3 million and increase in stock-based compensation of $2.0 million due to increase in headcount.
We expect research and development expenses to fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on the timing of clinical trial activities, clinical manufacturing and other development activities.
Research and development expenses consisted of the following:
General and Administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total general and administrative expenses increased by $2.7 million, or 12%, to $25.2 million, from $22.5 million for the prior year. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased employee related expenses of $2.7 million. The increase in employee related expenses is due to an increase in stock compensation expense of $2.3 million and $0.4 million for salary and benefits due to increased headcount. The increased stock compensation expense includes $0.7 million related to the modification of option agreements in connection with the retirement of a certain employees.
Interest Income and Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income, decreased by $0.4 million from the prior year. This decrease was primarily due to a lower average cash and investment balance and lower interest rates on our investments.
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on our term loan, operational and capital leases. The decrease is primarily due to our amended term loan. For additional information on the loan amendment agreement, please refer to Note 14, Loan Payable, to these financial statements.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income increased by $0.4 million from the prior year. This increase was primarily due to the change in fair value of the derivative liability recorded as of the Incyte Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $439.9 million. Since our inception, our operations have been primarily financed by net proceeds from our IPO, our follow-on stock offerings, our term loan, sale of convertible preferred stock and convertible debt securities and proceeds from our license agreements. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, will fund our projected operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. In addition to our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, we are eligible to receive research and development funding and to earn milestone and other contingent payments for the achievement of defined collaboration objectives and certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones and royalty payments under our collaboration agreements. Our ability to earn these milestone and contingent payments and the timing of achieving these milestones is primarily dependent upon the outcome of our collaborators’ research and development activities and is uncertain at this time.
Loan and Security Agreement
On December 22, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to our existing loan and security agreement, or the First Amendment with the several banks and financial institutions or entities from time-to-time party thereto, or the Lender, and Hercules Capital, Inc., in its capacity as administrative agent for itself and the Lender, or the Agent. The First Amendment amended that certain loan and security Agreement dated as of February 7, 2020, (as amended by the First Amendment, the Loan Agreement), among the Borrower, the Lender and the Agent.
The First Amendment increases the amount that we may borrow by $50.0 million, from up to $30.0 million to up to $80.0 million, in multiple tranches. The First Amendment increases the second tranche, or Tranche 2, from $10.0 million to $30.0 million with $15.0 million being available at our option through April 30, 2022 and another $15.0 million being available at our option through November 30, 2022, which availability period will be extended to April 30, 2023 if the first $15.0 million is drawn prior to April 30, 2022. The First Amendment also provides for a third tranche of $30.0 million, or Tranche 3, which is available, subject to the Agent’s investment committee approval, through an interest-only period. Our only borrowings to date under the Loan Agreement are the first tranche of $20.0 million, which we drew upon the closing of the Loan Agreement on February 7, 2020.
Additionally, the First Amendment, among other things, (i) extended the expiration of the period in which interest-only payments on borrowings under the Loan Agreement are required from October 1, 2021 to January 1, 2023, which is further extendable to December 31, 2023 upon the partial or full draw of Tranche 2, or the Interest-Only Period, (ii) extended the maturity date of Loan Agreement from September 1, 2023 to April 1, 2024, (iii) decreased the annual interest rate from the greater of (w) 9.85% or (x) 5.10% plus the Wall Street Journal prime rate to the greater of (y) 9.25% or (z) 6.00% plus the Wall Street Journal prime rate, (iv) applies a facility charge equal to 0.50% of any future draws, (v) applies a 4.99% end of term charge to any future draws payable on the maturity date, (vi) permits the entry into our collaboration and license agreement as previously disclosed with Incyte Corporation, and (vii) adds a minimum cash covenant applicable on the occurrence of certain events. The First Amendment also resets the prepayment premium requirements as of the date of the First Amendment so that any prepayments are subject to a prepayment premium equal to (i) 2.0% of the principal amount outstanding if the prepayment occurs during the first year following the Loan Amendment, (ii) 1.5% of the principal amount outstanding if the prepayment occurs during the second year following the Loan Amendment, and (iii) 1.0% of the principal amount outstanding at any time thereafter but prior to the maturity date.
Borrowings under the Loan Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our and our subsidiaries personal property and other assets, other than our intellectual property. In addition, the Loan Agreement includes customary affirmative and restrictive covenants and representations and warranties, including a covenant against the occurrence of a “change in control,” financial reporting obligations, and certain limitations on indebtedness, liens (including a negative pledge on intellectual property and other assets), investments, distributions (including dividends), collateral, investments, distributions, transfers, mergers or acquisitions, taxes, corporate changes, and deposit accounts. The Loan Agreement also includes customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of covenants following any applicable cure period, the occurrence of certain events that could reasonably be expected to have a “material adverse effect” as set forth in the Loan Agreement, cross acceleration to third-party indebtedness and certain events relating to bankruptcy or insolvency. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, a default interest rate of an additional 5.0% may be applied to the outstanding principal balance, and Hercules may declare all outstanding obligations immediately due and payable and take such other actions as set forth in the Loan Agreement.
Future Funding Requirements
We believe that our available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and continued access to our term loan are sufficient to fund existing and planned cash requirements. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Additionally, the process of testing drug candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain. We cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of our product candidates;
•
the outcome, timing and cost of seeking and obtaining regulatory approvals from the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities, including the potential for such authorities to require that we perform more trials than we currently expect;
•
the cost to establish, maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with licensing, preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
market acceptance of our product candidates;
•
the cost and timing of selecting, auditing and developing manufacturing capabilities, and potentially validating manufacturing sites for commercial-scale manufacturing;
•
the cost and timing for obtaining pricing and reimbursement, which may require additional trials to address pharmacoeconomic benefit;
•
the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for our product candidates if any product candidate receives regulatory approval and we determine to commercialize it ourselves;
•
the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in additional businesses, products, product candidates and technologies;
•
the diversion of healthcare resources away from the conduct of clinical trials as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the diversion of hospitals serving as our clinical trial sites and hospital staff supporting the conduct of our clinical trials;
•
the interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as clinical trial site monitoring, due to limitations on travel, quarantines or social distancing protocols imposed or recommended by federal or state governments, employers and others in connection with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the cost of disruption to our supply chain and operations, and associated delays in the manufacturing and supply of our products, which would adversely impact our ability to continue our clinical trial operations;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•
our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems, as we grow our company.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any product revenues from product sales to date. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and additional funding from license and collaboration arrangements. Except for any obligations of our collaborators to reimburse us for research and development expenses or to make milestone or royalty payments under our agreements with them, we will not have any committed external source of liquidity.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods. For additional information, see our consolidated financial statements.
(1)
Amounts include the estimated interest under our Term loan based on the interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2021.
(2)
In September 2016, we entered into a new five-year operating lease for office space in Waltham, Massachusetts, with a lease commencement date of March 1, 2017. In August 2021, the Company signed a 36-month extension of the lease for the office space in Waltham. In December 2015, we entered into a 62-month building lease for office space in New York, New York, which commenced on January 1, 2016. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes. In February 2021, we extended the lease for a period of 18 months at $15,000 per month.
(3)
In February 2016, we entered into a five-year non-cancelable operating lease for office equipment. In January 2021, and February 2022, we extended the lease by 12 months.
(4)
In April 2018, we entered into a four-year non-cancelable lease for office equipment, which is accounted for as a capital lease. The leased asset is included in property, plant and equipment, at cost.
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception, excluding year ending December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $543.7 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may raise through a combination of the sale of equity, debt financings, or other sources, including potential collaborations. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or drug candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
At-the-Market Offering Program
In March 2021, we entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, under which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $75.0 million from time to time through Cowen, acting as agent, in a series of one or more ATM equity offerings, or the 2021 ATM Program. Cowen is not required to sell any specific amount but acts as our sales agent using commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices. Shares sold pursuant to the sales agreement will be sold pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 ASR (Registration No. 333-254661), which became automatically effective upon filing on March 24, 2021. Our common stock will be sold at prevailing market prices at the time of the sale; and as a result, prices may vary. As of December 31, 2021, we sold 277,629 shares of common stock under the 2021 ATM Program for net proceeds of approximately $5.1 million.
Cash Flows
The following is a summary of cash flows:
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.1 million and primarily consisted of our net income of $24.9 million adjusted for non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $13.3 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.4 million, an investment amortization of $0.6 million, a decrease in non-cash interest expense associated with the term loan of $0.2 million, a decrease of the
derivative liability associated with the Incyte Agreements of $0.4 million, and a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $9.6 million. The significant items in the decrease in operating assets and liabilities include a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.4 million, an increase in accounts payable of $2.1 million, and a decrease in deferred revenue of $13.1 million partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $2.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $71.3 million and primarily consisted of our net loss of $73.2 million adjusted for non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $9.1 million, non-cash interest expense associated with the term loan of $0.4 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.4 million, an investment amortization of $0.1 million and a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $7.9 million. The significant items in the decrease in operating assets and liabilities include a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $4.3 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $2.7 million, and a decrease in deferred revenue of $1.5 million partially offset by increases in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $0.6 million.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $40.9 million and was primarily due to the purchase of $294.7 million of available-for-sale marketable securities partially offset by $254.0 million in proceeds from the maturities of available-for-sale marketable securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $142.5 million and was primarily due to the purchase of $278.9 million of available-for-sale marketable securities partially offset by $136.4 million in proceeds from the maturities of available-for-sale marketable securities.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $118.5 million and was primarily due to the $24.8 million of proceeds from issuances of common stock for Incyte Agreement, proceeds of $81.2 million from issuance of common stock, $5.1 million of proceeds from an at-the-market offering, $0.6 million of proceeds from the Incyte Agreement allocated to the derivate liability in connection with the side letter, and $6.7 million of proceeds from stock option exercises and ESPP purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $304.4 million and was primarily due to the $242.8 million of proceeds from issuances of common stock, $34.9 million of proceeds from a direct placement offering, $19.7 million of proceeds from the term loan, and $7.0 million of proceeds from stock options exercises and ESPP purchases.
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Tax Credit Carryforwards
December 31, 2021, we had federal and state tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $73.5 million and $34.6 million, respectively. The Company has generated federal NOLs of $48.5 million which have an indefinite carryforward period. The remaining $25.0 million of federal NOLs and the Company’s state NOLs will begin to expire at various dates starting in 2026. At December 31, 2021, we had available income tax credits of approximately $6.6 million, with $4.1 million attributable to Federal R&D Credits and $2.5 million attributable to state R&D Credits, which are available to reduce future income taxes, if any. These income tax credits begin to expire in 2022.
Utilization of the net operating losses and credits may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of our net operating losses and credits before we can use them. We have recorded a valuation allowance on all of our deferred tax assets, including our deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss and research and development tax credit carryforwards.