Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections of this report titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Since our inception, we have sustained significant operating losses in the course of our research and development activities and commercialization efforts and expect such losses to continue for the near future. We have generated limited revenue to date from product sales, research grants and licensing fees received under a former license. We have primarily funded our operations to date through the sale of equity securities, including convertible preferred stock, common stock and warrants to purchase common stock; and debt financing, consisting primarily of convertible notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had received net proceeds of $84.3 million from our sales of common stock, preferred stock and issuance of convertible and other promissory notes, an aggregate of $1.7 million from research grants and licensing fees and an aggregate of $1.5 million in product sales. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $112.5 million and cash and cash equivalents of $9.3 million.
On April 15, 2020, we also received cash proceeds of $645,700 from the Paycheck Protection Program (or “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). We used the proceeds from the PPP Loan to retain employees, maintain payroll and make lease, interest and utility payments. On June 18, 2021, the Company received notification from BMO Harris Bank National Association as the lender in a promissory note pursuant to the CARES Act, that such loan was forgiven in full under the terms of the program.
We have incurred significant operating losses every year since our inception. Our net losses were $8.3 million and $8.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and generate operating losses for at least the next 12 months.
We will need additional funding to continue to fund our operations, achieve profitability and become cash flow positive, we will continue to seek additional financing. If such equity or debt financing is not available at adequate levels or on acceptable terms, we may need to delay, limit or terminate commercialization and development efforts or discontinue operations.
While it is difficult to measure the effect and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the travel and other restrictions that started in March 2020 resulted in a significant slowdown in our proof-of-concept field studies and sales efforts. While we were able to resume field studies in some important projects by mid-year 2020 and initially believed that we would re-start all our most significant field studies as we obtained limited waivers of certain travel bans, we still have delays on certain projects that might remain on hold until certain businesses and government entities return to more normal operations. Continued delays or new restrictions on travel or operations as a result of new outbreaks and variants could impact our results in future quarters. Initially, we believed that pest control would continue through the COVID-19 pandemic as a necessity and we were and have been able to maintain our manufacturing with cautionary, best practices put in place. However, we have concerns about distributor, pest control operator and individual consumer spending as restrictive measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic continue. Extended stay at home orders across the world, whether imposed by governments or individual businesses, have impeded our ability to communicate with current and prospective customers, potentially reducing sales until the orders are lifted. In addition, federal, state and municipal budgets continue to be severely strained as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This may delay or impede their ability to make near term purchases of our products. While we have stocked certain long lead time inventory raw material ingredients, any prolonged impact on the suppliers we rely on for the purchase of these items by the COVID-19 pandemic could impact future manufacturing operations.
We have historically utilized, and intend to continue to utilize, various forms of stock-based awards in order to hire, retain and motivate talented employees, consultants and directors and encourage them to devote their best efforts to our business and financial success. In addition, we believe that our ability to grant stock-based awards is a valuable and necessary compensation tool that aligns the long-term financial interests of our employees, consultants and directors with the financial interests of our stockholders. As a result, a significant portion of our operating expenses includes stock-based compensation expense. Stock-based compensation expense has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy. Specifically, our stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively, which represented 8.3% and 8.1%, respectively, of our total operating expenses for those periods.
Components of our Results of Operations
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue is comprised entirely of grant funding provided by the City of Phoenix, Arizona for jobs created and new employee training in the City of Phoenix, Arizona during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Sales
Sales are comprised primarily of sales, net of discounts and promotions, of ContraPest and related components, to our distributors and customers, as well as consulting and implementation services provided in conjunction with ContraPest deployments.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consist primarily of cost of products sold, including scrap and reserves for obsolescence. We continue to focus on improving our cost structure, with the goals of shifting resources to commercialization, significantly reducing our year-over-year burn rate and achieving a 50% or greater gross margin. Steps have included relocating to more cost-efficient space, organizational restructuring, improving our manufacturing and supply processes and reducing staffing.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the research and development of ContraPest and our other product candidates, which costs include:
● employee related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions, including that portion of manufacturing not included in cost of goods sold;
● expenses incurred in connection with the development of our product candidates including related regulatory and production expenses; and
● facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies.
We expense research and development costs as incurred.
We continue to investigate other applications of our core technology to other product candidates and modifications to our existing products to expand usability, which includes laboratory tests and academic collaborations. We also continue to develop our supply chain, particularly identifying and improving our sourcing of triptolide, a key active ingredient for our product candidates. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs for further development of ContraPest or the cost associated with the development of any of our other product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, sales, marketing and administrative functions. Selling, general and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and audit services.
We plan to continue to utilize various forms of stock-based compensation awards to attract and retain qualified employees. As a result, we anticipate that stock-based compensation expense will continue to represent a significant portion of our selling, general and administrative expenses for the foreseeable future.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest accrued on our finance lease and note commitments.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists primarily of any recognized gains or losses related to the sale of fixed assets. In the year ended December 31, 2021, other income also included the reversal of a payroll benefits accrual from 2019 that was reversed as the liability period had expired.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as a consideration of net operating loss and credit carry forwards, using enacted tax rates in effect for the period in which the differences are expected to impact taxable income. A valuation allowance is established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The Company’s effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 has been affected by the valuation allowance on the Company’s deferred tax assets.
The Company has not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for our net operating losses incurred since inception or for our research and development tax credits generated to date, due to the uncertainty regarding our ability to realize a benefit from these tax attributes in the future. Based on tax return activity through December 31, 2021, the Company has federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $77.2 million and $63.7 million, respectively, not considering any potential Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (“IRC”) Section 382 annual limitation discussed below. The federal loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2029, unless previously utilized. The state loss carryforwards expire in 2041, unless previously utilized. Included in the $77.2 million of federal loss carryforwards are approximately $32.7 million of net operating losses that do not expire due to the tax law changes promulgated in conjunction with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
Additionally, the utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards is subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code od 1986, and similar state tax provisions due to ownership change limitations that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future. These ownership changes limit the amount of net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets that can be utilized to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an ownership change, as defined by Section 382 and 383. results from transactions increasing ownership of certain stockholders or public groups in the stock of the corporation by more than 50 percent points over a three-year period. The Company has not conducted an analysis of an ownership change under section 382. To the extent that a study is completed and an ownership change is deemed to occur, the Company’s net operating losses could be limited
During the quarter ended June 30, 2021, the Company received notification that a loan to the Company under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) in the amount of approximately $646 thousand was forgiven in full pursuant to the PPP program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Section 1106(i) of the CARES Act specifically requires taxpayers to exclude canceled indebtedness from PPP loans from gross income, and accordingly, the debt forgiveness amount is nontaxable to the Company. Subsequent to the passage of the CARES Act, the IRS issued Notice 2020-32, which precludes a deduction for an expense that would otherwise be deductible if the payment results in the forgiveness of a loan, thereby preventing entities from claiming a double tax benefit on the qualifying expenses for PPP loans. On December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act (“CAA”) was signed into law, which reverses existing IRS guidance provided in Notice 2020-32 by allowing taxpayers to fully deduct any business expenses, regardless of whether the expense was paid for using forgiven PPP loan proceeds. None of the other provisions of the CARES Act or CAA had a material impact to the Company’s tax accounts.
Comparison of the Years December 31, 2021 to 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
SENESTECH, INC.
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
(In thousands, except shares and per share data)
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $24,000and was granted for jobs created and related new employee training in the City of Phoenix, Arizona during the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Sales
Sales, shown net of sales discounts and promotions, were $576,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $258,000 for year ended December 31, 2020. Sales increased by $318,000 in 2021 due, in part, to the continued focus of our internet sales initiatives, augmenting our existing pull through sales strategy, where demand from the consumer market encourages, or pulls, resellers and pest management professionals to offer our products, as well as enhanced strategic partnerships and collaborations with key distributors and PMPs. While these initiatives continue to progress, we believe the benefits of these initiatives continue to be impacted by reduced spending by customers due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $356,000, or 61.8% of sales, exclusive of grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $281,000, or 108.9% of sales, exclusive of grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of sales of $75,000 in 2021 is primarily due to higher sales volume offset by lower reserves for obsolete product delivery system supplies of $119,000 and higher scrap expense in 2020. Without the reserve for delivery system supplies, cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been $162,000, or 62.8% of sales.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $244,000, or 42.4% of sales, compared to a gross profit of $1,000, or less than 1% of sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to increased sales and the impact of a reserve for obsolete product delivery system supplies of $119,000 recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been $120,000, or 42.6% of sales, without this reserve.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $460,000 increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase in manufacturing personnel-related costs of $243,000, an increase in professional fees of $162,000, a decrease in facility related expenses of $68,000 and an increase in other research and development expenses of $123,000.
The increase in manufacturing personnel-related costs relative to the same period of 2020, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, in addition to increases in manufacturing and regulatory headcount to meet current and future demand.
The increase in professional fees expenses of $162,000 in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to increased regulatory legal expenses and expenses related to field and regulatory compliance studies.
Facility-related expenses decreased $68,000 primarily due to the expiration of a facility lease of 7,632 square feet of manufacturing space in Flagstaff, Arizona at December 31, 2020 as discussed in Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The year over year increase in other research and development expenses of $123,000 was primarily due to increased expenses related to field and regulatory compliance studies and increased shipping expenses due to higher sales volume during the period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $784,000 in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase of $424,000 in net salary costs, including stock compensation expenses and an increase in other selling, general and administrative expenses of $516,000, offset by a $139,000 reduction in professional fees and a reduction in facility related costs of $17,000.
Net salaries and wages for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $424,000 higher than the same period in 2020, primarily due to recognition of incentive compensation expense for employees of $362,000 and increased stock compensation due to the issuance of certain common stock option awards of $125,000 offset by net headcount reductions in selling and marketing positions due to hiring delays.
The reduction in professional fees was primarily due to reduced legal expenses related to a litigation settlement incurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 that were not incurred in the same period of 2021, partially offset by an increase in professional services expenses relating to legal patent registration filings in the year ended December 31, 2021.
The increase in other selling, general and administrative expenses of $516,000 from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in marketing expenses of $386,000 as a result of costs associated with rebranding activities to highlight our commercial focus and continued on-line marketing program expansion, an increase in travel expenses of $84,000 as a direct result of eased COVID-19 travel restrictions in 2021 that were put in place at the end of March 2020, and an increase in director and officer and other insurance premiums of $75,000, offset by reduced depreciation expense due to certain assets becoming fully depreciated after December 31, 2020.
The decrease in facilities related expenses of $17,000 to $156,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $173,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 is a direct result of the expiration of a facility lease of 7,632 square feet of manufacturing space in Flagstaff, Arizona at December 31, 2020.
Interest Income/Expense, Net
We recorded $7,000 of interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, as opposed to interest expense, net of $25,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense, net of $18,000 was a result of reduced interest expense as a result of finance leases and promissory notes that expired during the year ended December 31, 2021 and increased interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of higher investments in cash invested in money market accounts.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan Forgiveness
PPP loan forgiveness income for the year ended December 31, 2021 represents the forgiveness of a promissory note pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act that we secured under this program
Other Income (Expense), Net
We recorded $21,000 of other income (expense), net for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily represented a payroll benefits accrual from 2019 that was reversed as the liability period had expired. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily represented income recognized for gains on sale of certain fixed assets during the year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have sustained significant operating losses in the course of our research and development activities and commercialization efforts and expect such losses to continue for the near future. We have generated limited revenue to date from product sales, research grants and licensing fees received under a former license. We have primarily funded our operations to date through the sale of equity securities, including convertible preferred stock, common stock and warrants to purchase common stock; and debt financing, consisting primarily of convertible notes.
Through December 31, 2021, we had received net proceeds of $84.3 million from our sales of common stock, preferred stock and issuance of convertible and other promissory notes, an aggregate of $1.7 million from research grants and licensing fees and an aggregate of $1.5 million in product sales. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $112.5 million and cash and cash equivalents of $9.3 million.
As discussed in Note 8 - Borrowings of our Notes to Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, on April 15, 2020, we received cash proceeds of $645,700 from the PPP of the CARES Act. We used the proceeds from the PPP loan to retain employees, maintain payroll and make lease, interest and utility payments. This loan was fully forgiven under terms of the PPP on June 14, 2021.
Our ultimate success depends upon the outcome of a combination of factors, including the following: (i) successful commercialization of ContraPest and maintaining and obtaining regulatory approval of our products and product candidates; (ii) market acceptance, commercial viability and profitability of ContraPest and other products; (iii) the ability to market our products and establish an effective sales force and marketing infrastructure to generate significant revenue; (iv) the success of our research and development; (v) the ability to retain and attract key personnel to develop, operate and grow our business; and (vi) our ability to meet our working capital needs.
Based upon our current operating plan, we expect that cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, in combination with anticipated revenue and any additional sales of our equity securities, will be sufficient to fund our current operations for at least the next 12 months. We have evaluated and will continue to evaluate our operating expenses and will concentrate our resources toward the successful commercialization of ContraPest in the United States. However, if anticipated revenue targets and margin targets are not achieved or expenses are more than we have budgeted, we may need to raise additional financing before that time. If we need more financing, including within the next 12 months, and we are unable to raise the necessary capital through the sale of our securities, we may be required to take other measures that could impair our ability to be successful and operate as a going concern. In any event, we may require additional capital in order to fund our operating losses and research and development activities before we become profitable and may opportunistically raise capital. We may never achieve profitability or generate positive cash flows, and unless and until we do, we will continue to need to raise capital through equity or debt financing. If such equity or debt financing is not available at adequate levels or on acceptable terms, we may need to delay, limit or terminate commercialization and development efforts or discontinue operations.
Additional Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to continue or increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we focus on marketing and sales of ContraPest. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic will likely continue to delay the completion of field studies and achievement of sales, which will further increase our need for financing. In addition, we will continue to incur costs associated with operating as a public company.
In particular, we expect to incur substantial and increased expenses as we:
● work to maximize market acceptance for, and generate sales of, our products, including by conducting field demonstrations at potential lead customers;
● explore strategic partnerships to enable us to penetrate additional target markets and geographical locations;
● manage the infrastructure for sales, marketing and distribution of ContraPest and any other product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval;
● seek additional regulatory approvals for ContraPest, including to more fully expand the market and use for ContraPest and, if we believe there is commercial viability, for our other product candidates;
● further develop our manufacturing processes to contain costs while being able to scale to meet future demand of ContraPest and any other product candidates for which we receive regulatory approval;
● continue product development of ContraPest and advance our research and development activities and, as our operating budget permits, advance the research and development programs for other product candidates;
● maintain and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and commercialization efforts and operations as a public company.
We believe we will need additional financing to fund these continuing and additional expenses.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the years presented:
Operating Activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $7.8 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $8.3 million, offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.1 million and non-cash charges of $0.4 million. Our net loss was primarily attributed to research and development activities and our selling, general and administrative expenses, as we generated limited product sales and grant revenue during the year. Net cash generated by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of a $215,000 increase in accrued expenses and accounts payable and a decrease in other assets of $12,000, offset by increases in net inventories of $56,000, prepaid expenses of $52,000 and a net increase in accounts receivable-trade of $52,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $7.1 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $7.9 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.1 million offset by non-cash charges of $0.9 million. Our net loss was primarily attributed to research and development activities and our selling, general and administrative expenses, as we generated limited product sales and no research grant and licensing revenue during the year. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a decrease in accrued expenses and accounts payable of $524,000 offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses of $79,000, a decrease in inventories of $235,000 and a net increase in accounts receivable and other assets of $127,000.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $99,000 of cash in investing activities, which consisted of $100,000 for the purchases of property and equipment, offset by $1,000 of cash received on the sales of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $67,000 of cash in investing activities, which consisted of $114,000 for the purchases of property and equipment, offset by $47,000 of cash received on the sales of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $13.6 million as a result of $12.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and $1.3 million in proceeds from warrant exercises, partially offset by $135,000 of repayments related to notes payable and finance lease obligations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $8.9 million as a result of $5.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, $2.6 million in proceeds from warrant exercises and $646,000 from the issuance of notes payable, partially offset by $110,000 of repayments related to notes payable, finance lease obligations and payment of employee withholding taxes related to share-based awards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue from the commercial sales of products, licensing agreements and contracts to perform pilot studies by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied. For the comparative periods, revenue has not been adjusted and continues to be reported under ASC 605 - Revenue Recognition (“ASC 605”). Under ASC 605, revenue is recognized when the following criteria are met: (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; (2) the performance of service has been rendered to a customer or delivery has occurred; (3) the amount of the fee to be paid by a customer is fixed and determinable; and (4) the collectability of the fee is reasonably assured. The performance obligations identified by us under ASC 606 are straightforward and similar to the unit of account and performance obligation determination under ASC Topic 605, Revenue Recognition.
We recognize revenue when product is shipped at a fixed selling price on payment terms of 30 to 120 days from invoicing. We recognize other revenue earned from pilot studies, consulting and implementation services upon the performance of specific services under the respective service contract.
We derive revenue primarily from commercial sales of products, net of discounts and promotions, as well as consulting and implementation services provided in conjunction with our product deployments.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock options granted to employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of estimated forfeitures, in accordance with ASC Topic 718 - Stock Compensation. We estimate the grant date fair value of the awards, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of stock-based awards is expensed on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the respective award.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of approximately $765,000 and $645,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to grant stock options and other equity-based awards, such as restricted stock units, in the future and to continue to recognize stock-based compensation expense in future periods.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, net loss and loss per share of common stock could have been significantly different. Our assumptions are as follows:
● Expected term. The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. Our historical share option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term because of a lack of sufficient data. Therefore, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method, which calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
● Expected volatility. Expected volatility is derived from the average historical volatilities of publicly traded companies within our industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period approximately equal to the expected term. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar public companies unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
● Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term.
● Expected dividend. The expected dividend is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
● Expected forfeitures. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. To the extent actual forfeitures differ from the estimates, the difference will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period that the estimates are revised.
Significant Factors, Assumptions and Methodologies Used in Determining Fair Value of Our Common Stock
As noted above, we are required to estimate the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards when performing the fair value calculations using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If we had made different assumptions than those used, the amount of our stock-based compensation expense, net income and net income per share amounts could have been significantly different. The fair value per share of our common stock for purposes of determining stock-based compensation expense is the closing price of our common stock as reported on the applicable grant date. The compensation cost that has been included in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss for all stock-based compensation arrangements is as follows:
The intrinsic value of stock options outstanding as of December 31, 2021 is $0.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.