Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Our Business Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing products to treat rare diseases where there is an unmet medical need. We maintain two active business segments: Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions.
Our Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment is developing and moving toward potential commercialization of HyBryte™ (a proposed proprietary name of HyBryte™ or synthetic hypericin), a novel PDT, utilizing topical synthetic hypericin activated with safe visible light for the treatment of CTCL. With a successful Phase 3 study completed, regulatory approval is being sought and commercialization activities for this product candidate are being advanced initially in the U.S. Development programs in this business segment also include our first-in-class IDR technology, dusquetide (SGX942) for the treatment of inflammatory diseases, including oral mucositis in head and neck cancer, and proprietary formulations of oral BDP for the prevention/treatment of GI disorders characterized by severe inflammation including pediatric Crohn’s disease (SGX203).
Our Public Health Solutions business segment includes active development programs for RiVax®, our ricin toxin vaccine candidate and SGX943, our therapeutic candidate for antibiotic resistant and emerging infectious disease and our vaccine programs targeting filoviruses (such as Marburg and Ebola) and CiVax™, our vaccine candidate for the prevention of COVID-19 (caused by SARS-CoV-2). The development of our vaccine programs incorporates the use of our proprietary heat stabilization platform technology, known as ThermoVax®. To date, this business segment has been supported with government grant and contract funding from NIAID, BARDA and DTRA.
An outline of our business strategy follows:
● Following positive primary endpoint results for the Phase 3 clinical trial of HyBryte™, as well as further statistically significant improvement in response rates with longer treatment (18 weeks compared to 12 and 6 weeks of treatment), pursue New Drug Application (“NDA”) filing and commercialization in the U.S. while continuing to explore ex-U.S. partnership.
● Expand development of synthetic hypericin under the research name SGX302 into psoriasis following the positive Phase 3 FLASH study and positive proof-of-concept demonstrated in a small Phase 1/2 pilot study in mild-to-moderate psoriasis patients.
● Following feedback from the United Kingdom (“UK”) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (“MHRA”) that the SGX942 Phase 3 DOM-INNATE (Dusquetide treatment in Oral Mucositis - by modulating INNATE Immunity) clinical trial, having missed its primary endpoint, would not support a potential marketing authorization and that a second Phase 3 study would be needed, analyze the DOM-INNATE study full dataset and design a second Phase 3 study; attempt to identify a potential partner(s) to continue this development program.
● Continue development of our therapeutic SGX943 and our heat stabilization platform technology, ThermoVax®, in combination with our programs for RiVax® (ricin toxin vaccine), CiVax™ (COVID-19 vaccine) and filovirus vaccines (targeting Ebola, Sudan, and Marburg viruses), with U.S. government funding support. Continue to apply for and secure additional government funding for each of our Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions programs through grants, contracts and/or procurements.
● Pursue business development opportunities for our pipeline programs, as well as explore merger/acquisition strategies.
● Acquire or in-license new clinical-stage compounds for development, as well as evaluate new indications with existing pipeline compounds for development.
Corporate Information
We were incorporated in Delaware in 1987 under the name Biological Therapeutics, Inc. In 1987, we merged with Biological Therapeutics, Inc., a North Dakota corporation, pursuant to which we changed our name to “Immunotherapeutics, Inc.” We changed our name to “Endorex Corp.” in 1996, to “Endorex Corporation” in 1998, to “DOR BioPharma, Inc.” in 2001, and finally to “Soligenix, Inc.” in 2009. Our principal executive offices are located at 29 Emmons Drive, Suite B-10, Princeton, New Jersey 08540 and our telephone number is (609) 538-8200.
Our Product Candidates in Development
The following tables summarize our product candidates under development:
Specialized BioTherapeutics Product Candidates*
Public Health Solutions*†
*
Timelines subject to potential disruption due to COVID-19 outbreak.
†
Contingent upon continued government contract/grant funding or other funding source.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are primarily generated from government contracts and grants. The revenue from government contracts and grants is based upon subcontractor costs and internal costs incurred that are specifically covered by the contracts and grants, plus a facilities and administrative rate that provides funding for overhead expenses and management fees. These revenues are recognized when expenses have been incurred by subcontractors or when we incur reimbursable internal expenses that are related to the government contracts and grants.
Research and Development Costs
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contract and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● contract research organizations (“CROs”) in connection with performing research activities on our behalf and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf;
● investigative sites or other service providers in connection with clinical trials;
● vendors in connection with preclinical and clinical development activities; and
● vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites active and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions such as the fair value of stock options and to accrue for clinical trials in process that affect the reported amounts in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Material Changes in Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $12,550,973 as compared to a net loss of $17,688,522 for the prior year, representing a decreased loss of $5,137,549 or 29%. The decrease in net loss is primarily due to the additional costs in 2020 relating to the issuance of $5,000,000 worth of fully vested shares of common stock to Hy Biopharma, Inc. (“Hy Biopharma”) in connection with the achievement of a development milestone. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had revenues of $824,268 as compared to $2,359,447 for the prior year, representing a decrease of $1,535,179 or 65%. The decrease in revenues was primarily a result of the finalization of the Rivax® contract and oral mucositis grant.
We incurred costs related to contract and grant revenues in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $728,640 and $1,820,949, respectively, representing a decrease of $1,092,309 or 60%. The decrease in costs was primarily the result of grants being fully utilized.
Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $95,628 or 12% as compared to $538,498 or 23% of total revenues for the prior year, representing a decrease of $442,870 or 82%. The decrease in revenues and gross profit were primarily the result of the conclusion of the CTCL study.
Research and development expenses decreased by $1,406,780 or 14% to $8,389,387 for year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $9,796,167 for the prior year. The decrease in research and development spending for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the conclusion of the CTCL and oral mucositis Phase 3 studies.
General and administrative expenses increased by $518,288 or 12%, to $4,847,126 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4,328,838 for the prior year. This increase is primarily related to an increase in legal fees associated with the Emergent arbitration partially offset by a decrease in company headcount.
Research and development milestone expense decreased by $5,000,000 or 100%, to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5,000,000 for the prior year. The decrease is due to the issuance of $5,000,000 worth of fully vested shares of common stock to Hy Biopharma in connection with the achievement of a development milestone in 2020.
Other expense and income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $274,830 of expense as compared to $61,092 of income for the prior year, reflecting a decrease of $335,922 or 550%. The decrease was primarily due to a full year of interest expense in 2021 on the Pontifax convertible debt agreement partially offset by the gain on forgiveness of the PPP loan, an increase in research and development tax incentives and an insurance reimbursement.
The State of New Jersey’s Technology Business Tax Certificate Program allows certain high technology and biotechnology companies to sell unused NOL carryforwards to other New Jersey-based corporate taxpayers. We sold NOLs resulting in the recognition of income tax benefits of $864,742 and $836,893 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have applied for and received preliminary confirmation for NOLs related to the year ended December 31, 2020 in the amount of $1,154,935, which will not be recognized until a certificate for the refund is received. We have not yet sold our 2021 New Jersey NOLs but may do so in the future. We will continue to explore opportunities to sell unused NOL carryforwards for the year ended December 31, 2021. However, there can be no assurance as to the continuation or magnitude of this program in future years.
Business Segments
We maintain two active business segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020: Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions.
There were no revenues for the Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $117,369 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $117,369 or 100%. The decrease was due to there being no reimbursable development activity under the oral mucositis juvenile toxicology grant to support the evaluation of SGX942 (dusquetide) in pediatric indications during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenues for the Public Health Solutions business segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $824,268 as compared to $2,242,078 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $1,417,810 or 63%. The decrease in revenues was primarily the result of grants and contracts coming to an end during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss from operations for the Public Health Solutions business segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $647,600 as compared to $85,417 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increased loss of $562,183 or 658%. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 is attributable to the expiration of grants and contracts to offset research and development spending. Loss from operations for the Specialized BioTherapeutics business segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7,280,936 as compared to $13,610,715 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decreased loss of $6,329,779 or 47%. This is primarily attributed to no expenses incurred in fiscal year 2021 for patient enrollments due to the Phase 3 clinical trial of HyBryte™ and the $5,000,000 Hy Biopharma milestone expense in 2020.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
Cash and Working Capital
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $26,043,897 as compared to $18,676,663 as of December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $7,367,234 or 39%. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $20,278,345, representing an increase of $6,891,860 as compared to working capital of $13,386,485 for the prior year. The increase in cash and cash equivalents and working capital was primarily related to our usage of the At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (“B. Riley Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. (“B. Riley”) offset by loan proceeds from Pontifax Medison Finance received in December 2020.
Based on our current rate of cash outflows, cash on hand, proceeds from government contract and grant programs, cash available from the loan from Pontifax Medison Finance, and proceeds available from the B. Riley Sales Agreement, management believes that its current cash will be sufficient to meet the anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months from issuance of the financial statements.
Our plans with respect to our liquidity management include, but are not limited to, the following:
● We have up to $1.35 million in active government grant funding still available as of December 31, 2021 to support our associated research programs through November 2022, provided the federal agencies do not elect to terminate the grants for convenience. We plan to submit additional contract and grant applications for further support of our programs with various funding agencies. However, there can be no assurance that we will obtain additional governmental grant funding;
● We have continued to use equity instruments to provide a portion of the compensation due to vendors and collaboration partners and expect to continue to do so for the foreseeable future;
● We will continue to pursue NOL sales in the state of New Jersey pursuant to its Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program if the program is available;
● We plan to pursue potential partnerships for pipeline programs; however, there can be no assurances that we can consummate such transactions;
● We have up to $26.8 million remaining from the B. Riley Sales Agreement as of March 22, 2022 under the prospectus supplement updated August 28, 2020; and
● We may seek additional capital in the private and/or public equity markets, pursue government contracts and grants as well as business development activities, to continue our operations, respond to competitive pressures, develop new products and services, and to support new strategic partnerships. We are currently evaluating additional equity/debt financing opportunities on an ongoing basis and may execute them when appropriate. However, there can be no assurances that we can consummate such a transaction, or consummate a transaction at favorable pricing.
Expenditures
Under our budget and based upon our existing product development agreements and license agreements pursuant to letters of intent and option agreements, we expect our total research and development expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2022 to be approximately $12.9 million before any contract or grant reimbursements, of which $11.7 million relates to the Specialized BioTherapeutics business and $1.2 million relates to the Public Health Solutions business. We anticipate contract and grant reimbursements for the same period of approximately $1.3 million to offset research and development expenses in the Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions business segments.
The table below details our costs for research and development by program and amounts reimbursed for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Contractual Obligations
We have licensing fee commitments of approximately $100,000 per year for the next five years for several licensing agreements with entities, consultants and universities. Additionally, we have collaboration and license agreements, which upon clinical or commercialization success may require the payment of milestones of up to $7.9 million and/or royalties up to 6% of net sales of covered products, if and when achieved. However, there can be no assurance that clinical or commercialization success will occur.
We currently lease approximately 6,200 square feet of office space at 29 Emmons Drive, Suite B-10 in Princeton, New Jersey pursuant to a lease that expires in to October 2022. This office space currently serves as our corporate headquarters, and both of our business segments (Specialized BioTherapeutics and Public Health Solutions), operate from this space. The rent for the remainder of the term will be $11,108, or approximately $21.50 per square foot. Our office space is sufficient to satisfy our current needs.
In September 2014, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Hy Biopharma pursuant to which we acquired certain intangible assets, properties and rights of Hy Biopharma related to the development of Hy BioPharma’s synthetic hypericin product. As consideration for the assets acquired, we initially paid $275,000 in cash and issued 184,912 shares of common stock with a fair value based upon our stock price on the date of grant of $3,750,000. These amounts were charged to research and development expense during the third quarter of 2014 as the assets will be used in our research and development activities and do not have alternative future use pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S.
In January 2020, our Board of Directors authorized an amendment to Dr. Schaber’s employment agreement to increase the number of shares of common stock from 5,000 to 500,000, issuable to Dr. Schaber immediately prior to the completion of a transaction, or series or a combination of related transactions, negotiated by our Board of Directors whereby, directly or indirectly, a majority of our capital stock or a majority of our assets are transferred from us and/or our stockholders to a third party.
In March 2020, we filed a prospectus supplement covering the offer and sale of up to 1,956,182 shares of our common stock, which were issued to Hy Biopharma. We were required to issue the shares to Hy Biopharma as payment following the achievement of a milestone under the asset purchase agreement, specifically, the Phase 3 clinical trial of HyBryte™ being successful in the treatment of CTCL. The number of shares of our common stock issued to Hy Biopharma was calculated using an effective price of $2.56 per share, based upon a formula set forth in the asset purchase agreement.
Provided the final success-oriented milestone is attained, we will be required to make a payment of up to $5.0 million, if and when achieved. The potential future payment will be payable in our common stock, not to exceed 19.9% of our outstanding stock.
In December 2020, we entered into a $20 million convertible debt financing agreement with Pontifax Medison Finance (“Pontifax”), the healthcare-dedicated venture and debt fund of the Pontifax life science funds. Under the terms of the agreement with Pontifax, we have access to up to $20 million in convertible debt financing in three tranches, which will mature on June 15, 2025 and have an interest only period through December 2022 with a rate of 8.47% on borrowed amounts and a 1% rate on amounts available but not borrowed. Upon the closing of this transaction, we borrowed the first tranche of $10 million. We did not utilize our option to draw the second or third tranche of $5 million each, which expired on December 15, 2021 and March 15, 2022, respectively. Interest expense incurred and paid in 2021 totaled $894,808 and $668,715, respectively.
Pontifax may elect to convert the outstanding loan drawn under the first tranche into shares of our common stock at any time prior to repayment at a conversion price of $4.10 per share. We also have the ability to force the conversion of the loan into shares of our common stock, subject to certain conditions.
CARES Act Loan
On April 13, 2020, we were advised that one of our principal banks, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., had approved a $417,830 loan (the “Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act that was signed into law on March 27, 2020.
As a U.S. small business, we qualified for the PPP, which allows businesses and nonprofits with fewer than 500 employees to obtain loans of up to $10 million to incentivize companies to maintain their workers as they manage the business disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The PPP provides for loans for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The PPP loan proceeds may be used for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities.
The Loan had a term of two years, was unsecured, and was guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The Loan bore interest at a fixed rate of 0.98% per annum, with interest and principal deferred during the eight-week or twenty-four-week period following the Loan origination date (“the loan forgiveness period”) and subsequent 10 months. Some or all of the Loan was eligible for forgiveness if at least 60% of the Loan proceeds were used by us to cover payroll costs, including benefits and if we maintained our employment and compensation within certain parameters during the loan forgiveness period and complied with other relevant conditions. We used the proceeds for purposes consistent with the PPP and met the conditions for forgiveness of the Loan.
On June 29, 2021, the SBA and JPMorgan notified us that the entire balance of this note has been forgiven. We recorded the forgiveness of the principal and accrued interest of $421,584 as a gain on forgiveness in other income on the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Contingencies
We follow subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to us but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. A liability is only recorded if management determines that it is both probable and reasonably estimable.
COVID-19
Based on the current outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, the pathogen responsible for COVID-19, which has already had an impact on financial markets, there could be additional repercussions to our operating business, including but not limited to, the sourcing of materials for product candidates, manufacture of supplies for preclinical and/or clinical studies, delays in clinical operations, which may include the availability or the continued availability of patients for trials due to such things as quarantines, conduct of patient monitoring and clinical trial data retrieval at investigational study sites.
The continued global spread of COVID-19 has affected our operations but did not have a material impact on our business, operating results, financial condition or cash flows as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021. In particular, due to delays by our third party commercial active pharmaceutical ingredient contract manufacturer of HyBryte™ we are unable to provide the pre-requisite amount of accrued stability data required to file the HyBryte™ NDA with the FDA by the first half of 2022. Therefore, the timeline for anticipated NDA filing with the FDA is being adjusted to the second half of 2022 with corresponding potential FDA approval adjusted to the second half of 2023.
The future impact of the outbreak is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, and we cannot provide any assurance that the outbreak will not have a material adverse impact on our operations or future results or filings with regulatory health authorities. The extent of the impact to us, if any, will depend on future developments, including actions taken to contain the coronavirus.
Emergent BioSolutions Legal Proceedings
In July 2020, we filed a demand for arbitration against Emergent BioSolutions, Inc. (“Emergent”) and certain of its subsidiaries with the American Arbitration Association in Mercer County, New Jersey. We allege in the arbitration various breaches of contracts and warranties as well as acts of fraud. Emergent has answered that demand for arbitration denying the allegations and asserting affirmative defenses. (see Part I, Item 3 - Legal Proceedings).
We are seeking to recover damages in excess of $19 million from Emergent. While we intend to vigorously pursue this arbitration, we cannot offer any assurances that we will recover any damages from Emergent.
We have received invoices from Emergent related to the above matter. No accrual has been made for these invoices as management deems them invalid and not probable of being required to pay them based on the numerous breaches cited in the pending arbitration. These invoices total approximately $331,000.