Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the summary of significant accounting policies and notes included herein this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” that reflect our future plans, estimates, forecasts, guidance, beliefs and expected performance. The “forward-looking statements” are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these “forward-looking statements”. Please read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a publicly-traded limited partnership formed in 2005 focused on the acquisition, development and ownership of infrastructure critical to the transition of energy supply to lower carbon sources. We own natural gas gathering systems, pipelines, and processing facilities in South Texas and continue to pursue energy transition infrastructure opportunities. Our common units are currently listed on the NYSE American under the symbol “SNMP.”
On February 26, 2021, in connection with our management team’s focus on expanding our business strategy to focus on the ongoing energy transition in the industries in which we operate, we changed our name to Evolve Transition Infrastructure LP and our general partner changed its name to Evolve Transition Infrastructure GP LLC.
Business Updates
Please read the following subsections contained in “Part I, Item 1. Business” of this Form 10-K for a discussion regarding material updates to our business and operations during the year ended December 31, 2021: “COVID-19,” “Our Relationship with Mesquite,” “Execution of Energy Transition Strategy,” “2021 Upstream Divestitures” and “Our Relationship with Stonepeak.”
Business Strategy
Our primary business objective is to create long-term value by generating stable and predictable cash flows that allow us to reduce the amount of our indebtedness and pursue energy transition infrastructure opportunities. We plan to achieve this objective by executing the following business strategy:
● grow our business through the acquisition and development of infrastructure critical to the transition of energy supply to lower carbon sources;
● pursue organic investments in our existing operating areas to support growth;
● pursue strategic relationships with third-party producers and other companies with operations in the area in which we operate in order to maximize the utilization of our midstream facilities or provide other revenue-generating services; and
● maintain financial flexibility and a strong capital structure.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our business on the basis of the following key measures:
● our throughput volumes on gathering systems upon those assets;
● our operating expenses; and
● our Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure (for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP financial measure please read “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA”).
Throughput Volumes
Our management analyzes our performance based on the aggregate amount of throughput volumes on the gathering system. We must connect additional wells or well pads within Mesquite’s Catarina Asset, which is in Dimmit, La Salle and Webb counties in Texas, in order to maintain or increase throughput volumes on Western Catarina Midstream. Our success in connecting additional wells is impacted by successful drilling activity by Mesquite on the acreage dedicated to Western Catarina Midstream, our ability to secure volumes from Mesquite or third parties from new wells drilled on non-dedicated acreage, our ability to attract hydrocarbon volumes currently gathered by our competitors and our ability to cost-effectively construct or acquire new infrastructure. Construction of the Seco Pipeline was completed in August 2017, however, Mesquite does not currently transport any volumes on the Seco Pipeline following termination of the Seco Pipeline Transportation Agreement, effective February 12, 2020. Future throughput volumes on the pipeline are dependent on execution of a new transportation agreement with Mesquite or execution of an agreement with a third party.
Operating Expenses
Our management seeks to maximize Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, in part by minimizing operating expenses. These expenses are, or will be, comprised primarily of field operating costs (which generally consists of labor, vehicles, supervision, transportation, minor maintenance, tools and supplies expenses, among other items), compression expense, ad valorem taxes and other operating costs, some of which will be independent of the throughput volumes on the midstream gathering system, but fluctuate depending on the scale of our operations during a specific period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Adjusted EBITDA
To supplement our financial results and guidance presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we use Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, in this Form 10-K. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures are helpful in understanding our past financial performance and potential future results, particularly in light of the effect of various transactions effected by us. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted by: (i) interest (income) expense, net, which includes interest expense, interest expense net (gain) loss on interest rate derivative contracts, and interest (income); (ii) income tax expense (benefit); (iii) depreciation, depletion and amortization; (iv) asset impairments; (v) accretion expense; (vi) (gain) loss on sale of assets; (vii) unit-based compensation expense; (viii) unit-based asset management fees; (ix) distributions in excess of equity earnings; (x) (gain) loss on mark-to-market activities; (xi) commodity derivatives settled early; (xii) (gain) loss on embedded derivatives; and (xiii) acquisition and divestiture costs. Please note that the gathering and transportation lease revenues utilized to determine net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 do not net out the approximately $16.2 million of such revenues that have not been collected from Mesquite.
Adjusted EBITDA is used as a quantitative standard by our management and by external users of our financial statements such as investors, research analysts, our lenders and others to assess: (i) the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis; (ii) the ability of our assets to generate cash sufficient to pay interest costs and support our indebtedness; and (iii) our operating performance and return on capital as compared to those of other companies in our industry, without regard to financing or capital structure.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net income (loss). Our non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to GAAP net income (loss). Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as an analytical tool because it excludes some but not all items that affect net income (loss). Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because Adjusted EBITDA may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing its utility.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), its most directly comparable GAAP performance measure, for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Significant Operational Factors
Throughput. The following table sets forth selected throughput data pertaining to the Midstream segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the selected financial and operating data pertaining to our continuing operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
(a) Variances deemed to be Not Meaningful “NM.”
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gathering and transportation lease revenues. Gathering and transportation lease revenues increased approximately $6.8 million, or 15%, to approximately $51.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $44.7 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily the result of an increase in the rate charged for hydrocarbons transported on Western Catarina Midstream that was produced from outside the dedicated acreage under the Gathering Agreement, effective as of July 1, 2021. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in throughput. As discussed in “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” SN Catarina has failed to pay the increased rate for the throughput outside the dedicated acreage. For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately $16.2 million of the gathering and transportation lease revenues are associated with the rate increase.
Transportation operating expenses. Our transportation operating expenses generally consist of equipment rentals, chemicals, treating, metering fees, permit and regulatory fees, labor, minor maintenance, tools, supplies and pipeline integrity management expenses and ad valorem taxes. Our transportation operating expenses decreased by approximately $1.7 million, or 17%, to approximately $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately $10.2 million for the same period in 2020. This decrease was due to the nature of operating expenses being dependent on throughput.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses include indirect costs billed by SP Holdings in connection with the Shared Services Agreement, field office expenses, professional fees and other costs not
directly associated with field operations. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $8.2 million, or 45%, to approximately $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately $18.3 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily the result of the mark-to-market impact on indirect costs billed in connection with the Shared Services Agreement of approximately $9.2 million due to the volatility in the market price of our common units during the period. This decrease was partially offset by bad debt expenses of approximately $1.9 million. Cash general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $10.1 million compared to approximately $10.9 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease in cash general and administrative expenses was primarily the result of lower professional fees when compared to the professional fees attributable to negotiation of the Settlement Agreement and related agreements with Mesquite during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Unit-based compensation expense. Unit-based compensation expense decreased approximately $1.6 million, or 63%, to approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $2.6 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease is due to awards vesting during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Gathering and transportation assets are stated at historical acquisition cost, net of any impairments, and are depreciated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the assets, which range from five to 15 years for equipment and up to 36 years for gathering facilities. Our depreciation and amortization expense was consistent for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense consists of distributions on the Class C Preferred Units, non-cash accretion of the discount on the Class C Preferred Units, the non-cash change in fair value of the Stonepeak Warrant and cash interest expense from borrowings under the Credit Agreement. Interest expense increased approximately $7.1 million, or 18%, to approximately $113.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately $95.9 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was the result of an increase in the number of junior securities deemed outstanding causing the Stonepeak Warrant value to increase and higher distributions on the Class C Preferred Units. Cash interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $2.6 million compared to approximately $5.2 million for the same period in 2020. This decrease is due to a decrease in the debt balance outstanding under the Credit Agreement between the periods.
Loss (earnings) from equity investment. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the loss from our equity method investment was approximately $54.1 million compared to earnings of approximately $4.5 million for the same period in 2020. During 2021, an impairment of approximately $55.0 million was recorded as a result of lower expectations regarding volumes and rates associated with the renewal of future expiring contracts and negotiation of new contracts. Excluding this impairment, our earnings from equity method investment was approximately $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was the result of lower margins.
Other income, net. Other income, net includes the mark-to-market impact of the Nuvve Holding Warrants as well as other expenses and income not associated with our operations. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $0.6 million compared to $71 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary income for the year ended December 31, 2021, relates to the mark-to-market impact of the Nuvve Holding Warrants which we received in May 2021.
Income tax (benefit) expense. Income tax benefit was approximately $5 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an expense of approximately $159 thousand for the same period in 2020. The decrease in income tax expense resulted from a decrease in taxable margin over the comparable periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and $5.0 million available for borrowing under the Credit Agreement in effect on such date, as discussed further below.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we paid approximately $2.6 million and approximately $5.2 million, respectively, in cash for interest on borrowings under our Credit Agreement.
Our capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 were funded with cash on hand. In the future, capital and liquidity are anticipated to be provided by operating cash flows, borrowings under our Credit Agreement and proceeds from the issuance of additional debt, additional common units or other limited partner interests. We expect that the combination of these capital resources will be adequate to meet our short-term working capital requirements and long-term capital expenditures program. However, there can be no assurance that operations and other capital resources will provide cash in sufficient amounts to maintain our current debt level, planned levels of capital expenditures, operating expenses or any cash distributions that we may make to unitholders.
While we cannot predict the duration or complete financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and volatile market conditions, we believe that our balances of cash, cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, borrowings under the Credit Agreement and potential issuances of securities will be sufficient to satisfy cash requirements over the next twelve months, including relating to working capital, amortizing debt payments on the Term Loan, and maintenance and expansion capital expenditures. However, there can be no assurance that operations and other capital resources will provide cash in sufficient amounts to maintain our current debt level, planned levels of capital expenditures, operating expenses.
Credit Agreement
The Credit Agreement provides a quarterly amortizing term loan of $65.0 million (the “Term Loan”) and a maximum revolving credit amount of $5.0 million (the “Revolving Loan”). The Term Loan and Revolving Loan both have a maturity date of September 30, 2023. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by various mortgages of midstream properties that we own as well as various security and pledge agreements among us, certain of our subsidiaries and the administrative agent.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are available for limited direct investment in midstream properties, acquisitions, and working capital and general business purposes. The Credit Agreement has a sub-limit of up to $2.5 million which may be used for the issuance of letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had $49.2 million of debt outstanding, consisting of $49.2 million under the Term Loan with no balance outstanding under the Revolving Loan. We are required to make mandatory amortizing payments of outstanding principal on the Term Loan of (i) $3.0 million per fiscal quarter commencing with the quarter ending December 31, 2021, and (ii) $2.0 million per fiscal quarter commencing with the quarter ending March 31, 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we have met our mandatory amortizing payments of outstanding principal on the Term Loan through March 2022. The maximum revolving credit amount is $5.0 million leaving us with $5.0 million in unused borrowing capacity. There were no letters of credit outstanding under our Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
At our election, interest for borrowings under the Credit Agreement are determined by reference to (i) the LIBOR plus an applicable margin between 2.75% and 3.50% per annum based on net debt to EBITDA or (ii) a domestic bank rate (“ABR”) plus an applicable margin between 1.75% and 2.50% per annum based on net debt to EBITDA plus (iii) a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum based on the unutilized portion of the Revolving Loan. Interest on the borrowings for ABR loans and the commitment fee are generally payable quarterly. Interest on the borrowings for LIBOR loans are generally payable at the applicable maturity date.
The Credit Agreement contains various covenants that limit, among other things, our ability to incur certain indebtedness, grant certain liens, merge or consolidate, sell all or substantially all of our assets, make certain loans, acquisitions, capital expenditures and investments, and pay distributions to unitholders.
In addition, we are required to maintain the following financial covenants:
● current assets to current liabilities, excluding any current maturities of debt, of at least 1.0 to 1.0 at all times; and
● senior secured net debt to consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the last twelve months, as of the last day of any fiscal quarter, of not greater than 3.25 to 1.00.
The Credit Agreement also includes customary events of default, including events of default relating to non-payment of principal, interest or fees, inaccuracy of representations and warranties when made or when deemed made, violation of covenants, cross-defaults, bankruptcy and insolvency events, certain unsatisfied judgments, loan documents not being valid and a change in control. A change in control is generally defined as the occurrence of one of the following events: (i) our existing general partner ceases to be our sole general partner or (ii) certain specified persons shall cease to own more than 50% of the equity interests of our general partner or shall cease to control our general partner. If an event of default occurs, the lenders will be able to accelerate the maturity of the Credit Agreement and exercise other rights and remedies.
Our partnership agreement prohibits us from paying any distributions on our common units until we have redeemed all of the Class C Preferred Units. Following such redemption, the Credit Agreement further limits our ability to pay distributions to unitholders.
At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants contained in the Credit Agreement. We monitor compliance on an ongoing basis. If we are unable to remain in compliance with the financial covenants contained in our Credit Agreement or maintain the required ratios discussed above, the lenders could call an event of default and accelerate the outstanding debt under the terms of the Credit Agreement, such that our outstanding debt could become then due and payable. We may request waivers of compliance from the violated financial covenants from the lenders, but there is no assurance that such waivers would be granted.
Sources of Debt and Equity Financing
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $49.2 million of debt outstanding under the Term Loan with no balance outstanding under the Revolving Loan, leaving us with approximately $5.0 million in unused borrowing capacity. There were no letters of credit outstanding under our Credit Agreement at December 31, 2021. Our Credit Agreement matures on September 30, 2023.
Operating Cash Flows
We had net cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, of approximately $31.0 million, compared to net cash flows provided by operating activities of approximately $37.9 million for the same period in 2020. This decrease was primarily related to the decrease in throughput between the periods.
Our operating cash flows are subject to many variables, the most significant of which is the volume of oil and natural gas transported through our midstream assets. Our future operating cash flows will depend on oil and natural gas transported through our midstream assets.
Investing Activities
We had net cash flows provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, of approximately $15.4 million, substantially all of which were proceeds from the sale of oil and natural gas properties.
Our net cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $1.9 million, consisting of approximately $1.8 million related to midstream activities, including pipeline construction, and contributions to Carnero JV totaling approximately $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows used in financing activities was approximately $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repaid $61.8 million of borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Net cash flows used in financing activities were approximately $39.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $39.0 million of borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
Credit Markets and Counterparty Risk
We actively monitor the credit exposure and risks associated with our counterparties. Additionally, we continue to monitor global credit markets to limit our potential exposure to credit risk where possible. Our primary credit exposures result from the generation of substantially all of our midstream revenues from a single customer, Mesquite.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The most significant estimates pertain to proved oil and natural gas reserves and related cash flow estimates used in the calculation of depletion and impairment of oil and natural gas properties, the fair value of commodity derivative contracts and asset retirement obligations, accrued oil and natural gas revenues and expenses and the allocation of general and administrative expenses. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
The policies disclosed included the accounting for oil and natural gas properties, oil and natural gas reserve quantities, revenue recognition and hedging activities. Please read Note 2 “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of additional accounting policies and estimates made by management.
Gathering and Transportation Assets
Gathering and transportation assets, are stated at historical acquisition cost, net of any impairments, and are depreciated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the assets, which range from three to 15 years for furniture and equipment, up to 36 years for gathering facilities, and up to 40 years for transportation assets.
Estimated asset retirement costs are recognized when the asset is acquired or placed in service, and are amortized over the useful life of the asset. Asset retirement costs are estimated by our engineers using existing regulatory requirements and anticipated future inflation rates.
We perform a periodic assessment of gathering and transportation assets to identify facts and circumstances, or triggering events, that indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Asset recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying value of the asset or asset group with its expected future pre-tax undiscounted cash flows. These cash flow estimates require us to make projections and assumptions for many years into the future for pricing, demand, competition, operating cost and other factors. If the carrying amount exceeds the expected future undiscounted cash flows, we recognize an impairment equal to the excess of net book value over fair value. The determination of the fair value using present value techniques requires us to make projections and assumptions regarding the probability of a range of outcomes and the rates of interest used in the present value calculations. Any changes we make to these projections and assumptions could result in significant revisions to our evaluation of recoverability of our gathering and transportation assets and the recognition of additional impairments. Refer to Note 8 “Gathering and Transportation Related Assets” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements and Accounting Changes
See Note 2 “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for information on new accounting pronouncements.