Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto, which are included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes “forward looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements,” “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at https://www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 1, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination, including our proposed initial business combination with Senti. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination, including our proposed initial business combination with Senti, will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 19, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub and Senti. The Business Combination Agreement provides, among other things, that on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth therein, Merger Sub will merge with and into Senti, with Senti surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Upon the Closing, the Company will change its name to “Senti Biosciences, Inc.” and its ticker symbol on the Nasdaq Capital Market is expected to change to “SNTI.”
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of the Company and Senti. We intend to effectuate our proposed initial business combination with Senti using a combination of cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (and the concurrent private placement of shares to our sponsor), the proceeds of the sale of our shares to private investors in connection with our initial business combination and shares issued to the current owners of Senti.
For further information regarding the Business Combination Agreement and our proposed initial business combination with Senti, please refer to “Part I, Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report and the Current Report on Form 8-K
announcing the proposed business combination, which was filed with the SEC on December 20, 2021.
PART II
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, and, after our initial public offering, identifying target companies for a business combination, conducting due diligence on such target companies and negotiating the Business Combination Agreement with Senti, which we anticipate will give effect to our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held following our initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance) and we incurred expenses for due diligence in connection with identifying Senti as the target company for our initial business combination.
For the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $3,857,088, which resulted from operating and formation costs of $3,702,033 and franchise tax expense of $163,839, partially offset by interest and dividend income on investments in the trust account of $8,784.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On May 28, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 23,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock, including 3,000,000 public shares that were issued pursuant to the underwriter’s exercise, in full, of its over-allotment option, at $10.00 per share, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, our sponsor purchased an aggregate of 715,500 shares of Class A Common Stock at a price of $10.00 per share (i.e. the private placement shares), generating gross proceeds of $7,155,000. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement shares was added to the net proceeds from our initial public offering held in the trust account. If we do not complete our initial business combination within 24 months of the closing of our initial public offering, the proceeds from the sale of the private placement shares held in the trust account will be used to fund the redemption of our public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law).
For the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,142,247, which was due to our net loss of $3,857,088, and non-cash
interest and dividend income on investments held in the trust account, partially offset by changes in working capital of $2,723,625.
For the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $230,000,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement shares being deposited into the trust account.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the period from March 1, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 of $232,031,570 was comprised of $225,400,000 in proceeds from the issuance of shares in the initial public offering, net of underwriter’s discount paid, $7,155,000 in proceeds from the issuance of the private placement shares to our sponsor, and proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our sponsor of $250,000, offset by the payment of $523,430 for offering costs associated with the initial public offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our sponsor of $250,000.
PART II
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $889,323 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to complete our proposed initial business combination with Senti.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting fees), to complete our initial business combination with Senti. We may withdraw interest income (if any) to pay franchise and income taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amount held in the trust account. We expect the interest income earned on the amount in the trust account (if any) will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining amount held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of Senti, to make other acquisitions and to pursue our growth strategies.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business while our initial business combination with Senti is completed. However, if our estimates of the costs of operating our business during this period are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our proposed initial business combination with Senti, our sponsor, or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers or directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans, if made, may be convertible into shares of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per share at the option of the lender. The shares would be identical to the private placement shares. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor, affiliates of our sponsor or our officers or directors as we do not believe third parties would be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
You should note that our independent registered public accounting firm’s report ( which is set forth in this Report) contains an explanatory paragraph that expresses substantial doubt about our ability continue as a “going concern.”
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Underwriting Agreement
In connection with our initial public offering, the Company granted the underwriter a 45-day
option to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional shares of Class A Common Stock to cover over-allotments at the initial public offering price, less the underwriting discounts and fees. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on May 28, 2021.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting fee of $0.20 per share, or $4,600,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of our initial public offering. In addition, approximately $0.306 per share, or $7,050,000 in the aggregate, may be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting fees (this amount having being reduced from $8,050,000 by $1,000,000 by agreement with the underwriter on December 17, 2021). The deferred underwriting fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amount held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes its initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Financial Advisor Agreement
On December 16, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Financial Advisor Agreement”) with Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC (“Morgan Stanley”) for financial advisory services in connection with our potential initial business combination with Senti, which services Morgan Stanley had been engaged to provide, and which services Morgan Stanley had provided, since August 4, 2021. The Financial Advisor Agreement shall terminate automatically on December 16, 2022 unless terminated earlier, with or without cause, by either the Company or Morgan Stanley. The Company will pay Morgan Stanley a fee of $1,000,000 upon the consummation of our proposed initial business combination with Senti.
Placement Agent Agreement
On September 21, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Placement Agent Agreement”) with Morgan Stanley, J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and BofA Securities, Inc. (together, the “Placement Agents”) for services in connection with the placement of shares of our Class A Common Stock to certain private investors which is anticipated to occur concurrently with the completion our potential initial business combination with Senti. The Placement Agent Agreement shall terminate automatically on August 28, 2022 unless terminated earlier, with or without cause, by either the Company or any Placement Agent (as to itself only). The Company will pay to the Placement Agents a total fee equal to 4.0% of the aggregate price at which the shares of our Class A Common Stock are sold to the private investors, which fee shall be payable upon the consummation of the placement of the shares. Each of the Placement Agents will receive 33.3% of the fee.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, private placement shares and any Class A Common Stock issuable upon conversion of any working capital loans from our sponsor, officers or directors have registration rights pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement signed in connection with our initial public offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
In addition, it is anticipated that each signatory to the investor rights agreement to be entered into at Closing, other than the Company, will be granted certain registration rights with respect to their respective shares of Class A Common Stock.
Business Combination
Agreement As set forth in “Part I, Item 1. Business” of this Report, we have entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub and Senti pursuant to which, among other things, Merger Sub will merge with and into Senti, with Senti surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. We have also entered into various ancillary transaction documents to give effect to the Merger, which are described throughout this Report.
PART II
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
. Shares of Class A Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A Common Stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet. Immediately upon the closing of the initial public offering, the Company recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.