ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Sollensys Corp (the “Company” or “Sollensys”) should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to “us,” “we,” “our,” and similar terms refer to the Company. This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements, as that term is defined in the federal securities laws, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements. We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Reference is made to “Risk Factors,” which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
Sollensys Corp was formerly a development stage company, incorporated in Nevada on September 29, 2010, under the name Health Directory, Inc. Sollensys’ initial plans included organization and incorporation, target market identification, marketing plans, and capital formation. A substantial portion of Sollensys’ efforts involved developing a business plan and establishing contacts and visibility in the marketplace. Sollensys did not, however, generate any revenues from these efforts.
Effective July 30, 2012, the holder of 3,000,000 shares, or approximately 79.8% of Sollensys’ then outstanding voting securities, executed a written consent in accordance with Section 78.320 of the Nevada Revised Statutes approving an amendment to the Articles of Incorporation to change Sollensys’ name to Sollensys, increase the number of authorized shares of Common Stock to 1,500,000,000, increase the number of authorized preferred shares of Sollensys, par value $0.001 (the “Preferred Stock”) to 25,000,000, and to split each outstanding share of Common Stock into 131.69 shares of Common Stock.
Subsequently, beginning September 30, 2012, Sollensys went dormant.
On December 27, 2019, the Eighth Judicial District Court of Clark County, Nevada (the “Court”), pursuant to Case number A-19-805633-B appointed Custodian Ventures, LLC (“Custodian Ventures”) as the custodian of Sollensys David Lazar, who controls Custodian Ventures was subsequently named the only interim officer and director of Sollensys.
On June 16, 2020, Custodian Ventures filed a motion with the Court asking the Court to enter an order concluding and terminating the custodianship of Sollensys. On July 20, 2020, the Court entered an order terminating custodianship and barring non-asserted claims against Sollensys.
Effective August 5, 2020, David Lazar, the interim Chief Executive Officer, President, Secretary, Treasurer, and sole director of Sollensys and the beneficial owner, through his ownership of Custodian Ventures of 19,000,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, representing 100% of Sollensys’ issued and outstanding shares of preferred stock, entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement by and among Eagle Lake, Sollensys, and Custodian Ventures. The Stock Purchase Agreement is referred to herein as the “SPA.” Pursuant to the terms of the SPA, Eagle Lake agreed to purchase, and Custodian Ventures agreed to sell, 19,000,000 shares of Sollensys’ Series A Preferred Stock in exchange for payment by Eagle Lake to Custodian Ventures of $230,000 (collectively with the other transactions in the SPA, the “Stock Purchase”). The Stock Purchase closed on August 5, 2020. The shares of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share, of Sollensys are convertible into shares of Common Stock of Sollensys at a rate of 50 shares of Common Stock per share of Series A Preferred Stock, and has voting power on an as-converted basis (voting with the Common Stock as one class) and thus represents 65.4% of the voting power of all shares of stock of Sollensys.
In connection with the closing of the Stock Purchase, on August 5, 2020, Mr. Lazar, the then-sole member of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of Sollensys, pursuant to the power granted to the Board in Sollensys’ bylaws, increased the size of Sollensys’ Board to two members. Simultaneously, Mr. Lazar, as the sole Board member, appointed Donald Beavers as a director to fill the newly created Board vacancy. At the same time, Mr. Lazar appointed Donald Beavers as Chief Executive Officer and Secretary of Sollensys.
Also on August 5, 2020, following the above officer and director appointments and effective on the closing of the Stock Purchase, Mr. Lazar resigned from any and all officer and director positions with Sollensys. Mr. Lazar’s resignation is not the result of a disagreement with Sollensys on any matter relating to Sollensys’ operations, policies, or practices.
On November 30, 2020, pursuant to the Closing of the Share Exchange Agreement, Sollensys acquired Eagle Lake, and Eagle Lake thereafter became a wholly owned subsidiary of Sollensys, and the business of Eagle Lake became the business of the Company going forward. At the time of the Closing, Eagle Lake had 10,011,667 shares of its common stock issued and outstanding, which is 11,667 shares in excess of the number of shares of common stock authorized pursuant to Eagle Lake’s Articles of Incorporation. Such over-issued shares are void under Florida law and are not entitled to any rights of a stockholder of Eagle Lake. As such, the 10,000,000 shares of Eagle Lake common stock that the Company acquired from the Eagle Lake Shareholders, represented 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Eagle Lake of the presence of over-issued shares.
Eagle Lake Laboratories, Inc. was incorporated in the State of Florida on May 8, 2020. Eagle Lake offers advanced technology products for cybersecurity that ensure a clients’ data integrity through collection, storage, and transmission.
The Acquisition of Abstract Media as described throughout this Report, closed on December 6, 2021. The Results of Operations include the activity of Abstract Media for the period December 7, 2021 through December 31, 2021, with no comparable results in the prior year period.
Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Nine Months Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021 we recorded $182,321 in subscription revenue from the execution of our blockchain archive server agreements , compared to $180,000 from the sale of servers for the year ended December 31, 2020. As an emerging growth company we are in the process of developing our strategic business plan going forward, therefore, revenues may vary from period to period.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $384,908 for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cost of sales of $30,000 for the period ended December 31, 2020. The significant increase in cost of sales is attributable to the buildout of our infrastructure in the December 31, 2021 period in anticipation for higher sales levels in 2022.
Operating expenses
Operating expense for the period ended December 31, 2021 were $4,253,875 compared to $3,063,903 for the period ended December 31, 2020. The significant increase in operating expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 is due to the buildout of the infrastructure at the Company in 2021 to support higher levels of activity and revenue generation.
During the period ended September 30, 2020 expenses of $20,843 were paid on behalf of the Company by David Lazar In connection with the August 5, 2020 change of control, the aggregate amount of $46,943 due to Mr. Lazar was forgiven and recognized as a capital contribution to the Company.
Key components of the Company’s operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 include approximately $2,459,000 in payroll, consultants, staffing of temporary help and benefits (which includes approximately $242,000 in non-cash stock based compensation); approximately $962,000 in legal and professional services, and $127,000 in rent expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had $592,534 in cash on hand as of December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,717,036 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $910,926 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The material increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1,700,000 in operating losses in 2021(net of non-cash stock based compensation) compared to 2020 operating losses, partially offset by an increase in customers deposit in the 2021 period of approximately $553,000 over 2020 levels.
Net cash used for investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $422,453 compared to $-0- for the year ended December 31, 2020. The investing activity in 2021 was comprised of the acquisition of Abstract Media for $8,920 and the purchase of property and equipment of $413,533.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4,602,399 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,040,550 for the period ended December 31, 2020. The material increase during 2021 is due to an increase in proceeds from the sale of common stock of approximately $4,600,000.
During
the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 73,244 shares of our common stock valued at $292,976 to purchase Abstract, LLC.
Since we have been incurring losses from operations we have relied on ongoing sales of unregistered securities and the personnel guarantees of our CEO to obtain financing to fund our operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we issued 73,244 shares of our common stock to help fund our acquisition of Abstract Media. Additionally, we were able to purchase our corporate headquarters with a cash outlay of $186,087 and through the issuance of a $2,500,000 mortgage due to the personal guarantee of our CEO.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to raise capital from the sale of our securities, use our securities to make acquisitions, nor can there be any assurances that our CEO will continue to provide his personal guaranty on financing transactions to help raise capital.
Financial Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected how we are operating our business, and the duration and extent to which this will impact our future results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. Federal, state and foreign governments have implemented measures to contain the virus, including social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, limitations on public gatherings, work from home, and closure of non-essential businesses. To protect the health and well-being of our employees, partners, and third-party service providers, we have implemented work-from-home requirements, made substantial modifications to employee travel policies, and cancelled or shifted marketing and other corporate events to virtual-only formats for the foreseeable future. While we continue to monitor the situation and may adjust our current policies as more information and public health guidance become available, such precautionary measures could negatively affect our customer success efforts, sales and marketing efforts, delay and lengthen our sales cycles, or create operational or other challenges, any of which could harm our business and results of operations. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the operations of our current enterprise customers, as well as many potential enterprise customers, and may continue to disrupt their operations, for an indefinite period of time, including as a result of travel restrictions and/or business shutdowns, uncertainty in the financial markets, or other harm to their businesses and financial results, resulting in delayed purchasing decisions, extended payment terms, and postponed or cancelled projects, all of which could negatively impact our business and results of operations, including our revenue and cash flows.
Beginning in March 2020, the U.S. and global economies have reacted negatively in response to worldwide concerns due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. These factors also may adversely impact enterprise and government spending on technology as well as such customers’ ability to pay for our products and services on an ongoing basis. For example, some businesses in industries particularly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel, hospitality, retail, and oil and gas, have significantly cut or eliminated capital expenditures. A prolonged economic downturn could adversely affect technology spending, demand for our offerings, which could have a negative impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Any resulting instability in the financial markets could also adversely affect the value of our common stock, our ability to refinance our indebtedness, and our access to capital.
The ultimate duration and extent of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately forecasted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of the disease, the actions of governments, businesses and individuals in response to the pandemic, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions, the impact on economic activity and the impact of these and other factors on our employees, partners, and third-party service providers. These uncertainties may increase variability in our future results of operations and adversely impact our ability to accurately forecast changes in our business performance and financial condition in future periods. If we are not able to respond to and manage the impact of such events effectively or if global economic conditions do not improve, or deteriorate further, our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows could be adversely affected.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
We believe that the following critical policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Common Control Accounting Treatment
Sollensys Corp and Eagle Lake were under the common control of the CEO before and after the date of transfer. As a result, the Company adopted the guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 805-50-05-5 for the transfer of net assets between entities under common control to apply a method similar to the pooling-of-interests-method. Under the method, the financial statements of the Company shall report results of operations for the period in which the transfer occurs as though the transfer of the net assets had occurred at the beginning of the period. Results of operations for the period will thus comprise both those of the previously separate entities combined from the beginning of the period to the date the transfer is completed and those of the combined operations from that date to the end of the period. Similarly, the Company shall present the statements of financial position and other financial information presented as of the beginning of the period as though the assets and liabilities had been transferred at that date. Financial statements and financial information presented for prior years also shall be retrospectively adjusted to furnish comparative information.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business for the twelve months following the date of these consolidated financial statements.
The Company expects to generate operating cash flow that will be sufficient to fund presently anticipated operations although there can be no assurance. This raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Therefore, the Company will need to raise additional funds and is currently exploring alternative sources of financing to supplement expected cash flow. Historically, the Company has raised capital through private placements, as an interim measure to finance working capital needs and may continue to raise additional capital through the sale of common stock or other securities and obtaining some short-term loans. The Company will be required to continue to do so until its operations become profitable.
The Company may attempt to raise capital in the near future through the sale of equity or debt financing; however, there can be assurances the Company will be successful in doing so. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to the Company on acceptable terms or at all.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are accounted for in accordance with the FASB’s Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).
The Company derives revenue from two sources. The Company’s primary product is the Blockchain Archive Server-a turn-key, off-the-shelf, blockchain solution that works with virtually any hardware and software combinations currently used in commerce, without the need to replace or eliminate any part of the client’s data security that is being utilized.
The second product offering is called the “Regional Service Center” which is a single unit system of 32 Blockchain Archive Servers capable of servicing up to 2,580 individual small accounts, and is marketed to existing IT service providers with established accounts. The service is delivered over the Internet and is considered software as a service “SaaS”.
The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for the products and/or services. To achieve this principle, the Company applies the following five steps:
1. Identify the contract with the customer;
2. Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
3. Determine the transaction price;
4. Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract, and
5. Recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company recognizes revenue when the control of the Blockchain Archive Server is transferred to the Company’s customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for these products. Control is generally transferred when products are delivered. The Company’s revenue contracts generally represent a single performance obligation to sell its products to customers. For the SaaS software, which typically involves a significant customer deposit with services provided by the Company over a 60 month period, the Company recognizes revenue ratably as service is provided over the contract period.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the future economic benefit arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized. The goodwill arising from the Company’s acquisition is attributable to the value of the potential expanded market opportunity with new customers. Intangible assets have either an identifiable or indefinite useful life. Intangible assets with identifiable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their economic or legal life, whichever is shorter. The Company’s amortizable intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationships. The useful life of these customer relationships is estimated to be three years.
Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to annual impairment testing unless circumstances dictate more frequent assessments. The Company performs an annual impairment assessment for goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than the carrying amount. Goodwill impairment testing compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by considering both the income approach and market approaches. The fair values calculated under the income approach and market approaches are weighted based on circumstances surrounding the reporting unit. Under the income approach, the Company determines fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit, which are discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. For the discount rate, the Company relies on the capital asset pricing model approach, which includes an assessment of the risk-free interest rate, the rate of return from publicly traded stocks, the Company’s risk relative to the overall market, the Company’s size and industry and other Company specific risks. Other significant assumptions used in the income approach include the terminal value, growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approaches use key multiples from guideline businesses that are comparable and are traded on a public market. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
New Accounting Pronouncements
The Company currently follows the guidance in ASC 840 “Leases,” which requires us to evaluate the lease agreements the Company enters into to determine whether they represent operating or capital leases at the inception of the lease.
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which establishes a new lease accounting model for lessees. The updated guidance requires an entity to recognize assets and liabilities arising from financing and operating leases, along with additional qualitative and quantitative disclosures. The amended guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those years, beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted. In March 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-01, Codification Improvements, which clarifies certain aspects of the new lease standard. The FASB issued ASU 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases in July 2018. Also in 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842) Targeted Improvements, which provides an optional transition method whereby the new lease standard is applied at the adoption date and recognized as an adjustment to retained earnings. The amendments have the same effective date and transition requirements as the new lease standard On November 15, 2019, the FASB has issued ASU 2019-10, which amends the effective dates for three major accounting standards. The ASU defers the effective dates for the credit losses, derivatives, and lease standards for certain companies. Since the Company is classified as an emerging growth company the Company is eligible for deferring the adoption of ASC 842 to December 15, 2021.
ASC 842 will be effective for the Company beginning on January, 1 2022. We do not believe that the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Except for the adoption of ASC 842, management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards could have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements. As new accounting pronouncements are issued, we will adopt those that are applicable under the circumstances.
Recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the SEC did not have, or are not believed by management to have, a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.