Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Results of Operations and Critical Accounting Policies.
The following commentary should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes thereto contained in Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Item 1A.,"Risk Factors," included in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
We are a leading U.S. provider of ultra-rugged mobile devices, including phones and accessories designed specifically for task workers physically engaged in their work environments, often in mission-critical roles. We currently sell our ruggedized mobile phones and accessories to the three largest wireless carriers in the United States- AT&T, T-Mobile and Verizon-as well as the three largest wireless carriers in Canada-Bell, Rogers and Telus Mobility. We also sell our ruggedized phones and accessories through distribution channels in North America, South America and Europe. Our devices and accessories connect workers with voice, data and workflow applications in two end markets: industrial enterprise and public sector.
We generate revenues primarily from sales of our mobile phones and industrial-grade accessories. We sell our mobile phones and accessories primarily to wireless carriers in both the United States and Canada, who then resell our products in conjunction with network services to end customers.
Because our U.S. sales channel is primarily comprised of large wireless carriers, the number of customers that we sell to is limited. For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately 90% of our revenues came from large wireless carriers and 68% came from our top three customers. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our smartphones accounted for approximately 27% of our revenues and our feature phones accounted for approximately 69% of our revenues. To help control and manage the quality, cost and reliability of our supply chain, we directly manage the procurement of all final assembly materials used in our products, which include LCDs, housings, camera modules and antennas. To help contain costs and improve the efficiency of our operations, we have outsourced substantially all of our manufacturing functions, software development and quality control functions to third parties, transferring the employees who previously performed this work. In order to continue to develop differentiated products to attract and retain customers, we have made significant investments in research and development through our partnerships with ODMs. We expect this investment to result in a new generation of rugged phones which will deliver a significant percentage of the Company’s revenue by the end of 2022.
Recent Developments
Liquidity and Going Concern
Currently, our principal source of liquidity consists of cash and cash equivalents totaling $11.2 million, as December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $38.6 million, and it is likely that we will continue to experience operating losses into the future because we have not yet generated sufficient revenue levels needed to ensure profitability. Although we remain subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the development and release of new products, among others, we believe our operations have been streamlined to enable us to conduct business more effectively and efficiently despite near term economic uncertainty. However, our liquidity has been negatively impacted by a decline in the sales of our legacy products while our next generation products are still under development. In addition, legal expenses related to our ongoing SEC investigation have been significantly higher than expected and may continue to impact our results in the foreseeable future. In addition, the terms and conditions of applicable bylaws, certificates or articles of incorporation, agreements or applicable law may obligate us under certain circumstances to indemnify our current and former directors, officers or employees, and underwriters, with respect to certain of our litigation matters, including the ongoing SEC investigation, and we have been advancing legal fees and costs to certain current and former directors, officers, employees and underwriters in connection with certain of the matters disclosed in Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies. As a result of the foregoing, substantial doubt exists regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least one year from the date of issuance for the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Next Generation of Phones
The Company is developing next generation phones that are expected to be launched in the third quarter of 2022. The XP5plus replaces the XP5s and the XP10 replaces the XP8.
Restructuring in 2021
On May 31, 2021, Mr. Tom Wilkinson resigned from his positions and offices with Sonim, including as our Chief Executive Officer. In connection with and effective upon Mr. Wilkinson’s separation with the Company on May 31, 2021, the Board appointed Mr. Robert Tirva, the Company’s Chief Financial Officer, to the additional positions of President and Chief Operating Officer of the Company.
In 2021, the Company began co-development and manufacturing with ODM partners. To ensure the efficient manufacturing of our legacy products through this transition, we outsourced our final assembly to a supply chain partner. These changes resulted in a reduction of global headcount from 263 employees and 54 contractors as of December 31, 2020 to 77 employees and 25 contractors as of December 31, 2021.
Nasdaq Delisting and Reverse Stock Split
On April 28, 2021, we received a deficiency letter from the Staff of Nasdaq notifying us that, for the last 30 consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below $1.00 per share, which is the minimum closing price required to maintain continued listing on the Nasdaq Stock Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). On September 15, 2021, the Company effected the 1-for-10 Reverse Stock Split of its issued and outstanding shares of common stock on that date. On September 30, 2021, we received a letter from the Staff notifying us that we had regained compliance with the minimum bid requirement.
On February 16, 2022, we received a new deficiency letter from the Staff of Nasdaq notifying us that, for the last 30 consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below $1.00 per share, which is the minimum closing price required to maintain the Minimum Bid Requirement. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we have been provided a period of 180 calendar days, or until August 15, 2022, in which to regain compliance. In order to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Price, the closing bid price of our common stock must be at least $1.00 per share for a minimum of ten consecutive business days during this 180-day period. In the event that we do not regain compliance within this 180-day period, we may be eligible to seek an additional compliance period of 180 calendar days.
ATM Program
On June 30, 2021, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with B. Riley Securities, Inc. and EF Hutton, a division of Benchmark Investments, LLC, or the Sales Agents, to sell shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $10 million from time to time, through an “at-the-market offering” program, or the June 2021 ATM Program. Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we paid the Sales Agents a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the Sales Agreement. We exhausted this June 2021 ATM Program on July 14, 2021, selling an aggregate of 1,820,785 shares of our common stock at a weighted average price per share of $4.59 and for net proceeds of approximately $8.4 million.
On September 23, 2021, we entered into a new At Market Issuance Sales Agreement, or the New Sales Agreement, with B. Riley Securities, Inc., as Sales Agent, to sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $41.6 million from time to time, through a new “at the market offering” program or the New ATM Program. Under the terms of the New Sales Agreement, we will pay B. Riley Securities, Inc. a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the New Sales Agreement. From September 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we issued and sold an aggregate of 10,280,906 shares of our common stock at a weighted average price per share of $1.89 under the New ATM Program for net proceeds of approximately $19.4 million. All proceeds were received by December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $21.6 million remaining under our New ATM Program.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. As a result of the pandemic, including the introduction of new variants of COVID-19, our workforce shifted to operating in a primarily remote working environment, which has created productivity, connectivity, and oversight challenges. We have been experiencing and expect to continue to experience supply chain delays and higher shipping costs. The effects of the ongoing pandemic are unpredictable, and as a result we may experience increased costs and/or disruption as long as the pandemic persists.
Restructuring and Reduction in Force
During 2020, we reduced our headcount to better align our expenses with our revenue profile. The Company executed a reduction in force of approximately 10% of its U.S. employees in February 2020 and has also reduced headcount in certain international locations in India and Shenzhen. Our headcount at December 31, 2021 was 102. During 2020, we decided to proceed with future product co-development and manufacturing with ODM partners. To ensure the efficient manufacturing of our legacy products through this transition, we outsourced our final assembly to a supply chain partner and transferred twenty-two employees to that partner to enhance their efficiency in taking over our production work. We have also relocated our headquarters from San Mateo, California to Austin, Texas. We recorded costs related to restructuring totaling $1.5 million, in 2020, of which $1.0 million was paid out in 2020, and $0.1 million is included in cost of revenues in 2020. The remaining $0.5 million was paid out in 2021.
Key Metrics
We review a variety of key financial metrics to help us evaluate growth trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness of our business strategies and assess operational efficiencies.
Units Sold
Our smartphones include the XP6, XP7, and XP8 models. The number of smartphone units sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 43%, primarily because the XP6 and XP7 reached end of life in 2020 in terms of new sales and our XP8 smartphone is approaching end of life as we prepare to introduce a replacement 5G smartphone in 2022. Our feature phones include the XP3plus, XP3, XP5, and XP5s models. The number of feature phone units sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 3%, primarily because sales of our new XP3plus were not high enough to offset a decrease in the older XP3. We launched updated versions of the XP3, the XP3plus, in the third and fourth quarter of 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP and operational measures are useful in evaluating our performance related metrics.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss adjusted to exclude the impact of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income taxes, and restructuring costs. Adjusted EBITDA is a useful financial metric in assessing our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business, such as certain material non-cash items and other adjustments, such as stock-based compensation.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, our reported GAAP results, provides useful information to investors regarding our performance and overall results of operations for various reasons, including:
•
non-cash equity grants made to employees at a certain price do not necessarily reflect the performance of our business at such time, and as such, stock-based compensation expense is not a key measure of our operating performance; and
•
costs associated with certain events, such as restructuring costs, are not considered a key measure of our operating performance.
We use Adjusted EBITDA:
•
as a measure of operating performance;
•
for planning purposes, including the preparation of budgets and forecasts;
•
to allocate resources to enhance the financial performance of our business;
•
to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies;
•
in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance; and
•
as a consideration in determining compensation for certain key employees.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•
it does not reflect all cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•
it does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
•
it does not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments; and
•
other companies in our industry may define and/or calculate this metric differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Set forth below is a reconciliation from net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the respective periods:
Year Ended December 31,
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depend on many factors. While these factors present significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to improve our results of operations.
Research and Development
We believe that our performance is significantly dependent on the investments we make in research and development and that we must continue to develop and introduce innovative new products on a two to three-year cycle. Our partnerships with ODMs are expected to enable us to shift between different types and numbers of devices under development without the need to adjust the size of our internal team.
While the hardware design of our phones is generally the same for all wireless carriers, each device must be configured to conform to the requirements of each wireless carrier’s network, resulting in higher development expenses as the number of wireless carriers we sell through increases. In addition to the design and configuration costs, each device must undergo a multi-month technical approval process at each carrier before it can be certified to be stocked at each carrier. The approval process for each device for each carrier has historically cost between $1 million and $2 million. Prior to commencement of development of a product for certification, we generally do not receive any purchase orders or commitments. Following a carrier’s review of product concepts, we may receive a product award letter from that carrier to move forward with the development and certification process, at which time we may begin receiving advance purchase orders or commitments. Since the timing of when we seek technical approval with our wireless carriers tends to be cyclical in nature, quarter-over-quarter expenditures may vary significantly depending on the number of approvals in process during the quarter. If we fail to innovate and enhance our product offerings, our brand, market position and revenues may be adversely affected. If our research and development efforts are not successful, then we will not recover these investments that we make.
New Customer Acquisitions
We are focused on continuing to acquire new customers, both in North America and overseas, to support our long-term growth. Historically, we have been dependent on a small number of wireless carriers distributing our products. We have invested, and expect to continue to invest, in our sales and marketing efforts to drive new customer acquisition. A key part of our strategy is to further expand the use of our solutions over cellular networks in the public safety and industrial enterprise markets. We also intend to continue to invest in and expand our international sales teams. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing costs to increase as we seek to acquire new customers. Sales and marketing investments will often occur in advance of any sales benefits from these activities, and it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating our sales and marketing resources.
Seasonality and New Product Introduction
We have historically experienced lower net revenue in our first quarter compared to other quarters in our fiscal year due to seasonal demand associated with the introduction of new products to our lead customers. New product introductions can significantly impact net revenue, gross profit and operating expenses. The timing of product introductions can also impact our net revenue as our wireless carrier customers prepare for a new product launch, and channel inventory of an older product often declines as the launch of a newer product approaches. Net revenue can also be affected when consumers and distributors anticipate a new product introduction. However, neither historical seasonal patterns nor historical patterns of product or service introductions should be considered reliable indicators of our future pattern of product or service introductions, future net sales or financial performance.
Components of Our Results of Operations
The following describes the line items set forth in our consolidated statements of operations.
Revenues
Revenues are recognized on the date that the customer receives the products sold or when title is passed to the customer upon shipment. For products shipped on consignment, revenue is not recognized until the products is sold to the end customer. Any discounts, marketing development funds, product returns or other revenue reductions are treated as offsets to revenues, which is presented on a net basis. A return reserve reduces revenue for products that are sold to distributors with a right of return. We have also historically entered into customer agreements with channel partners that include a combination of products and non-recurring engineering services, or NRE services. When a customer agreement includes NRE services which involve significant design modification and customization of the product software that is essential to the functionality of the hardware, revenues are also recognized as control transfers to the customer under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. All of our revenues are derived from a single segment.
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including our mobile phones and accessories, and the majority of the Company’s contracts include only one performance obligation, namely the delivery of product. A performance obligation is a commitment in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account for revenue recognition under ASC 606. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contracts that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services. Where there is a combination of products and NRE services, the Company accounts for the commitments as individual performance obligations if they are both capable of being distinct and are distinct within the context of the contract.
Our customer agreements with channel partners set forth the terms pursuant to which our channel partners purchase our products for distribution on a purchase order basis. While these arrangements are typically long term, they generally do not contain any firm purchase volume commitments. As a result, our channel partners are not contractually obligated to purchase from us any minimum number of products. However, while our channel partners provide us with demand forecasts under these sales arrangements, we are generally required to satisfy any and all purchase orders delivered to us within specified delivery windows, with limited exceptions (such as orders significantly in excess of forecasts). Our sales arrangements also generally include technical performance standards for our mobile phones and accessories sold, which vary by channel partner. If a technical issue with any of our covered products exceeds certain preset failure thresholds for the relevant performance standard or standards, the channel partner typically has the right to cease selling the product, cancel open purchase orders and levy certain monetary penalties. In addition, our channel partners retain sole discretion in which of their stocked products to offer their customers.
We also offer our channel partners channel marketing and other limited promotional incentives, such as sales volume incentives, in exchange for retail price reductions. Under certain of our customer agreements, we may also offer NRE services in the form of third-party design services relating to the design of materials and software licenses used in the manufacturing of our products.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit/Gross Margin
Cost of revenues for products manufactured by third parties is the negotiated price that the Company pays for the products. For products that are manufactured by the Company, the cost of revenues primarily consists of the following:
•
Direct costs consist of raw materials, supplies and sub-assemblies used in the production of our products. Direct materials represent the majority of our direct manufacturing expenses.
•
Direct labor costs expended in the final assembly and testing of our products. Labor is charged to each product based on the actual time required to build that specific product.
•
Indirect manufacturing expense associated with producing our products, such as rent on production facilities, depreciation on production equipment and tooling, engineering and support salaries and other indirect manufacturing costs.
For both products manufactured by third parties and for products manufactured by the Company, cost of revenues includes other direct costs related to the shipment of the final product to the customer, including such items as shipping costs, royalties on third-party technology included in the product, warranty cost accruals and packaging and handling costs.
Amortization of NRE expenses are part of cost of revenues. Gross profit is defined as revenues less cost of revenues. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenues. We expect that our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period, primarily as a result of changes in average selling price, revenue mix among our devices, and manufacturing costs. In addition, we may reserve against the value at which we carry our inventory based upon the device’s lifecycle and conditions in the markets in which we sell.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the following categories:
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits, as well as outsourced costs incurred through our ODM partnerships. Research and development expenses also include the costs of developing new products and supporting existing products. Research and development activities include the design of new products, refinement of existing products and design of test methodologies to ensure compliance with required specifications, as well as all costs associated with achieving technical acceptance with each product at each carrier. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to fluctuate over time as we experience the various product cycles of our devices.
Sales and marketing. Sales expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, commissions to sales representatives, travel costs and employee benefits, as well as field support and customer training costs. Marketing expenses include all social media and collateral print media, and brand development expenses.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, travel costs and employee benefits, as well as professional and consulting fees, legal fees, trade shows, depreciation expense and occupancy costs.
Income taxes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements we are required to estimate our taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. We account for income taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and the tax effects of net operating loss and credit carryforwards using the enacted tax rates expected to apply in the periods of expected settlement. In addition, this method requires a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognized income tax provision of $167,000 during 2021 as compared to an income tax benefit of $521,000 during 2020. The increase in tax expense in 2021 was primarily due to a release of an uncertain tax position in 2020, partially offset by the Company’s decrease in earnings in foreign subsidiaries in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following tables present key components of our results of operations for the respective periods (In thousands):
Net revenues. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by $9.4 million, or 14.7% to $54.6 million compared to $64.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net revenues was primarily attributable to a 35% decrease in unit sales of the XP8 resulting in a decrease of $9.9 million in revenues as this product approaches end of life. Sales of the next generation XP3plus and of the XP5s increased in 2021, but were partially offset by lower sales of the XP3 as it approaches end of life. The launch of an updated smartphone in the third quarter of 2022 is expected to replace the XP8 and increase unit sales of our smartphones in 2022.
Cost of revenues. Total cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $0.6 million, or 1.3%, to $48.2 million, or 88.2% of revenues, compared to $48.8 million, or 76.2% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was attributable to fewer units sold as discussed above. The higher cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue in 2021 was due to sales mix and specifically the sale of relatively higher margin XP8’s in 2020. In 2021, the cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue for the XP8 was 54% as compared to 80% for the XP3plus and 79% for the XP5s.
Gross profit and margin. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased $8.8 million, or 57.8%, to $6.4 million, or 11.8% of revenues, from $15.2 million, or 23.8% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease to gross profit was primarily due to a 35% decrease in unit sales of the XP8 in 2021. The decrease in gross profit margin was primarily attributable to product sales mix, as more relatively higher margin XP8’s were sold in 2020.
Research and development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $1.5 million or 9.1%, to $17.7 million compared to $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These expenses increased primarily due our investment in the development of a new generation of products that were released in 2021 and are scheduled for release in 2022.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by $0.8 million, or 8.1% to $9.6 million compared to $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is due to a $1.7 million decrease in personnel costs due to cost cutting measures that was partially offset by a $0.9 million increase in handset demos that were provided to retail stores.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $0.5 million, or 4.6% to $10.3 million compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due primarily to a $0.6 million increase in bad debt expense.
Legal expenses. Legal expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $0.4 million to $6.9 million compared to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in legal expenses was primarily due to an increase in expenses related to the SEC investigation.
Restructuring costs. In September 2019, the Board of Directors approved, and management commenced and completed, a restructuring plan to reduce operating costs and better align our workforce with the needs of our business. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded costs related to restructuring totaling $1.6 million, of which $0.1 million is included in cost of revenues. We did not record any costs related to restructuring during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense. Interest expense/other expense decreased by $0.8 million to zero because in June 2020 all long-term debt was settled.
Other expense, net. We recorded $0.5 million in foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $0.4 million in foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense increased by $0.7 million, or 132% to $0.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $(0.5) million, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily because in 2020 we released $0.8 million of prior years’ uncertain tax position accruals.
Net loss. The net loss for December 31, 2021, was $38.6 million compared to net loss of $29.9 million for December 31, 2020. The increase in the net loss is a result of a decrease in revenues of $9.4 million and a decrease in the gross profit margin percentage in 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA was negative $34.7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to negative $24.3 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020. This higher loss was primarily due to lower revenues and a decrease in the gross profit margin percentage in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, we have funded operations from a combination of public and private equity financings, convertible loans from existing investors and borrowings under loan agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any convertible loans or any other borrowing structures in place.
Currently, our principal source of liquidity consists of cash and cash equivalents totaling $11.2 million, as December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $38.6 million, and it is likely that we will continue to experience operating losses into the future because we have not yet generated sufficient revenue levels needed to ensure profitability. Although we remain subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the development and release of new products, among others, we believe our operations have been streamlined to enable us to conduct business more effectively and efficiently despite near term economic uncertainty. However, our liquidity has been negatively impacted by a decline in the sales of our legacy products while our next generation products are still under development. In addition, legal expenses related to our ongoing SEC investigation have been significantly higher than expected and may continue to impact our results in the foreseeable future. In addition, the terms and conditions of applicable bylaws, certificates or articles of incorporation, agreements or applicable law may obligate us under certain circumstances to indemnify our current and former directors, officers or employees, and underwriters, with respect to certain of our litigation matters, including the ongoing SEC investigation, and we have been advancing legal fees and costs to certain current and former directors, officers, employees and underwriters in connection with certain of the matters disclosed in Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies. As a result of the foregoing, substantial doubt exists regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least one year from the date of issuance for the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
To alleviate these conditions, our management is currently evaluating various funding alternatives and may seek to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, mezzanine or debt securities, through arrangements with strategic or investment partners with greater resources or access to funds or through obtaining credit from government or financial institutions. As we seek additional sources of financing, there can be no assurance that such financing would be available to us on favorable terms or at all. Our ability to obtain additional financing in the debt and equity capital markets, including through our New ATM Program, is subject to several factors, including market and economic conditions, our performance and investor sentiment with respect to us and our industry. See risk factor entitled “Our liquidity has been adversely impacted by our ongoing net losses, including as a result of declines in the sales of our legacy products while our next generation products are still under development and our ongoing SEC investigation, and there is
no assurance that we will have sufficient liquidity to continue operations.” in this Annual report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Our cash balance as of February 28, 2022, was approximately $9.8 million.
During the quarter ended December 31, 2021, we issued and sold an aggregate of 10,280,906 shares of our common stock at a weighted average price per share of $1.89 under the New ATM Program for net proceeds of approximately $19.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $21.6 million available for future issuances under the New ATM Program. See “Recent Developments - New ATM Program” for additional information.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the periods presented:
Cash flows from operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $38.5 million, primarily attributable to a net loss of $38.6 million. Non-cash charges of $5.7 million were partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.6 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation, $1.6 million in inventory write-downs, $2.1 million in depreciation and amortization, and $0.9 million for an increase to the provision for doubtful accounts. The changes in our net operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to a $7.5 million increase in accounts receivable, an increase in other assets of $2.7 million, and an increase in non-trade receivable of $1.8 million, partially offset by a $4.2 million decrease in inventory, a $1.6 million decrease in prepaid expenses, and a $1.2 million increase in accounts payables and accrued liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $10.6 million, primarily attributable to a net loss of $29.9 million, partially offset by a net cash inflow of $14 million from changes in our net operating assets and liabilities and non-cash charges of $5.3 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $1.1 million in stock-based compensation, $0.7 million in inventory write-downs, and $2.7 million in depreciation and amortization. The net cash inflow in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $7.5 million decrease in inventory, a $5.5 million decrease in accounts receivable, and an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.7 million, partially offset by a $1.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, a decrease in income tax payable of $0.7 million, and a $0.3 million decrease in deferred revenue.
Cash flows from investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $0.05 million, attributable to the purchases of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $0.01 million, attributable to the purchases of property and equipment.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $27.6 million, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuance of common stock through the ATM Program.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $21.4 million, primarily attributable to proceeds from issuance of common stock upon a public offering of common stock, net of costs, of $25.1 million, and proceeds from stock options and ESPP of $0.5 million, offset by the repayment of long-term debt of $4.1 million.
Material Cash Requirements
The Company had a contractual obligation with third-party designers for the Company’s next generation of phones of approximately $3.7 million for the XP10 and $2.5 million for the XP5plus as of December 31, 2021. We had approximately $5.7 million in noncancelable purchase orders for inventory and other operating expenses as of December 31, 2021. We had approximately $4.0 million in contractual obligations with a third-party software developer at December 31, 2021. We had $2.3 million in noncancelable operating lease commitments as of December 31, 2021. We anticipate the source of funds to meet these obligations to be existing cash, future product sales, and future ATM Program stock sales.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic initially impacted our supply chain partners and resulted in a shutdown of our manufacturing operations in China, in the first quarter of 2020. In the middle of March 2020, the majority of our offices worldwide had enacted shelter-in-place measures, with employees being mandated to work from home. We expect this to have a negative impact on our sales and our results of operations, the size and duration of which we are currently unable to predict. In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, we are required to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and the accompanying disclosures. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty and therefore require the exercise of judgment. As of the date of issuance of these financial statements, we are not aware of any specific event or circumstance that would require us to update our estimates, judgments or revise the carrying value of our assets or liabilities. These estimates may change, as new events occur and additional information is obtained, and are recognized in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they become known. Actual results could differ from those estimates and any such differences may be material to our financial statements
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for its arrangements, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. See Note 2, Revenue Recognition, for additional information.
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including our mobile phones, scanners, and accessories. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contractual arrangements that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services.
Revenue recognition incorporates discounts, price protection and customer incentives. In addition to cooperative marketing and other incentive programs, the Company has arrangements with some distributors, which allow for price protection and limited rights of return, generally through stock rotation programs. Under the price protection programs, the Company gives distributors credits for the difference between the original price paid and the Company’s then current price. Under the stock rotation programs, certain distributors are able to exchange certain products based on the number of qualified purchases made during the period. The Company estimates future returns from distributors with a right of return and accrues for estimated customer allowances or future price protection discounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based payments at fair value. The fair value of stock options is measured using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For share-based awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of a service requirement, the fair value measurement date for stock-based compensation awards is the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The fair value of each stock option grant is determined using the methods and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment and estimation by management.
•
Expected term. The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. Our historical share option exercise information is limited due to a lack of sufficient data points and does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term. The expected term for option grants is therefore determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the expected term to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility. Because our stock has not been publicly traded for a sufficiently long period of time, in 2020 we use an expected volatility figure based on a review of the historical volatilities, over a period of time, equivalent to the expected life of the instrument being valued, of similarly positioned public companies within our industry.
•
Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the date of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the stock-based awards’ expected term.
•
Expected dividend yield. The expected dividend yield is zero as we have not paid nor do we anticipate paying any dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
We account for restricted stock units (RSUs) issued to employees and non-employees at fair value, based on the market price of our stock on the date of grant. The RSUs are expensed over the vesting period, and we account for forfeitures as they occur. RSUs, primarily issued as long-term incentives, generally vest annually over four years.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we recorded $1.1 million in each year of stock-based compensation related to stock options and restricted stock units.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in multiple tax jurisdictions. We may be periodically reviewed by domestic and foreign tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These reviews may include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, we record estimated reserves when it is more likely than not that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. Such estimates are subject to change.
Inventory Valuation
We report inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a first-in, first-out method, or FIFO, and includes materials, labor, shipping and manufacturing overhead related to the purchase and production of inventories. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation.
The net realizable value of inventory is based on management’s estimates of forecasted sales of each model and the estimated sale price of each model. Inventory that is not part of the sales forecast is fully written-off. Inventory was written down for one model because the estimated net realizable value was less than the cost. If the net realizable value was lower by 10% for this model, then an additional $44 of inventory write-off would be realized and cost of revenue would be increased by $44. An increase of the estimated sale price of 10% would increase the inventory value and decrease cost of revenue by $33. All other models have costs that are significantly lower than the estimated net realizable value.
Warranty Reserves
We provide standard warranty coverage on our accessories and devices for one and three years, respectively, providing labor and parts necessary to repair the systems during the warranty period. We account for the estimated warranty cost as a charge to cost of revenues when revenue is recognized. The estimated warranty cost is based on historical product performance and field expenses. We update this estimate periodically. The actual product performance and/or field expense profiles may differ, and in these cases, we adjust warranty accruals accordingly.
The warranty liability account balance is based on management’s estimates of the lifetime return rate for each model and the cost to repair each returned model. These assumptions are based on historical rates for similar products and on actual return rates. If the estimated cost to repair each unit increased by 10%, then the warranty liability balance would be $84 higher at December 31, 2021. If the lifetime return rate was increased by 10%, then the warranty liability balance would be $146 higher at December 31, 2021. The cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 would increase by the same amount as the warranty liability. Decreases to these rates 10% will reduce the warranty liability by the same amount.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements and Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See “Note 1 - The Company and Its Significant Accounting Policies” of “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements” under the caption Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements.
7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Item Disclosures About Market Risk.
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information under this item.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following consolidated financial statements of Sonim Technologies, Inc., and the independent registered public accounting firm’s report are incorporated by reference from Part IV, Item 15(1) and (2):
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Moss Adams LLP, Issuing Office City and State, PCAOB ID: 659)
Consolidated Balance Sheets - At December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity- Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures.
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Our management, with the participation of our principal executive and financial officer has evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act, prior to filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Based on this evaluation, and as a result of the material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting described below, our principal executive and financial officer concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective at the reasonable assurance level.
Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls and Procedures
In designing and evaluating disclosure controls and procedures, our management recognizes that any system of controls, however well designed and operated, can provide only reasonable assurance, and not absolute assurance, that the desired control objectives of the system are met. In addition, the design of any control system is based in part upon certain assumptions about the likelihood of future
events. Because of these and other inherent limitations of control systems, there can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals in all future circumstances. Accordingly, our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of our disclosure control system are met.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act. Our management has assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021 using the criteria established in “Internal Control-Integrated Framework” (2013), issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Based on that assessment and due to the material weakness described below, our management has concluded that the Company’s internal control over financial reporting was not effective as of December 31, 2021. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
Material Weaknesses in Internal Control and Plan for Remediation
With respect to the year ended December 31, 2021, we identified a material weakness in our internal controls over financial reporting related to the design and implementation of our IT general controls including elevated (administrator) access to financial reporting systems and subsystems. Although we have made progress with the remediation of these issues, these efforts may not be sufficient to avoid similar material weaknesses in the future. In response to the conclusion set forth above, management retained outside consultants in September 2021 to specifically evaluate our IT general controls as well as our other internal control procedures. As part of our remediation efforts, we improved our IT general controls by removing most elevated (administrator) access to financial reporting systems and by providing additional controls over administrator system access. We expect this material weakness to be fully remediated by the second half of 2022.
Attestation Report of Registered Public Accounting Firm
This annual report does not include an attestation report of our registered public accounting firm on our internal control over financial reporting due to an exemption established for “emerging growth companies” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
During the three months ended December 31, 2021, we improved our IT general controls by removing most elevated (administrator) access to financial reporting systems and by providing additional controls over administrator system access. Except as otherwise disclosed, there was no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the three months ended December 31, 2021 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information.
None.
Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections.
Not applicable.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
We have adopted a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, or the Code of Conduct, applicable to all of our employees, executive officers, and directors. The Code of Conduct is available on our website at www.sonimtech.com. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of our Board of Directors will be responsible for overseeing the Code of Conduct and must approve any waivers of the Code of Conduct for employees, executive officers, and directors. We expect that any amendments to the Code of Conduct, or any waivers of its requirements, will be disclosed on our website.
The additional information required by this Item 10 will either be (i) included in an amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or (ii) incorporated by reference from our definitive proxy statement to be filed not later than 120 days after the end of our 2021 fiscal year.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
The information required by this Item 11 will either be (i) included in an amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or (ii) incorporated by reference from our definitive proxy statement for the 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, in either case to be filed not later than 120 days after the end of our 2021 fiscal year.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The information required by this Item 12 will either be (i) included in an amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or (ii) incorporated by reference from our definitive proxy statement for the 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, in either case to be filed not later than 120 days after the end of our 2021 fiscal year.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
The information required by this Item 13 will either be (i) included in an amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or (ii) incorporated by reference from our definitive proxy statement for the 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, in either case to be filed not later than 120 days after the end of our 2021 fiscal year.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
The information required by this Item 14 will either be (i) included in an amendment to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or (ii) incorporated by reference from our definitive proxy statement for the 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, in either case to be filed not later than 120 days after the end of our 2021 fiscal year.
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
The following documents are filed as part of this report:
1.
Financial Statements. The following - consolidated financial statements and related documents are filed as part of this report:
Financial Statements
Page
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Balance Sheets - At December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Operations - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity- Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
to
2.
Financial Statement Schedules. Schedules are omitted because they are not required or applicable, or the required information is included in the Financial Statements or related notes.
3.
Exhibits. The Exhibits listed in the accompanying Exhibit Index are filed or incorporated by reference as part of, or furnished with, this report.
Exhibit Index
Exhibit
Number
Description
Form
File No.
Incorporated by Exhibit Reference
Filing Date
3.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant.
8-K
001-38907
3.1
May 17, 2019
3.2
Certificate of Amendment to the Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, effective September 15, 2021.
8-K
001-38907
3.1
September 15, 2021
3.3
Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Registrant.
8-K
001-38907
3.24
May 17, 2019
4.1
Form of Common Stock Certificate of the Registrant
S-1/A
333-230887
4.1
April 29, 2019
4.4
Description of the Registrant’s Securities
10-K
001-38907
4.4
March 27, 2020
10.1**
2012 Equity Incentive Plan and forms of agreements thereunder
S-1
333-230887
10.1
April 15, 2019
10.2**
2019 Equity Incentive Plan (as amended)
8-K
001-38907
10.1
October 1, 2020
10.3**
2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan
S-1/A
333-230887
10.3
April 29, 2019
10.4**
Form of Indemnification Agreement, by and between the Registrant and each of its directors and executive officers.
S-1
333-230887
10.4
April 15, 2019
10.8**
Office Lease Agreement, by and between the Registrant and BCSP Crossroads Property LLC, dated May 25, 2006, as amended.
S-1
333-230887
10.8
April 15, 2019
10.11+
Amended and Restated Global Patent License Agreement, by and between Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson (Publ) and the Registrant, effective as of January 1, 2017.
S-1
333-230887
10.11
April 15, 2019
10.12**
Patent License Agreement, by and between Nokia Corporation and the Registrant, effective as of September 23, 2008, as amended.
S-1/A
333-230887
10.12
April 29, 2019
10.18**
Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Thomas Wilkinson, dated October 29, 2019.
10-K
001-38907
10.18
March 27, 2020
10.19**
Transaction Bonus Plan.
10-K
001-38907
10.19
March 27, 2020
10.23**
Employment Letter Agreement, dated October 14, 2021, by and Between Sonim Technologies, Inc. and Robert Tirva.
8-K
001-38907
10.1
October 15, 2021
10.24**
Registration Rights Agreement between Sonim Technologies, Inc. and B. Riley Principal Investments, LLC and BRC Partners Opportunity Fund, L.P. dated June 11, 2020.
8-K
001-38907
10.1
June 17, 2020
10.25+
Frame Purchase Agreement dated December 18, 2020 by and among Sonim Technologies, Inc. and Dongguan Unicair Communication Technology Co. Ltd.
8-K
001-38907
10.1
December 18, 2020
10.26+
Asset Purchase & Employee Transfer Agreement dated December 22, 2020 by and among Sonim Technologies (India) Private Limited and Coforge Ltd.
8-K
001-38907
10.1
December 29, 2020
10.27+
ODM Services Agreement dated February 26, 2021 by and among Sonim Technologies, Inc. and FIH (Hong Kong) Limited
8-K
001-38907
10.1
March 4, 2021
10.29**
2021 Non-Employee Director Compensation Policy.
10-Q
001-38907
10.2
November 10, 2021
21.1*
Subsidiaries of the Registrant.
*
23.1*
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
*
31.1*
Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
*
31.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
*
32.1*
Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
*
32.2*
Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
*
101.INS
Inline XBRL Instance Document (the instance document does Not appear in the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags Are embedded within the Inline XBRL document)
101.SCH
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as inline XBRL and Contained in Exhibit 101)
*
Filed herewith.
**
Compensatory plan or management contract
+
Portion of this exhibit (indicated by asterisks) have been omitted as the Registrant has determined that (i) the omitted information is not material and (ii) the omitted information would likely cause competitive harm to the Registrant if publicly disclosed.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, the Registrant has duly caused this Report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Sonim Technologies, Inc.
Date March 21, 2022
By:
/s/ Robert Tirva
Robert Tirva
Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Name
Title
Date
/s/ Robert Tirva
Principal Executive Officer
March 21, 2022
Robert Tirva, President and Chief Operating Officer
/s/ Robert Tirva
Principal Financial and Accounting Officer
March 21, 2022
Robert Tirva, Chief Financial Officer
/s/ John Kneuer
Director and Chairman of the Board of Directors
March 21, 2022
John Kneuer
/s/ Alan Howe
Director
March 21, 2022
Alan Howe
/s/ Susan G. Swenson
Director
March 21, 2022
Susan G. Swenson
/s/ Michael Mulica
Director
March 21, 2022
Michael Mulica
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of Sonim Technologies, Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Sonim Technologies, Inc. (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders’ equity, and cash flows for the years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the consolidated results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Going Concern Uncertainty
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has incurred recurring losses from operations that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 1. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These consolidated financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s consolidated financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures to respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Moss Adams LLP
Campbell, CA
March 21, 2022
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2013
SONIM TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
DECEMBER 31, 2021 and 2020
(IN THOUSANDS EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE AMOUNTS)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
* Reflects the 1-for-10 reverse stock split that became effective on September 15, 2021. Refer to Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies for further information.
SONIM TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 and 2020
(IN THOUSANDS EXCEPT SHARE AND PER SHARE AMOUNTS)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
* Reflects the 1-for-10 reverse stock split that became effective on September 15, 2021. Refer to Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies for further information.
SONIM TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021, and 2020
(IN THOUSANDS EXCEPT SHARE AMOUNTS)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
* Reflects the 1-for-10 reverse stock split that became effective on September 15, 2021. Refer to Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies for further information.
SONIM TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 and 2020
(IN THOUSANDS)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
SONIM TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(In Thousands, except Share and Per Share Amounts)
NOTE 1 -The Company and its significant accounting policies
Description of Business -Sonim Technologies, Inc. was incorporated in the state of Delaware on August 5, 1999, and is headquartered in Austin, Texas. The Company is a leading U.S. provider of ultra-rugged mobile phones and accessories designed specifically for task workers physically engaged in their work environments, often in mission-critical roles.
On September 15, 2021, the Company effected a 1-for-10 stock split (the “Reverse Stock Split”) of its issued and outstanding shares of common stock on that date. Additionally, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock subject to outstanding stock options and restricted stock units, the exercise price of all of its outstanding stock options, and the number of shares of common stock reserved for future issuance pursuant to its equity compensation plans were adjusted proportionately in connection with the Reverse Stock Split. The number of authorized shares of common stock under the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and the par value per share of its common stock were unchanged. All historical share and per share amounts presented herein have been adjusted retrospectively to reflect these changes.
Liquidity and Ability to Continue as a Going Concern - Our consolidated financial statements account for the continuation of our business as a going concern. We are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with the development and release of new products. Our principal sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2021, consist of existing cash and cash equivalents totaling $11,233, and our ability to raise additional capital through the issuance of equity, and positive cash flow from the sale of products that are currently in development over the next year. The Company had a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $38,627and used $38,476 in cash from operations that raises substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least one yar from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
To alleviate a potential lack of liquidity, management is currently evaluating various funding alternatives and may continue to issue and sell the Company’s stock through their current at-the-market stock sale program. Management is also evaluating various funding alternatives and may seek to raise additional funds through other issuances of equity, mezzanine or debt securities, through arrangements with strategic or investment partners with greater sources of financing or through obtaining credit from government or financial institutions. The Company’s ability to obtain additional financing in the debt and equity capital markets is subject to several factors, including market and economic conditions, the Company’s performance and investor sentiment with respect to the Company and its industry.
Financial Statement Presentation-The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) for annual financial information.
Principles of Consolidation - The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Sonim Technologies. Inc. and its wholly owned foreign subsidiaries, Sonim Technologies India Private Limited, Sonim Technologies (Shenzhen) Limited, Sonim Technologies (Hong Kong) Limited and Sonim Communications India Private Limited (collectively, the “Company”). All significant intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.
Estimates -The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. These estimates include, but are not limited to, estimates related to revenue recognition; valuation assumptions regarding the determination of the fair value of common stock, as well as stock options; the useful lives of our long-lived assets; product warranties; loss contingencies; the recognition and measurement of income tax assets and liabilities, including uncertain tax positions; the net realizable value of inventory; and allowances for bad debt. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Concentrations of Credit Risk-The Company’s product revenues are concentrated in the technology industry, which is highly competitive and rapidly changing. Significant technological changes in the industry or customer requirements, or the emergence of competitive products with new capabilities or technologies, could adversely affect the Company’s consolidated operating results. Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to credit risk consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable. Cash and cash equivalents are deposited with high-quality, federally insured commercial banks in the United States and cash balances are in excess of federal insurance limits at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company generally does not require collateral or other security in support of accounts receivable. To reduce credit risk, management performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition. The Company analyzes the need for reserves for potential credit losses and records allowances for doubtful accounts when necessary. The Company had allowances for such losses totaling approximately $932 and $65 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and recognized $936 and $302 in bad debt expense during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Segment Information-The Company operates in one reporting segment. Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, who is the chief executive officer, in deciding how to allocate resources and assessing performance. The Company’s chief operating decision maker allocates resources and assesses performance based upon discrete financial information at the consolidated level.
Cash and Cash Equivalents-The Company considers all highly liquid investments with an original maturity from the date of purchase of 90 days or less to be cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, cash and cash equivalents consist of cash deposited with banks and money market funds. Included in the Company’s cash and cash equivalents are amounts held by foreign subsidiaries. The Company had $432 and $822 of foreign cash and cash equivalents included in the Company’s cash positions on December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts-Accounts receivable consist primarily of amounts due from customers in the course of normal business activities. Collateral on trade accounts receivable is generally not required. The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated uncollectible accounts receivable. The allowance is based on our assessment of known delinquent accounts. Accounts are written off against the allowance account when they are determined to be no longer collectible.
Inventory-The Company reports inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a first-in, first-out method (“FIFO”) and includes materials, labor, and manufacturing overhead related to the purchase and production of inventories. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation.
The Company periodically reviews its inventory for potential slow-moving or obsolete items and writes down specific items to net realizable value, as appropriate. The Company writes down inventory based on forecasted demand and technological obsolescence. These factors are impacted by market and economic conditions, technology changes, new product introductions, and changes in strategic direction, and require estimates that may include uncertain elements. Actual demand may differ from forecasted demand and such differences may have a material effect on recorded inventory values. Any write-down of inventory to the lower of cost or net realizable value creates a new cost basis that subsequently would not be marked up based on changes in underlying facts and circumstances.
Property and Equipment-Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. The cost for molds and tooling used in the Company’s manufacturing processes are capitalized and included in equipment. Depreciation and amortization are computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the respective assets, generally 24 to 36 months. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of estimated useful lives of the assets or the lease term. Expenditures for repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred. Upon disposition, the cost and related accumulated depreciation and amortization are removed from the accounts and the resulting gain or loss is reflected in the consolidated statements of operations.
Non-recurring Engineering (“NRE”) Tooling and Purchased Software Licenses-Third-party design services relating to the design of tooling materials and purchased software licenses used in the manufacturing process are capitalized and included in other assets within the consolidated balance sheets. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, amortization of NRE tooling and NRE software costs approximating $72 and $2,303 were charged to cost of revenues. The related net book value is $26 and $90, respectively, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, other Assets includes $2,345 and $2,889, respectively, of deferred NRE costs representing costs to fulfill contracts.
Long-lived Assets-The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. No such impairments have been identified to date.
Revenue Recognition - The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including our mobile phones, scanners, and accessories. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contractual arrangements that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services.
Revenue recognition incorporates discounts, price protection and customer incentives. In addition to cooperative marketing and other incentive programs, the Company has arrangements with some distributors, which allow for price protection and limited rights of return, generally through stock rotation programs. Under the price protection programs, the Company gives distributors credits for the difference between the original price paid and the Company’s then current price. Under the stock rotation programs, certain distributors are able to exchange certain products based on the number of qualified purchases made during the period.
The Company’s handsets typically require a technical approval process. This process entails design and configuration activities required to conform the Company’s devices to a wireless carrier customer’s specific their network requirements. Each wireless carrier defines its own specific functional requirements and certification process in order for the product to be ready for manufacture. While the technical approval process does involve some level of customization, in addition to design and configuration, the Company does not charge separately and is not reimbursed for these activities to the extent that they do not involve significant customization and does not incur these costs in advance of entering into binding agreements with its wireless carrier customers. Such technical approval is obtained prior to shipment. Revenue is recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for its arrangements, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Cost of Revenues-Cost of revenues includes direct and indirect costs associated with the manufacture of the Company’s products as well as with the performance of NRE services in connection with significant design modification and customization. Direct costs include material and labor, royalty, depreciation and amortization, while indirect costs include other labor and overhead costs incurred in manufacturing the product.
Advertising-The Company expenses the costs of advertising, including promotional expenses, as incurred. Advertising expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately zero and $17, respectively.
Shipping and Handling Costs-When the Company bills customers for shipping and handling it includes such amounts as part of revenue. Costs incurred for shipping and handling are recorded in cost of revenues.
Deferred Revenues-Deferred revenues represents the amount that is allocated to undelivered elements in multiple element arrangements. We limit the revenue recognized to the amount that is not contingent on the future delivery of products or services or meeting other specified performance conditions.
Research and Development-Research and development expenses consist of compensation costs, employee benefits, development fees paid to ODM partners, research supplies, allocated facility related expenses and allocated depreciation and amortization. Research and development expenses include costs incurred for the design and configuration activities of new products to conform to the specific functional requirements of the Company’s wireless carrier customers necessary to prepare the product for manufacture. The Company determined that the NRE technical approval costs and the NRE field test costs are contract fulfillment costs, and recognizes the associated NRE asset as these costs are incurred. The Company tracks the NRE asset by product and customer, then amortizes the NRE assets over a period of 4 years, which is management’s estimated average product life for each model phone, starting from the date of the first significant sales.
Stock-Based Compensation-The Company measures equity classified stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated fair value on the date of grant and recognizes compensation expense of those awards, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. For awards subject to performance conditions, the Company evaluates the probability of achieving each performance condition at each reporting date and begins to recognize expense over the requisite service period when it is deemed probable that a performance condition will be met using the accelerated attribution method. The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is described more fully in Note 9. The fair value of each restricted stock award is measured as the fair value per share of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant.
Warranty-The Company provides standard warranty coverage on its accessories and handsets for one and three years, respectively, providing labor and parts necessary to repair the systems during the warranty period. The warranty coverage is an assurance type warranty, and thus is not a separate performance obligation. The Company accounts for the estimated warranty cost as a charge to cost of revenues when revenue is recognized. The estimated warranty cost is based on historical product performance and field expenses.
Utilizing actual service records, the Company calculates the average service hours and parts expense per system to determine the estimated warranty charge. The Company updates these estimated charges periodically. The actual product performance and/or field expense profiles may differ, and in those cases the Company adjusts warranty accruals accordingly.
From time to time, the Company ships mobile devices to its customers as seed stock. The seed stock represents extra units of mobile devices beyond the original mobile devices ordered by the customer and are primarily used to facilitate warranty coverage of mobile devices received by our customers from their direct customers.
Comprehensive Income or Loss-The Company had no items of comprehensive income or loss other than net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Therefore, a separate statement of comprehensive loss has not been included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Foreign currency translation-The Company uses the U.S. dollar as its functional currency for its significant subsidiaries. Foreign currency assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars at the end-of-period exchange rates except for property and equipment, and related depreciation and amortization, which are translated at the historical exchange rates. Expenses are translated at average exchange rates in effect during each period. Foreign assets held directly by the Company include certain accounts receivable balances and bank accounts which are translated in the U.S. dollar at the end-of-period exchange rates. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had approximately $378 and $389, respectively, in net foreign currency transactions losses, which are included in other expense, net on the consolidated statements of operations.
Sales taxes-Sales and value added taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are accounted for on a net basis and not included in revenue.
Income taxes-The (expense) benefit for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
Compliance with income tax regulations requires the Company to make decisions relating to the transfer pricing of revenue and expenses between each of its legal entities that are located in several countries. The Company’s determinations include many decisions based on management’s knowledge of the underlying assets of the business, the legal ownership of these assets, and the ultimate transactions conducted with customers and other third parties. The calculation of the Company’s tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in multiple tax jurisdictions. The Company may be periodically reviewed by domestic and foreign tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These reviews may include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, the Company records estimated reserves when it is more likely than not that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority. Such estimates are subject to change. See Note 10, “Income Taxes”.
Net Loss per Share-Net loss per share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, for purposes of the calculation of diluted net loss per share, warrants to purchase stock, unvested restricted stock units and stock options to purchase common stock are considered
potentially dilutive securities but have been excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share as their effect is antidilutive. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as the basic net loss per share for the periods presented.
Restructuring and Reduction in Force-
The Company reduced its global headcount from approximately 402 employees and 98 contractors at year-end 2019 to 263 employees and 54 contractors as of December 31, 2020 and to 77 employees and 25 contractors as of December 31, 2021.
During 2020, we reduced our headcount to better align our expenses with our revenue profile. The Company executed a reduction in force of approximately 10% of its U.S. employees in February 2020 and has also reduced headcount in certain international locations in India and Shenzhen. Our headcount at December 31, 2020 was 317. During 2020, we decided to proceed with future product co-development and manufacturing with ODM partners. To ensure the efficient manufacturing of our legacy products through this transition, we outsourced our final assembly to a supply chain partner and transferred 22 employees to that partner to enhance their efficiency in taking over our production work. We have also relocated our headquarters from San Mateo, California to Austin, Texas, a lower cost location. In 2020, we recorded costs related to restructuring totaling $1,663, of which $459 and $1,204 was paid out in 2021 and 2020 respectively, and approximately $100 was included in cost of revenues in 2020.
The severance liability related to these restructuring costs as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is:
ATM Program
On June 30, 2021, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (“Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. and EF Hutton, a division of Benchmark Investments, LLC (“Sales Agents”) to sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $10,000, from time to time, through an “at-the-market offering” program (the “June 2021 ATM Program”). Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we paid the Sales Agents a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the Sales Agreement. We exhausted this June 2021 ATM Program on July 14, 2021, selling an aggregate of 1,820,785 shares of our common stock at a weighted net average price per share of $4.59 and for net proceeds of approximately $8,313 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On September 23, 2021, we entered into a new At Market Issuance Sales Agreement with B. Riley Securities, Inc., as sales agent, to sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $41,637 from time to time, through a new “at the market offering” program (the “ATM Program”). Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we will pay B. Riley Securities, Inc. a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the Sales Agreement. From September 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we issued and sold an aggregate of 10,280,906 shares of our common stock at an average net price per share of $1.89 under the ATM Program for net proceeds of approximately $19,389.
Public Offering
The 2020 Offering (“PO”) -On June 9, 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering (“PO”) in which the Company sold 3,680,000 shares of its common stock, at a price to the public of $7.50 per share. The offer and sale of the shares in the PO were registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-238869), which was declared effective by the SEC on June 4, 2020. The Company raised approximately $25,086 in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $1,656 and offering expenses of approximately $689. Offering costs, which consist of direct incremental legal, consulting, banking and accounting fees relating to the Company’s PO, are offset against proceeds from the PO within stockholders’ equity.
New accounting pronouncements:
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s consolidated financial statements with another public company, which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the extended transition period, difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Pronouncements adopted in 2021:
In December 2019, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of ASC 740 in order to reduce cost and complexity of its application. The ASU removes the exception related to the incremental approach for intra-period tax allocation, as well as two exceptions related to account for outside basis differences of equity method investments and foreign subsidiaries. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 31, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 on January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have an impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Pronouncements not yet adopted:
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), as amended, which requires lessees to recognize a liability associated with obligations to make payments under the terms of the arrangement in addition to a right-of-use asset representing the lessee’s right to use, or to control the use of the given asset assumed under the lease. As an emerging growth company, the Company has elected to adopt the standard based on nonpublic business entities implementation dates for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently evaluating this new standard and the impact it will have on its consolidated financial statements, information technology systems, process, and internal controls.
NOTE 2 -Revenue recognition
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from the sale of products, including mobile phones, scanners, and accessories, and the majority of the Company’s contracts include only one performance obligation, namely the delivery of product. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account for revenue recognition under ASC 606. The Company also recognizes revenue from other contracts that may include a combination of products and NRE services or from the provision of solely NRE services. Where there is a combination of products and NRE services, the Company accounts for the promises as individual performance obligations if they are concluded as distinct. Performance obligations are considered distinct if they are both capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract. In determining whether performance obligations meet the criteria for being distinct, the Company considers a number of factors, such as the degree of interrelation and interdependence between obligations, and whether or not the good or service significantly modifies or transforms another good or service in the contract. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any contracts in which the products and NRE services were concluded to be a single performance obligation. In certain cases, the Company may offer tiered pricing based on volumes purchased for specific model phones. To date, all tiered pricing provisions have fallen into observable ranges of pricing to existing customers, thus, not resulting in any material right which could be concluded as its own performance obligation. In addition, the Company does not offer material post-contract support services to its customers.
Net revenue for an individual contract is recognized at the related transaction price, which is the amount the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the goods and/or services. The transaction price for product sales is calculated as the product selling price net of variable consideration which may include estimates for marketing development funds, sales incentives, and price protection and stock rotation rights. The Company generally does not offer a right of return to its customers, except for certain distributors where the company estimates future returns and reduces revenue on sales subject to return and maintains a reserve for
returns allowance. Typically, variable consideration does not need to be constrained as estimates are based on specific contract terms. However, the Company continues to assess variable consideration estimates such that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur. The transaction price for a contract with multiple performance obligations is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. Standalone selling prices for products are determined based on the prices charged to customers, which are directly observable. Standalone selling price of the professional services are mostly based on time and materials. We determine our estimates of variable consideration based on historical collection experience with similar payor classes, aged accounts receivable by payor class, terms of payment agreements, correspondence from payors related to revenue audits or reviews, our historical settlement activity of audited and reviewed claims and current economic conditions using the portfolio approach. Revenue is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the cumulative amount recognized will not occur in future periods.
Revenue is then recognized for each distinct performance obligation as control is transferred to the customer. Revenue attributable to hardware is recognized at the time control of the product transfers to the customer. Control is generally transferred when the Company has a present right to payment and title and the significant risks and rewards of ownership of products or services are transferred to its customers. For most of the Company’s revenue attributable to hardware, control transfers when products are shipped. Revenue attributable to professional services is recognized as the Company performs the professional services for the customer.
Disaggregation of revenue
The following table presents our net revenue disaggregate by product category for the years ended:
Shipping and handling costs
The Company has elected to account for shipping and handling activities related to contracts with customers as costs to fulfill the promise to transfer the associated products.
Contract costs
Applying the practical expedient, the Company recognizes the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred when the amortization period of the assets that otherwise would have been recognized is one year or less. These costs are included in sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses.
The non-recurring costs associated with design and development of new products for technical approval, represent costs to fulfill a contract pursuant to ASC 340-40, Other Assets and Deferred Costs. Accordingly, the Company capitalizes these non-recurring engineering costs and amortizes such costs over the estimated period of time over which they are expected to be recovered, which is typically 4 years, the estimated life of a particular model phone.
The total capitalized costs to fulfill a contract is primarily associated with Company’s introduction of the XP8 model phone and the XP3plus model feature phone. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the total costs to fulfill a contract included in other assets were $2,345 and $2,889, respectively.
Contract balances
The Company records accounts receivable when it has an unconditional right to consideration. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company does not have a contract receivable balance. Contract liabilities are recorded when cash payments are received or due in advance of performance. Contract liabilities consist of advance payments and deferred revenue, where the Company has unsatisfied performance obligations. Contract liabilities are presented as a component of deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the contract liabilities were $11 and $5, respectively, with the contract liabilities as of December 31, 2021, expected to be recognized into revenue in 2022.
The following table is a rollforward of contract balances as of December 31, 2021:
NOTE 3 -Fair value measurement
The fair value measurements standard establishes a framework for measuring fair value. That framework provides a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under the standard are described below:
Level 1-Inputs to the valuation methodology are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets that the Company has the ability to access.
Level 2-Inputs to the valuation methodology include:
•
Quoted market prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets;
•
Quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets;
•
Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability;
•
Inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
If the asset or liability has a specified (contractual) term, the level 2 input must be observable for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
Level 3-Inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
The asset’s or liability’s fair value measurement level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Valuation techniques used need to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
Following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for assets and liabilities measured at fair value. There have been no changes in the methodologies used for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Money market funds are classified within level 1 of the fair value hierarchy because they are valued using quoted market prices.
The methods described above may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. Furthermore, while the Company believes its valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different fair value measurement at the reporting date.
The following tables sets forth by level, within the fair value hierarchy, the Company’s assets and liabilities at fair value:
*
Included in cash and cash equivalents on the consolidated balance sheets.
NOTE 4 -Significant Balance Sheet Components
Inventory consisted of the following:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a $1,594 write-down of the inventory value for scanners, aging raw materials and aging finished goods. The Company accrued a loss of approximately $300 on purchase commitments in connection with end-of-life products.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an inventory reserve adjustment of approximately $700 as a result of aging materials and finished goods, and accrued a loss of approximately $500 of purchase commitments in connection with end-of-life products.
Distributor returns allowance
The Company records reductions to revenue related to future distributor product returns based on the Company’s expectation. The Company had inventory related to distributor product returns totaling approximately $229 and zero as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Prepaid expenses and other current assets consisted of the following:
Property and equipment consisted of the following:
Depreciation and amortization expense of property and equipment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $301 and $426, respectively. During 2021, the Company disposed of computer equipment with a cost of $910 and accumulated depreciation of $856.
Other assets consisted of the following:
Accrued Expenses consisted of the following:
The table below sets forth the activity in the warranty liability account, which is included in accrued expenses on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
NOTE 5 - Accounts Receivable
The following table presents the components of the Company’s receivables as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The Company has non-trade receivables from a manufacturing vendor resulting from the sale of components to this vendor who manufactures and assembles final products for the Company.
The Company analyzes the need for reserves for potential credit losses and records allowances for doubtful accounts when necessary. The Company had allowances for such losses totaling approximately $932 and $65 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The entire amount of the allowance at December 31, 2021, was for a distributor who is not a 10% customer.
Trade receivables from one customer approximated 70% of total accounts receivable at December 31, 2021, and receivables from two customers approximated 26% and 10% of total trade receivables at December 31, 2020.
NOTE 6 -Borrowings
Long-Term Debt
Riley Loan- The Company had a Subordinated Term Loan and Security Agreement, as amended, (the “B. Riley Loan Agreement”) with B. Riley Principal Investments, LLC (“BRPI”), an affiliate of B. Riley Financial, Inc., a shareholder of the Company. Under the amended B. Riley Loan Agreement, the Company could borrow principal up to $12,000 via a subordinated secured convertible promissory note, with an optional conversion feature.
The amended B. Riley Loan Agreement included repayment penalties if any repayment reduced the principal amount outstanding below $10,000. The prepayment penalty was 2% for 2019 and decreased to 1% after the second anniversary through maturity. The borrowings under the B. Riley Loan Agreement, as amended would have matured on September 1, 2022, and carried a stated interest rate of 10% and provided that the first year of interest commencing on October 26, 2018, was compounded into the principal, with interest-only payments beginning thereafter.
On June 1, 2020, the Company entered into a Note Amendment and Debt Cancellation Agreement with BRPI (the “Note Amendment”), which provided that, contingent upon the closing of the PO, the Company would repay $4,000 of the outstanding indebtedness to BRPI in cash (the “B. Riley Repayment”) and the remaining principal amounts, accrued interest and other amounts outstanding under the B. Riley Loan Agreement, after giving effect to the B. Riley Repayment, would be redeemed for shares of common stock to be issued to BRPI or its affiliates at the public offering price of shares of common stock in the PO.
Pursuant to the Note Amendment, as amended, the Company made the B. Riley Repayment on June 9, 2020, and the remaining principal amount, accrued interest and other amounts outstanding under the B. Riley Loan Agreement, after giving effect to the B. Riley Repayment, in the amount of $6,170, was redeemed into 822,682 shares of the Company’s common stock issued to BRPI and BRC Opportunity Fund L.P., an affiliate of BRPI, (the “Redemption Shares”). Following the B. Riley Repayment and the issuance of the Redemption Shares, the Company has no outstanding indebtedness under the B. Riley Loan Agreement. Also, on June 11, 2020, the Company entered into a registration rights agreement with BRPI and BRC Partners Opportunity Fund, L.P. pursuant to which the Company agreed to file a registration statement covering the resale of the Redemption Shares and to use its best efforts to cause such registration statement to become effective upon the time frames set forth in the registration rights agreement. A registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-239664) registering the Redemption Shares for resale by BRPI and BRC Partners Opportunity Fund, LP was declared effective by the SEC on July 13, 2020.
Promissory Notes Payable-In 2014 and 2017, the Company entered into agreements with one of its suppliers, whereby certain of its trade payables for royalties and royalty up-front payments were converted to payment plans. In December 2018, the Company amended its accounts payable financing agreements, effective January 1, 2019, which provides for the $736 outstanding balance to be paid in twenty equal quarterly installments. The amounts due under these agreements would be paid in quarterly installments over periods from two to four years, with interest ranging up to 8%. Remaining balances are $214 and $362 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
PPP Loan--On April 13, 2020, the Company received approximately $2.3 million in PPP loan proceeds. Following additional guidance issued by the SBA on April 23, 2020, that casted doubt on the ability of public companies to qualify for loans under the PPP, the Company repaid the PPP loan on April 29, 2020.
The components of the long-term debt balance as of December 31, are as follows:
Future aggregate annual principal payments on all long-term debt, are as of December 31, 2021:
NOTE 7 -Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity
On November 2, 2018, the Company amended and restated its previous certificate of incorporation and adjusted its authorized capital stock (par value of $0.001) to consist of 100,000,000 shares of common stock and 5,000,000 shares of preferred stock. Each outstanding share of common stock entitles the holder to one vote of each matter properly submitted to the stockholders of the Company for vote. As of December 31, 2021, no shares of preferred stock have been issued.
The following table shows shares of common stock reserved as of:
NOTE 8 -Stockholders’ Equity
On September 15, 2021, the Company effected a 1-for-10 Reverse Stock Split of its issued and outstanding shares of common stock on that date. Additionally, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock subject to outstanding stock options and restricted stock units, the exercise price of all of its outstanding stock options, and the number of shares of common stock reserved for future
issuance pursuant to its equity compensation plans were adjusted proportionately in connection with the Reverse Stock Split. The number of authorized shares of common stock under the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation and the par value per share of its common stock were unchanged. All historical share and per share amounts presented herein have been adjusted retrospectively to reflect these changes.
On June 30, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Sales Agents to sell shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $10,000, from time to time, through the June 2021 ATM Program. Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we paid the Sales Agents a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the Sales Agreement. We exhausted this June 2021 ATM Program on July 14, 2021, selling an aggregate of 1,820,785 shares of our common stock at a weighted average net price per share of $4.59 and for net proceeds of approximately $8,313 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On September 23, 2021, we entered into a new Sales Agreement with the Sales Agent, to sell shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $41,637 from time to time, through a new ATM Program. Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we will pay the Sales Agent a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of common stock sold through it under the Sales Agreement. From September 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we issued and sold an aggregate of 10,280,906 shares of our common stock at a weighted average net price per share of $1.89 under the ATM Program for net proceeds of approximately $19,389. All proceeds were received by December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $21,600 available for future issuances under the ATM Program.
NOTE 9-Stock-based Compensation
On September 15, 2021, the Company effected a 1-for-10 stock split (the “Reverse Stock Split”) of its issued and outstanding shares of common stock on that date. Additionally, the number of shares of the Company’s common stock subject to outstanding stock options and restricted stock units, the exercise price of all of its outstanding stock options, and the number of shares of common stock reserved for future issuance pursuant to its equity compensation plans were adjusted proportionately in connection with the Reverse Stock Split. All historical share and per share amounts presented herein have been adjusted retrospectively to reflect these changes.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had the 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2012 Option Plan”), 2019 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2019 Option Plan”) and the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan in place.
As of December 31, 2021, the number of shares available to be issued under the 2019 Option Plan were 538,243.
The 2019 Option Plans provides for the grant of incentive and non-statutory stock options (“Options”), stock appreciation rights (“SAR”), restricted stock awards (“RSA”), and restricted stock unit awards (“RSU”) to employees, nonemployee directors, and consultants of the Company. Option awards granted under the 2019 Option Plan generally become exercisable ratably over a two-year or four-year period following the date of grant and expire ten years from the date of grant. At the discretion of the Board of Directors, certain awards may be exercisable immediately at the date of grant but are subject to a repurchase right, under which the Company may buy back any unvested shares at their original exercise price in the event of an employee’s termination prior to full vesting. All other awards are exercisable only to the extent vested. At, December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no shares that had been early exercised that were subject to the Company’s repurchase right at that date. The exercise price or strike price for Options and SARs granted under the 2019 Option Plan must generally be at least equal to 100% of the fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of grant, as determined by the Board of Directors. The exercise price of incentive stock options granted under the 2019 Option Plan to ten percent or greater stockholders must be at least equal to 110% of the fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of grant, as determined by the Board of Directors, and are not exercisable after five years from the date of grant.
The Board of Directors adopted, and its stockholders approved, the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and the 2019 Option Plan in March 2019 and April 2019, respectively, each of which became effective in connection with the IPO. There are 54,137 shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, the number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan automatically increases on January 1 of each calendar year for 10 years, starting January 1, 2020, and ending on, and including, January 1, 2029, in an amount equal to the lesser of 1% of the total number of shares of capital stock outstanding on December 31st of the prior calendar year, and (ii) 50,000 shares, unless the Board of Directors or the compensation committee of the Board of Directors determines prior to such date that there will be a lesser increase, or no increase. The increase under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan for 2021 was 50,000 shares. As of December 31, 2021, 922,266 shares of common stock are reserved for future issuance under the 2019 Option Plan, plus the number of shares subject to outstanding stock options or other stock awards that were granted under the 2012 Option Plan that are forfeited, terminated, expire or are otherwise not issued. Additionally, the number of shares of common stock reserved for issuance under the 2019 Option Plan automatically increases on January 1 of each calendar year for 10 years, starting January 1, 2020 and ending on and including January 1, 2029, in an amount equal to 5% of the total number of shares of capital stock outstanding on December 31 of the prior calendar year, unless the Board of Directors or compensation committee determines prior to the date of increase that there will be
a lesser increase, or no increase. The increase under the 2019 Option Plan for 2021 and 2020 was 331,551 and 102,185 shares. In May 2020, the Board of Directors approved an increase in the number of shares of common stock reserved for future issuance under the 2019 Option Plan to 300,000 shares, which was approved by the Company’s stockholders on September 29, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 19,736 and 19,210 shares of common stock respectively were issued under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
On June 17, 2021, and June 18, 2021, the Company granted an aggregate of 46,747 restricted stock units to the Company’s board of directors and an executive.
On July 1, 2021, the Company granted an aggregate of 850 restricted stock units to the Company’s employees.
On October 8, 2021, the Company granted an aggregate of 75,000 restricted stock units to a member of the board of directors.
On November 12, 2021, the Company granted an aggregate of 97,671 restricted stock units to members of the board of directors.
On June 9, 2020, the Company granted an aggregate of 201,550 restricted stock units to the Company’s board of directors, executives and employees.
On September 29, 2020, the Company granted an aggregate of 67,650 restricted stock units to the Company’s executives and employees.
On December 14, 2020, the Company granted an aggregate of 11,400 restricted stock units to an ex-member of the board of directors who will be serving in a consulting capacity.
Stock-based compensation expense is as follows:
On January 27, 2022, 415,023 shares of common stock were issued under the 2019 Employee Stock Purchase Plan as payment to three executives for bonuses that relate to the 2021 year. The dollar value of these bonuses was fixed at $254 as of December 31, 2021, and the number of shares issued on January 27, 2022 was determined based on the closing stock price on that date. As of December 31, 2021, the bonus was fully vested and $254 was included in accrued expenses.
Stock Options:
Stock option activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows and reflects the 1-for-10 Reverse Stock Split that became effective on September 15, 2021:
*The intrinsic value is calculated as the difference between the exercise price and the fair value of the common stock on the balance sheet date.
As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $2,034 of unamortized stock-based compensation cost related to unvested stock options and RSU’s, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted average period of four years.
The total pre-tax intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was zero and $50, respectively. The intrinsic value is the difference between the estimated fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of exercise and the exercise price for in-the-money options.
The weighted average grant date fair value of options granted during the years ended December 31, 2020 was $4.10.
The fair value of employee stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model using various inputs, including the Company’s estimates of the fair value of common stock on the date of grant, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expectations regarding future dividends. Stock-based compensation also reflects the Company’s estimate regarding the portion of awards that may be forfeited.
The following describes the key inputs used by the Company:
Fair Value of Common Stock- The Company measures equity classified stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated fair value on the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the vesting period. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the Company’s stock options are expected to be outstanding. The majority of stock option grants are considered to be “plain vanilla” and thus the Company determines the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
Expected Volatility-The expected volatility was derived from the historical stock volatilities of several unrelated public companies within the Company’s industry that the Company considers to be comparable to the business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants. The Company completed its IPO in May 2019, and therefore does not have sufficient history.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest yield in effect at the date of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the option’s expected term.
Dividend Rate-The expected dividend rate was assumed to be zero, as the Company has not previously paid dividends on common stock and has no current plans to do so.
Forfeiture Rate-Forfeitures are recognized when they occur. Historically, the Company estimated the forfeiture rate based on an analysis of actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior, and other factors.
The fair value of option grants made during the years ended December 31, 2020, was estimated using the following Black-Scholes option pricing model assumptions:
Restricted Stock Awards:
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the unvested restricted stock units totaled 347,111 and 269,138 shares, respectively.
The following table summarized the outstanding RSU’s as of December 31, 2021:
NOTE 10 -Income Taxes
The following table presents the income (loss) before income taxes for domestic and foreign operations, and the components of the provision (benefit) for income taxes for the years ended December 31:
The Company’s effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate due to the following for the years ended December 31:
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The following table presents the significant components of the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities at December 31:
A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets where the recoverability of the assets is uncertain. The determination to provide a valuation allowance is dependent upon the assessment of whether it is more likely than not that sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize the deferred tax assets. Based on the weight of the available evidence, which includes the Company’s historical operating losses, lack of taxable income, and the accumulated deficit, the Company provided a full valuation allowance against the U.S. deferred tax assets resulting from the accruals and reserves along with the net operating loss and credits carried forward. The valuation allowance increased by $8,477 from $14,281 as of December 31, 2020 to $22,738 as of December 31, 2021, and by $2,467 from $11,814 to $14,281 as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had net deferred income tax assets related primarily to net operating loss carry forwards, accruals and reserves and tax credit carryforward that are not currently being recognized of $22,738 and $14,281, respectively, which have been offset by a valuation allowance.
We have not provided U.S. Federal and State income taxes, nor foreign withholding taxes on approximately $9,802 of undistributed earnings for certain non-US subsidiaries, because such earnings are intended to be indefinitely reinvested. If these earnings were distributed to the U.S. in the form of dividends or otherwise, or if the shares of the relevant foreign subsidiaries were sold or otherwise transferred, we would not be subject to U.S. income tax due to the transition tax of IRC Section 965 or via newly enacted Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) provision, enacted as part of the 2017 U.S. Tax Act. The Company would be subject to U.S. state tax and potential foreign withholding taxes on a repatriation of the foreign earnings. The amount of unrecognized deferred income tax liability related to these earnings is not material.
Estimate of cumulative foreign earnings is as follows as of December 31:
The Company had net operating loss carryovers (NOL) for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $92,262 and $27,577, respectively, as of December 31, 2021. Approximately $9,939 of federal NOLs will expire beginning in 2037, while approximately $82,323 generated beginning in 2018 have an indefinite life. The state NOLs will expire if unused in years 2027 through 2041:
The Company had research and development (“R&D”) credit carryforwards as follows as of December 31:
At December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $99 of federal and $126 of California research and development tax credit and other tax credit carryforwards available to offset future taxable income. The California research credits have no expiration dates.
The federal research credits expire on December 31, 2040.
Federal and state laws impose restrictions on the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards and R&D credit carryforwards in the event of a change in ownership of the Company, which constitutes an 'ownership change' as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 382 and 383. The Company experienced an ownership change in the past that materially impacts the availability of its net operating losses and tax credits. The amounts indicated in the above tables reflect the reduction of net operating losses and credit carryforwards as a result of previous ownership changes that the Company experienced. Should there be additional ownership changes in the future, the Company's ability to utilize existing carryforwards could be substantially restricted.
The Company had excess interest expense carryforwards of $1,499 as of December 31, 2021. Federal laws impose restrictions on the utilization of sec 163 (j) excess interest expense carryforwards in the event of a change in ownership of the Company, which constitutes an 'ownership change' as defined by Internal Revenue Code Section 382 and 383. The Company experienced an ownership change in June 2020 that materially impacts the availability of its excess interest expense. However, since the Section 163(j) excess interest expense carryover does not expire, there will be no limitation under Section 382 against the excess interest expense carryover in 2021. Should the Company utilize the excess interest expense in the future, the availability of its carryforwards would be substantially restricted.
Uncertain Tax Positions
The Company accounts for uncertainty in income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under ASC 740, uncertain tax positions, are evaluated in a two-step process. The Company first determines whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authority, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on technical merit. If a tax position meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold it is then measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize, in the consolidated financial statements. The tax position is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
The following table summarizes the activity related to unrecognized tax benefits as follows as of December 31:
$66 of the unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021, are accounted for as a reduction in the Company’s deferred tax assets. Due to the Company’s valuation allowance, only $1,240 of the $1,306 of unrecognized tax benefits would affect the Company’s effective tax rate, if recognized. The Company does not believe it is reasonably possible that its unrecognized tax benefits will significantly change in the next twelve months.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. The Company reported a tax expense of $52 of interest and penalties in 2021 and the Company has accrued a $136 liability for accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit as of December 31, 2021.
The Company's material income tax jurisdictions are the United States (federal and California), China and India. As a result of net operating loss and credit carryforwards, the Company is subject to audit for tax years 2014 and forward for California purposes and
for 2017 and forward for federal tax purposes. The statute of limitations remains open for China tax years 2015 and later, and for India tax years 2016 and later.
Accounting for GILTI requires companies to adopt tax accounting policies related to:
Treating the book-tax differences as either period costs or to recognize GILTI related deferred tax assets/liabilities in accounting for the GILTI book-tax differences. The Company has elected to treat this difference as a period cost.
In the Company’s valuation allowance analysis, the Company will elect the Increment Cash Tax Savings Approach in determining its U.S. valuation allowance.
NOTE 11 -Commitments and Contingencies
The terms and conditions of applicable bylaws, certificates or articles of incorporation, agreements or applicable law may obligate Sonim under certain circumstances to indemnify its current and former directors, officers or employees, and underwriters, with respect to certain of the matters described below and Sonim has been advancing legal fees and costs to certain current and former directors, officers, employees and underwriters in connection with certain matters described below.
Operating leases-The Company leases several facilities under noncancelable operating leases that began expiring in 2021. The Company recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease period.
Future minimum lease payments under noncancelable operating lease commitments are approximately as follows:
Rent expense was approximately $1,071 and $1,568 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Third Party Designer Commitments-The aggregate amount of noncancelable outsourced third party designer services for our next generation phones as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, was approximately $6,460 and zero, respectively, and were related to the XP5plus and the XP10.
Purchase Commitments-The aggregate amount of noncancelable purchase orders as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, was approximately $5,663 and $5,113, respectively, and were related to the purchase of components of our devices.
Royalty payments-The Company is required to pay per unit royalties to wireless essential patent holders and other providers of integrated technologies on mobile devices delivered, which, in aggregate, amount to less than 5% of net revenues associated with each unit and expire from 2022 through 2026. Royalty expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $2,168 and $2,288, respectively, which are included in cost of revenues on the consolidated statements of operations. The Company may be required to pay additional royalties to additional patent holder and technology providers on future products.
Securities litigation-On September 20, 2019, a purported Sonim stockholder who allegedly purchased stock registered in Sonim’s initial public offering (“IPO”) filed a putative class action complaint in the Superior Court of the State of California, County of San Mateo, captioned Pearson v. Sonim Technologies, Inc., et al., Case No. 19CIV05564, on behalf of himself and others who purchased shares of Sonim registered in the IPO (the “Pearson Action”). On October 4 and 16, 2019, two additional purported class action complaints substantially similar to the Pearson Action were filed on behalf of different plaintiffs yet the same putative class of Sonim stockholders, in the same court as the Pearson Action (the “’33 Act State Court Actions”). The defendants asked the Superior court to dismiss the “33 Act State Court Actions based on the provision in the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation requiring stockholders to file and litigate in federal court any claims under the Securities Act of 1933. On December 7, 2020, the Superior Court entered an order granting defendants’ motion to dismiss. On October 7, 2019, a substantially similar putative class action lawsuit was filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California (the “’33 Act Federal Action”). All four complaints allege violations of the Securities Act of 1933 by Sonim and certain of its current and former officers and directors for, among other things, alleged false or misleading statements and omissions in the registration statement issued in connection with the IPO, relating primarily to an alleged failure to disclose software defects in Sonim’s phones and alleged misstatements about performance characteristics of Sonim’s phones. In July 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with the Lead Plaintiff in the ‘33 Act Federal Action to settle that case on a class wide basis for $2.0 million. As a result, the Company has paid out the $2.0 million
settlement as of December 31, 2020. On March 5, 2021, the court presiding over the ’33 Act Federal Action granted final approval of the settlement.
Securities and Exchange Commission Formal Order of Private Investigation: In March 2020, the Company received a voluntary document request from the SEC San Francisco Regional office, and in August 2020, the Company was informed that the SEC Staff was conducting a formal investigation into events that occurred in 2018-2019. The Company has been cooperating in the SEC’s ongoing investigation. In October 2021, the Company and the SEC Staff began discussions regarding a potential resolution of the investigation. These discussions are ongoing. The Company is unable to predict the likely outcome of the investigation, including whether it can be resolved through settlement negotiations, or determine its potential impact, if any, on the Company.
Derivative litigation-On September 21, 2020, the Company, and certain of its current and former directors and officers were sued by a stockholder on behalf of our Company in a derivative action in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware, captioned Kusiak v. Plaschke, et al., Case No 20-cv-1270-MN (“Kusiak”). The Kusiak complaint is based largely on the same underlying factual allegations as the ’33 Act Federal Action. The Company filed a motion to dismiss the Kusiak derivative action based on plaintiff’s failure to make a litigation demand on Sonim’s directors. On February 1, 2021, plaintiff in Kusiak voluntarily dismissed the action without prejudice.
On February 1, 2021, the same plaintiffs’ lawyers in the Kusiak action filed a new derivative action in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware against the Company and certain of its current and former directors and officers, captioned Gupta v. Plaschke, et al., Case No. 1:21-cv-130-MN (“Gupta”). The allegations in the Gupta complaint are generally similar to those in the Kusiak action. The Company filed a motion to dismiss the Gupta derivative action based on plaintiff’s failure to make a litigation demand on Sonim’s directors. Given the early stages of this proceeding and the limited information available, the Company cannot predict the outcome of this legal proceeding or determine its potential impact, if any, on the Company.
General litigation-The Company is involved in various other legal proceedings arising in the normal course of business. The Company does not believe that the ultimate resolution of these other matters will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
The results of any future litigation cannot be predicted with certainty and, regardless of the outcome, litigation can have an adverse impact on us because of defense and settlement costs, diversion of management time and resources and other factors.
Indemnification-Under the terms of its agreements with wireless carriers and other partners, the Company has agreed to provide indemnification for intellectual property infringement claims related to Company’s product sold by them to their end customers. From time to time, the Company receives notices from these wireless carriers and other partners of a claim for infringement of intellectual property rights potentially related to their products. These infringement claims have been settled, dismissed, have not been further pursued by the customers, or are pending for further action by the Company.
Contingent severance obligations-The Company has agreements in place with certain key employees (Executive Severance Arrangements) guaranteeing severance payments under certain circumstances. Generally, in the event of termination by the Company without cause, termination due to death or disability, or resignation for good reason, the Company is obligated to the pay the employees in accordance to the terms of the agreements. On May 31, 2021, the Company and Tom Wilkinson agreed that he will cease serving as the Company’s Chief Executive Officer. In connection with his departure, the Company entered into a Separation and Release Agreement with him pursuant to which he will continue to be paid his base salary of $400, the rate in effect on the effective date for a period of twelve months, subject to tax withholding and any other authorized deductions.
On December 11, 2019, the Board of Directors approved the Sonim Technologies Inc. Transaction Bonus Plan (the “Plan”) that is intended to incentivize Company employees who are in a position to significantly impact the value received by the Company’s stockholders in a change of control transaction. Pursuant to the Plan, upon consummation of a change of control transaction, 10% of the consideration payable to Company stockholders, after deducting transaction expenses, will be distributed to Plan participants, including the Company’s named executive officers. The Plan has a three-year term and may be extended by the administrator of the Plan. Subject to the terms of the Plan, participants must be continuously providing services to the Company through the date of the closing of a change in control transaction to be eligible to receive a bonus thereunder, except in the event of death or disability or involuntary termination without cause as further described in Section 5(c) and 5(d) of the Plan, and payment is contingent upon delivery and non-revocation of a general release of claims. In connection with the adoption of the Plan, the Board of Directors allocated a 10% interest in the Plan to Robert Tirva, the Company’s President, Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer, and 35% to 6 other key employees and consultants.
NOTE 12 -Net Loss Per Share
The following table sets forth the computation of the Company’s basic and diluted net loss per share for the periods ended and reflects the 1-for-10 Reverse Stock Split that became effective on September 15, 2021:
:
The potentially dilutive common shares that were excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share because their effect would have been antidilutive for the periods ended:
NOTE 13 -Entity Level Information
Segment Information-The Company operates in one reporting segment.
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, who is the chief operating officer, in deciding how to allocate resources and assessing performance. The Company’s chief operating decision maker allocates resources and assesses performance based upon discrete financial information at the consolidated level.
The following table summarizes the revenue by region based on ship-to destinations for the periods ended:
Long-lived assets located in the United States and Asia Pacific region were $2,370 and $3,040, and $534 and $782 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The composition of revenues is as follows:
Concentrations of Credit Risk-The Company’s product revenues are concentrated in the technology industry, which is highly competitive and rapidly changing. Significant technological changes in the industry or customer requirements, or the emergence of competitive products with new capabilities or technologies, could adversely affect the Company’s consolidated operating results. Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to credit risk consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable. Cash and cash equivalents are deposited with high-quality, federally insured commercial banks in the United States and cash balances are in excess of federal insurance limits at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company generally does not require collateral or other security in support of accounts receivable. To reduce credit risk, management performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition. The Company analyzes the need for reserves for potential credit losses and records allowances for doubtful accounts when necessary. The Company had allowances for such losses totaling approximately $932 and $65 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Receivables from one customer approximated 70% of total accounts receivable at December 31, 2021 and two customers approximated 26% and 10% of total accounts receivable at December 31, 2020.
Revenue from certain customers in 2021 and 2020 accounted for approximately the following percentage of total revenues:
NOTE 14 -Restructuring Costs
At the beginning of 2021, the Company outsourced substantially all of its software development to a third-party and transferred 105 employees to support the ongoing work to be performed. In connection with outsourcing its software development, the Company entered into an agreement of future business volume over the next three years in the amount of $7,120, of which the Company has committed to that a minimum value of $3,100 will be assured in the first year of business. The Company has paid $3,127 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Additionally, at the beginning of 2021, the Company outsourced its manufacturing work to a supply chain partner and transferred 22 employees as part of this solution.
During 2020, the Company continued to reduce headcount to better align its expenses with its revenue profile. The Company executed a reduction in force of approximately 10% of its U.S. employees in February 2020 and has also reduced headcount in certain international locations in India and Shenzhen. The Company has also relocated its headquarters from San Mateo, California to Austin, Texas, a lower cost location.
The table below sets forth the activity in the Company’s restructuring costs during 2021 and 2020:
Total restructuring costs of $1,663 were broken out between operating expenses of $1,546 and cost of revenues of $117 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company paid insignificant bonuses and cash settlement of options for the India employees for the year ended December 31, 2021.
NOTE 15 -Subsequent Events
On February 16, 2022, we received a deficiency letter from the Listing Qualifications Department (the “Staff”) of The Nasdaq Stock Market, LLC (“Nasdaq”) notifying us that, for the last 30 consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below $1.00 per share, which is the minimum closing price required to maintain continued listing on the Nasdaq Stock Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1) (the “Minimum Bid Requirement”). In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we have been provided a period of 180 calendar days, or until August 15, 2022, in which to regain compliance. In order to regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement, the closing bid price of our common stock must be at least $1.00 per share for a minimum of ten consecutive business days during this 180-day period. In the event that we do not regain compliance within this 180-day period, we may be eligible to seek an additional compliance period of 180 calendar days. We intend to actively monitor the closing bid price of our common stock and are evaluating available options to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement, including by effecting a reverse stock split.