Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical technology company focused on saving teeth from tooth decay, the most prevalent chronic disease globally. We have developed the GentleWave System, an innovative technology platform designed to treat tooth decay by cleaning and disinfecting the microscopic spaces within teeth without the need to remove tooth structure. Our initial focus is on leveraging the GentleWave System, the first and only FDA-cleared system for root canal therapy that employs a sterilized, single-use procedure instrument, to transform RCT, by addressing the limitations of conventional methods. The system utilizes our proprietary mechanism of action, which combines procedure fluid optimization, broad-spectrum acoustic energy and advanced fluid dynamics, to debride and disinfect deep regions of the complex root canal system in a less invasive procedure that preserves tooth structure. The clinical benefits of our GentleWave System when compared to conventional methods of RCT include improved clinical outcomes, such as superior cleaning that is independent of root canal complexity and tooth anatomy, high and rapid rates of healing and minimal to no post- operative pain. In addition to the clinical benefits, the GentleWave System can improve the workflow and economics of dental practices. We began scaling commercialization of our current technology in 2017 and are focused on establishing the GentleWave Procedure as the standard of care for RCT. As of December 31, 2021, we had an installed base of approximately 820 GentleWave Systems that had performed more than 750,000 GentleWave patient procedures since commercialization.
RCT is a treatment for late-stage tooth decay that aims to save the patient’s tooth instead of removing it. Conventional methods of RCT depend primarily on instruments to manually scrape and remove tooth structure and open canals inside the tooth in order to remove and irrigate infected tissue. We believe that conventional methods of RCT do not adequately clean and disinfect the entire root canal system, primarily due to the complexity and uniqueness of each root canal and the inability of current endodontic technologies to effectively reach the microscopic spaces within the tooth. Conventional methods of RCT also generally require extensive use of instrumentation within the root canal system, which can result in the removal of substantial tooth structure, weaken the tooth and impact its long-term survival. This lack of sufficient cleaning and removal of substantial tooth structure can result in poor clinical outcomes, such as high treatment failure rates and significant post- operative pain. In addition, other limitations of conventional methods of performing RCT include: a frequent need for multiple visits to complete the procedure, a lack of standardized procedure protocols and a complex procedure that can be difficult to perform.
Our GentleWave System represents an innovative technology platform and approach to RCT. The GentleWave System is a Class II device and has received 510(k) clearance from the FDA. The key components of our GentleWave System are a sophisticated and mobile console and a pre-packaged, sterilized, single-use procedure instrument ("PI"). The GentleWave System utilizes a proprietary mechanism of action that is designed to combine procedure fluid optimization, broad-spectrum acoustic energy and advanced fluid dynamics to efficiently and effectively reach microscopic spaces within teeth and dissolve and remove tissue and bacteria with minimal or no removal of tooth structure. We have invested significant resources in establishing a broad intellectual property portfolio that protects the GentleWave Procedure and its unique mechanism of action, as well as future capabilities under development. We believe our GentleWave System transforms the patient and dental practitioner experience and addresses many of the limitations of conventional RCT.
We are committed to continuing to generate evidence to support the clinical benefits of the GentleWave System. These benefits have been demonstrated in-vivo and in-vitro across two prospective, multi-center clinical studies, in real-world, clinical practice and in over 30 peer-reviewed journal publications, including seven independent publications and more than 23 publications by our consultants or sponsored or funded by us. For example, results
from our PURE study demonstrated a treatment success rate of 97% at the six- and 12-month follow-ups for patients treated using the GentleWave System.
In the United States and Canada, our direct sales force markets and sells the GentleWave System to dental practitioners performing a high volume of root canals as part of their practice. Our commercial strategy and sales model involves a focus on driving adoption of our GentleWave System by increasing our installed base of consoles and maximizing recurring PI revenue through increased utilization. We intend to expand the size of our sales and clinician support teams to support our efforts of driving adoption and utilization of the GentleWave System. We also plan to pursue marketing authorizations and similar certifications to enable marketing and engage in other market access initiatives over time in attractive international regions in which we see significant potential opportunity.
On November 2, 2021, we completed our IPO, issuing 7.8 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $12.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were approximately $83.8 million.
Prior to our IPO, our primary sources of capital had been private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock, debt financing agreements, and to a lesser extent, revenue from the sale of our products and related services and software. We have raised a total of $281.3 million in net proceeds from private placements of preferred stock, and approximately $4.2 million from issuances of common stock and common stock issued upon stock option exercises. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $84.6 million, an accumulated deficit of $312.0 million, and $30.0 million in principal outstanding on our term loan facility. We generated revenue of $33.2 million and a net loss of $48.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to revenue of $23.4 million and a net loss of $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect to continue to incur net losses for the next several years. We expect to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. and Canadian sales representatives, expanding our international marketing programs and expanding direct to clinician digital marketing efforts to help facilitate further adoption among existing accounts and to broaden awareness and adoption of our products to new clinicians. We also expect to continue to make investments in research and development, regulatory affairs and clinical studies to develop future generations of our GentleWave products, support regulatory submissions and demonstrate the clinical efficacy of our new products. Moreover, we are incurring additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services expenses. As a result of these expenses, we will require additional financing to fund our operations and planned growth.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations through at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. We may also seek additional financing opportunistically. We may seek to raise any additional capital by entering into partnerships or through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, credit or loan facilities or a combination of one or more of these funding sources. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution.
Factors Affecting Our Performance and Key Business Metrics
We believe there are several important factors that impact our operating performance and results of operations. We also regularly review several operating and financial metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions. We believe the following factors and key business metrics are important indicators of our performance:
•Installed base of GentleWave Systems: In the United States and Canada, we are initially focused on driving adoption of the GentleWave System among dental practitioners, with an initial focus on RCT. Our sales force leverages third-party data of root canal procedure volumes by practitioner, in order to enable us to efficiently and effectively identify target accounts. We believe that our current targeting strategy identifies a well-defined customer base that is accessible by our direct sales organization. As of December 31, 2021, we had 24 capital sales representatives, and we plan to continue expanding our team of capital sales representatives.
•System utilization: Our revenue is significantly impacted by the utilization of our GentleWave System. Our objective is to establish the GentleWave Procedure as the standard of care for RCT. To accomplish
this, we plan to continue expanding our team of consumable sales representatives who are partnering with our customers to provide onboarding, onsite training and continuing education, to enhance practice efficiency and clinical workflow and to drive patient referral volumes. In addition, we plan to launch the CleanFlow PI, which has received 510(k) clearance from the FDA and which we expect will further increase utilization. We expect to commercialize the CleanFlow PI in 2022.
•Gross margins: Our results of operations depend, in part, on our ability to increase our gross margins by more effectively managing our costs to produce our GentleWave console and single-use PIs, and to scale our manufacturing operations efficiently. We expect to realize operating leverage through increased scale efficiencies as our commercial operations grow. We are undertaking continuous margin improvement programs, including implementing lean manufacturing methods and working with our suppliers to reduce material costs. We have also executed several product design improvements to reduce product cost. For example, we expect the CleanFlow PI to have a positive impact on the gross margin profile of our single-use PIs. We anticipate that the combination of these strategies will drive margin improvement.
•Commercial organization: As of December 31, 2021, our sales and customer support team consisted of approximately 77 employees. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our commercial organization by increasing the number of employees in our commercial organization, as well as by expanding our marketing and training programs, to help facilitate further adoption of our products among existing and new customer accounts. Successfully recruiting and training a sufficient number of sales and customer support employees is required to achieve growth at the rate we expect. The rate at which we grow our commercial organization and the speed at which newly hired personnel become effective can impact our revenue growth and our costs incurred in anticipation of such growth.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our operations, revenue and overall financial condition in 2021 and 2020, and may negatively impact our operations, revenue, and overall financial condition in the future if new and more transmissible vaccine-resistant variants emerge.
For a period of time during 2020, U.S federal, state and local governmental authorities recommended, and in certain cases required, that elective, specialty and other procedures (including root canal procedures) and appointments be suspended or canceled to avoid non-essential patient exposure to medical environments and potential infection with COVID-19 and to focus limited resources and personnel toward the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Even after the “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions to control the spread of COVID-19 began to be lifted in 2021, we continued to experience disruptions to our business, including as a result of customers' continuing reluctance to start root canal procedures in light of the continuing risk posed by the virus. Our customers, including endodontists, experienced significant financial hardship and some of them may never fully recover.
The number of root canal procedures performed during 2020 and 2021 decreased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and consequently impacted our ability to sell our GentleWave System. We also experienced disruptions, and may experience future disruptions, including: delays in capital and clinical sales representatives becoming fully trained and productive; difficulties and delays in dental practitioner outreach and training dental practitioners to use our GentleWave System; travel restrictions; delays in initiation, enrollment and follow-ups of our clinical studies; challenges with maintaining adequate supply from third-party manufacturers of components and finished goods and distribution providers; and access to dental practitioners for training and case support. The COVID-19 pandemic has also resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption to the global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity.
While COVID-19 cases have decreased in 2022, primarily as a result of more and more individuals being vaccinated, the duration and ultimate economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business remains uncertain at this time. We expect that any future restrictions on dental procedures, as a result of COVID-19 or the emergence of any vaccine resistant variant, would have a negative impact on our operations, revenue and overall financial condition.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists primarily of product revenue and software revenue. We generate product revenue on the capital sale of our GentleWave console and recurring sales of our single-use PI and accessories. To a lesser extent, we also derive product revenue from service and repair and extended warranty contracts with our existing customers. Software revenue relates to fees we receive for licensing our TDO practice management tool to dental practitioners. We expect our product revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase adoption and utilization of the GentleWave System, though revenues may fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Cost of sales consists primarily of manufacturing overhead costs, material costs, and direct labor to produce our products, warranty, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory, and other direct costs such as shipping and software support. A significant portion of our cost of sales currently consists of manufacturing overhead costs. These overhead costs include compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation expenses, facilities, the cost of production equipment and operations supervision, quality control, material procurement and intangible assets amortization. We provide a two-year warranty on capital equipment upon initial sale, and we establish a reserve for warranty repairs based on historical warranty repair costs incurred. Provisions for warranty obligations, which are included in cost of sales, are provided for at the time of shipment. We expect our cost of sales to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows, partially offset by lower unit product costs, though it may fluctuate from period to period.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily, product mix and the resulting average selling prices, production volumes, manufacturing costs and product yields, and the implementation of cost reduction strategies. Our software gross margin is generally higher than our product gross margin. As a result of these factors, we expect gross margin may fluctuate from period to period. We are engaged in various efforts to improve our gross margin by reducing unit product costs to the extent our production volumes increase, as well as through product design improvements, reducing material costs through negotiations with suppliers and optimizing the manufacturing process and reducing the costs to service our installed base.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, related to selling, marketing, professional education, administration, finance, information technology, legal, and human resource functions. SG&A expenses also include commissions, training, travel expenses, promotional activities, conferences, trade shows, professional services fees, audit fees, legal fees, insurance costs and general corporate expenses including allocated facilities-related expenses. We expect our SG&A expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we expand our commercial infrastructure and incur additional fees associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services expenses, though it may fluctuate from period to period. However, over time, we expect our SG&A expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Research and Development
Research and development ("R&D") expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for proprietary R&D programs, and include costs of product engineering, product development, regulatory affairs, consulting services, materials, and depreciation, as well as other costs associated with products and technologies being developed. These expenses include employee and non-employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, materials, consulting, related travel expenses and facilities expenses. We expect our R&D expenses to moderate in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop, enhance, and commercialize new products and
technologies. However, we expect our R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of initiating new product development efforts.
Changes in Fair Value of Contingent Earnout
Changes in fair value of contingent earnout consists of fair value adjustments from our contingent earnout liabilities recorded in connection with the 2018 acquisition of TDO. We record a liability related to the contingent earnout provisions, which are based on actual and estimated annual sales of licenses and units, as defined in the stock purchase agreement, for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The contingent earnout period ended December 31, 2021 and final payment was made in February 2022.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists primarily of interest expense from our outstanding term loan, and the remeasurement to fair value each reporting period, of our preferred stock warrant liabilities and our forward obligation recorded in connection with an asset acquisition. On completion of our IPO, all of the outstanding warrants to purchase shares of convertible preferred stock were revalued and converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock and the warrants liability was reclassified into stockholders’ equity. As a result, we are no longer required to remeasure the fair value of the common stock warrants at each reporting period. On completion of our IPO, the forward obligation was settled by the issuance of shares of common stock and will no longer require remeasurement at each reporting period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar and percentage change in those items:
Revenue
Our breakdown of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is summarized below:
Total revenue increased $9.8 million, or 42% year over year.
Product revenue increased $8.4 million, or 49% year over year. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $8.4 million and $14.4 million from the sale of GentleWave consoles and PIs, respectively, compared to $4.8 million and $10.4 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue was lower in 2020 as a result of the temporary dental and endodontic office closures implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which also precipitated a reduction in our sales representatives.
Software revenue increased $1.4 million, or 23% year over year, which was primarily due to a higher number of customer subscriptions.
Cost of sales and Gross margin
Cost of sales increased $5.4 million or 28% year over year, which was primarily attributable to higher sales volume in our Product segment, partially offset by lower unallocated manufacturing overhead expenses due to increased production volume in 2021. There were no significant changes in the Software segment cost of sales.
Gross margin increased 8% year over year, primarily due to reduction in inventory reserves and improved overhead absorption in 2021 in the Product segment.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
SG&A expenses increased $7.2 million, or 27% year over year, primarily driven by changes in our Product segment due to higher sales employee-related compensation and benefit expenses, including stock-based compensation, as a result of the expansion of our commercial infrastructure and increase in sales. We also incurred higher administrative expenses in preparation for our IPO and the ongoing requirements associated with being a public company. There were no significant changes in the Software segment selling, general and administrative expenses.
Research and development expenses
R&D expenses decreased $1.9 million, or 9% year over year, primarily driven by lower spending on supplies and services purchased for various R&D projects of the Product segment. There were no significant changes in any major components of the R&D expenses in the Software segment as described in the Components of Our Results of Operations above.
Change in fair value of contingent earnout
Change in the fair value of the contingent earnout was a loss of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a gain of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by changes in estimated annual sales of licenses and units. The contingent earnout period ended December 31, 2021 and the final payment was made in February, 2022.
Loss from operations
Loss from operations was $44.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $42.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in operating expenses in the Product segment as partially offset by growth in revenue and gross profit. The Software segment recorded income from operations of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to loss from operations of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest and financing costs, net
Interest and financing costs, net, increased $0.3 million, or 6% year over year, primarily attributable to lower interest income in 2021.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
There were no significant changes in fair value of warrant liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Upon the closing of our IPO, we remeasured to fair value and reclassified the warrant liabilities to stockholders equity as common stock warrants. As a result, we are no longer required to adjust for changes in fair value of these warrants.
Change in fair value of forward obligation
There was no significant change in fair value of forward obligation for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Upon the closing of our IPO, we issued 224,842 shares of common stock to settle the forward obligation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
We have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and we anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the next several years. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $84.6 million, an accumulated deficit of $312.0 million, and $30.0 million in principal outstanding on our term loan facility. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net losses from operations were $48.5 million and $46.7 million, respectively, and our net cash used in operating activities was $48.6 million and $38.5 million, respectively.
Prior to our IPO, we raised a total of $281.3 million in net proceeds from private placements of convertible preferred stock, and approximately $4.2 million from the issuance of common stock and stock option exercises. On November 2, 2021, we completed our IPO of 7.8 million shares of our common stock at a public offering prices of $12.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were approximately $83.8 million.
Funding requirements
We expect our operating expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in expanding our sales and marketing infrastructure programs to both drive and support anticipated sales growth and product development. In addition, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we hire personnel and expand our infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth in our organization. We will also incur additional expenses as we increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business and operations as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of our current and future products and the GentleWave Procedure;
•the scope and timing of investment in our sales force and expansion of our commercial organization;
•the impact on our business from the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic, or any other pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease;
•the cost of our research and development activities;
•the cost and timing of additional regulatory clearances or approvals;
•the costs associated with any product recall that may occur;
•the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products at increased production levels;
•the costs of attaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property rights;
•whether we acquire third-party companies, products or technologies;
•the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•the scope, rate of progress and cost of our current or future clinical trials and registries;
•the emergence of competing new products, technologies or alternative treatments or other adverse market developments;
•the rate at which we expand internationally;
•our ability to raise additional funds to finance our operations;
•debt service requirements; and
•the cost associated with being a public company.
Our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report have been prepared assuming we will continue to operate as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business, and do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from uncertainty related to our ability to continue as a going concern. Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations through at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
We have based this estimate on estimates and assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may need to utilize additional available capital resources or seek additional financing opportunistically. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully secure sources of financing and ultimately achieve profitable operations. If our existing capital resources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional public or private equity or debt securities or obtain an additional credit facility. The sale of equity or convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional capital through collaboration agreements, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product or grant licenses that may not be favorable to us. Additional financing may not be available at all, or in amounts or on terms unacceptable to us.
Indebtedness
On June 23, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement and guaranty (the "Credit Agreement") with Perceptive Credit Holdings, LP, which provided for a delayed-draw term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million. The initial loan of $10.0 million was made in a single borrowing on June 23, 2017. The interest rate for the loan is the greater of the 1-month LIBOR and 2.00% plus the applicable margin of 9.25%. In connection with the loan, we granted a security interest in substantially all of our assets.
The Credit Agreement was amended in October 2018 to provide an additional tranche consisting of two borrowings, which were exercised on October 16, 2018 and October 7, 2019 in an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million each. The Credit Agreement was further amended in October 2019 to provide two additional tranches of delayed-draw term loans of $10.0 million each, and to modify the repayment provisions of the loan to require all principal to be due at maturity. The additional tranches were not exercised prior to their expiration on December 31, 2020. Both amendments were evaluated and accounted for as modifications.
On August 23, 2021, we further amended the Credit Agreement to transfer and assign the loans thereunder to Perceptive Credit Holdings III, LP. In connection with this transfer and assignment, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement and guaranty (the "New Credit Agreement") with Perceptive Credit Holdings III, LP, which provides for two additional tranches of delayed-draw term loans of $10.0 million each and extended the maturity date for repayment, including with respect to amounts owed in connection the existing delayed-draw term loan, to August 2026. On December 31, 2021, the first tranche of $10.0 million loan expired. The obligation of Perceptive Credit Holdings III, LP to make the second tranche loan is subject to the making of the first tranche. Since the Company did not draw the first tranche, the second tranche due on March 31, 2022 has been forfeited.
As of December 31, 2021, there was an aggregate principal balance of $30.0 million outstanding under the New Credit Agreement and we were in compliance with all covenants and conditions under the New Credit Agreement.
The interest rate for amounts borrowed under the New Credit Agreement is the greater of the 1-month LIBOR and 2.00% plus the applicable margin of 9.25%. In connection with the New Credit Agreement, we also entered into an amended and restated security agreement and granted a security interest in substantially all of our assets. We are permitted to make voluntary prepayments, subject to a scaled prepayment premium that ranges from 7.0% to 1.0% of the aggregate principal amount outstanding on such prepayment date for prepayments made after August 23, 2022 and before August 23, 2025. No prepayment premium is required for payments made after August 23, 2025.
The New Credit Agreement contains events of default, including, without limitation, events of default upon: (i) failure to make a payment pursuant to the terms of the agreement; (ii) violation of certain covenants; (iii) payment or other defaults on other indebtedness; (iv) material adverse change in the business or change in control; (v) insolvency; (vi) significant judgments; (vii) incorrectness of representations and warranties; (viii) regulatory matters; and (ix) failure by us to maintain a valid and perfected lien on the collateral securing the borrowing. In the event of an event of default, the lender may terminate its commitments and declare all amounts outstanding under the New Credit Agreement immediately due and payable, together with accrued interest and all fees and other obligations. The amount of such repayment will include payment of any prepayment premium applicable due to the time of such payment. In addition, upon the occurrence and during the continuance of any event of default, the applicable margin will increase by 3.00% per annum to 12.25%.
The New Credit Agreement includes financial covenants that requires us to (i) maintain, at all times, a minimum aggregate balance of $3.0 million in cash in one or more controlled accounts, and (ii)satisfy certain minimum revenue thresholds, measured for the twelve consecutive month period on each calendar quarter-end until June 30, 2026. These thresholds increase over time and range from $26.4 million for the 12-month period ended September 30, 2021 to $95.3 million for the 12-month period ended June 30, 2026. Failure to satisfy these financial covenants would constitute an event of default under the New Credit Agreement.
In connection with the New Credit Agreement, we issued a warrant to purchase 150,685 shares of our Series E convertible preferred stock at a purchase price of $20.08 per share. Upon the closing of our IPO, this convertible preferred stock warrant was converted to a warrant to purchase 150,685 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $20.08 per share. See note 4 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report for additional disclosure related to this warrant.
On April 22, 2020, we were granted a loan in an aggregate amount of $5.1 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the "PPP loan"), under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act, which was enacted March 27, 2020. On May 7, 2020, the PPP Loan was repaid in full.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Our purchase commitments and obligations include all open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business, including commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers, for which we have not received the goods or services. A majority of these purchase obligations are due within a year. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services, and hence, have not been included in the table above.
Summary statement of cash flows
The following table summarizes our statement of cash flows:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $48.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of net loss of $48.5 million as adjusted for non-cash items of $6.3 million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $6.4 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of $2.0 million in depreciation and amortization and $2.4 million in stock-based compensation. Changes in our net operating assets and liabilities year over year, was primarily due to a $3.9 million increase in inventory held due to higher production and changes in prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities attributable to timing of payment.
Net cash used in operating activities was $38.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of our net loss of $46.7 million as adjusted for non-cash items of $5.5 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $2.6 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of $2.6 million in depreciation and amortization and $1.6 million in stock-based compensation. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $1.7 million reduction in inventory held due to lower productions, a $1.4 million decrease in accrued compensation and related benefits due to lower headcount, and a $2.2 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities attributable to timing of payment.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2.0 million and $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as a result of acquisition of intangible assets and purchases of property and equipment in each year.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $83.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily resulting from net proceeds of $83.8 million received from our IPO, partially offset by payments of deferred debt issuance costs and contingent earnout. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to payment of a contingent earnout.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, the revenue generated, and expenses incurred, and related disclosures, during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. Specifically, we apply the following five core principles to recognize revenue: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our performance obligations primarily arise from the manufacture and delivery of the GentleWave System, single-use PIs and other accessories and services as well as software license sales related to our practice management platform. Payment terms are typically on open credit terms consistent with industry practice and do not have significant financing components.
We consider the individual deliverables in our product offering as separate performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. The total contract transaction price is determined based on the consideration expected to be received, based on the stated value in contractual arrangements or the estimated cash to be collected in no-contracted arrangements, and is allocated to the identified performance obligations based upon the relative standalone selling prices of the performance obligations. The stand-alone selling price ("SSP") is based on an observable price offered to other comparable customers. We estimate the SSP using the market assessment approach considering market conditions and entity-specific factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the products and services, geographies, type of customer and market conditions. We regularly review and update SSP as necessary. The consideration we receive in exchange for our goods or services is only recognized when it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur. The consideration to which we expect to be
entitled includes a stated list price, less various forms of variable consideration. We estimate related variable consideration at the point of sale, including discounts, product returns, refunds, and other similar obligations.
Revenue is recognized over time when the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by our performance. Revenue is recognized at a point in time if the criteria for recognizing revenue over time are not met, and we transferred control of the goods to the customer. Product revenue is recognized at a point in time when we have transferred control to the customer, which is generally when title of the goods transfers to the customer. Revenue from support and maintenance contracts and software license revenue is recognized as the output of the service is transferred to the customer over time, typically evenly over the contract term. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
We also sell extended service contracts on the GentleWave System. Sales of extended service contracts are recorded as deferred revenue until such time as the standard warranty expires, which is generally up to two years from the date of sale. Service contract revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over time consistent with the life of the related service contract in proportion to the costs incurred in fulfilling performance obligations under the service contract.
Revenue for technical support and other services is recognized ratably over the performance obligation period.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets with Indefinite Lives
Our goodwill represents the excess of cost over fair value of identified assets acquired and liabilities assumed by the Company in an acquisition of a business. We recorded $8.5 million of goodwill in conjunction with the acquisition of TDO in October 2018.
The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized; however, it is assessed for impairment using fair value measurement techniques on an annual basis or more frequently if facts and circumstance warrant such a review. The goodwill is considered to be impaired if we determine that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value.
We perform our goodwill impairment analysis at the reporting unit level, which aligns with our reporting structure and availability of discrete financial information. We perform our annual impairment analysis by either doing a qualitative assessment of the reporting unit’s fair value from the last quantitative assessment to determine if there is potential impairment, or comparing the reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying amount. We may do a qualitative assessment when the results of the previous quantitative test indicated the reporting unit’s estimated fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying value of its net assets and we do not believe there have been significant changes in the reporting unit’s operations that would significantly decrease its estimated fair value or significantly increase its net assets. If a quantitative assessment is performed the evaluation includes management estimates of cash flow projections based on internal future projections and/or use of a market approach by looking at market values of comparable companies.
We estimate the fair value of the TDO reporting unit using the income approach and market approach. For the purposes of the income approach, fair value is determined based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, discounted at an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. Key assumptions for these projections require significant judgments by management and include revenue growth, future gross and operating margin growth, and its weighted cost of capital and terminal growth rates. The revenue and margin growth is based on increased sales of new and existing products as the Company maintains investments in research and development. Additional assumed value creators may include increased efficiencies from capital spending. The resulting cash flows are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital. Operating mechanisms and requirements to ensure that growth and efficiency assumptions will ultimately be realized are also considered in the evaluation. Actual results may differ from those assumed in our forecasts. We also reconcile our discounted cash flow analysis to our indicated equity value allowing for a reasonable control premium. For purposes of the market approach, fair value is determined based on the guideline public company method and utilizes a number of factors such as publicly available information regarding the market capitalization of the selected guideline companies, as well as operating results, market multiples, and present value
techniques. Under the market-based fair value methodology, judgment is required in evaluating market multiples and recent transactions. Management believes that the assumptions used for its impairment test are representative of those that would be used by market participants performing similar valuations of the TDO reporting unit.
Our annual evaluation for impairment of goodwill consists of the TDO reporting unit from which goodwill originated. In accordance with our policy, we completed our annual evaluation for impairment using a qualitative and a quantitative method for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and determined that no impairment existed.
It is possible that our conclusions regarding impairment or recoverability of goodwill in the TDO reporting unit could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions used in our goodwill impairment testing performed for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 will prove to be accurate predictions of the future, if, for example, (i) the business does not perform as projected, (ii) overall economic conditions in future years vary from current assumptions (including changes in discount rates), (iii) business conditions or strategies for the TDO reporting unit change from current assumptions, including loss of major customers, (iv) investors require higher rates of return on equity investments in the marketplace or (v) enterprise values of comparable publicly traded companies, or actual sales transactions of comparable companies, were to decline, resulting in lower multiples of revenues and earnings before income tax depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). An impairment charge, if recorded in the future, could impact our consolidated balance sheets, as well as our consolidated statements of operations. If we were required to recognize an impairment charge in the future, the charge would not impact our consolidated cash flows, current liquidity, capital resources, and covenants under our existing term loan credit facility.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets with a finite life are comprised primarily of developed technology, customer relationships, and tradenames acquired in conjunction with the acquisition of TDO in October 2018. We make significant judgments in relation to the valuation of intangible assets resulting from business combinations and asset acquisitions.
Intangible assets are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 5 to 10 years. We base the useful lives and related amortization expense on the period of time we estimate the assets will generate revenue or otherwise be used. We also periodically review the lives assigned to our intangible assets to ensure that our initial estimates do not exceed any revised estimated periods from which we expect to realize cash flows from the assets. If a change were to occur in any of the above-mentioned factors or estimates, the likelihood of a material change in our reported results would increase.
We evaluate our intangible assets with finite lives for indications of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant under-performance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business or significant negative industry or economic trends. If this evaluation indicates that the value of the intangible asset may be impaired, we make an assessment of the recoverability of the net carrying value of the asset over its remaining useful life. If this assessment indicates that the intangible asset is not recoverable, based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the technology over the remaining amortization period, we reduce the net carrying value of the related intangible asset to fair value and may adjust the remaining amortization period. No indicators of impairment were identified in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Significant judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow valuation models. It is possible that plans may change and estimates used may prove to be inaccurate. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur additional impairment charges.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock options granted to employees and non-employees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the grant date. We generally recognize grant-date fair value of stock options granted to employees and non-employee service providers on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting term of the respective awards. We determine the fair value of stock options with a service condition based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
We estimate the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model for purposes of calculating stock-based compensation expense. The determination of the fair value of stock-based payment awards utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by a number of assumptions:
•Fair value of common stock-For grants prior to our IPO in November 2021, the fair value of our common stock underlying share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock underlying option grants, our board of directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. For all grants subsequent to our IPO in November 2021, the fair value of common stock was determined by using the closing price per share of our common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
•Expected term- The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•Expected volatility-Expected volatility is derived from the historical volatilities of a select group of comparable peer companies, for a look-back period commensurate with the expected term of the stock options, as we have limited trading history of our common stock and limited data regarding company-specific historical or implied volatility of our share price.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Each of these input assumptions is subjective, involves a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and generally requires significant judgement by management at the time of measurement. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
JOBS Act Accounting Election and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the "JOBS Act"). As such, we are eligible for exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, presenting only two years of audited financial statements, with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure in this Annual Report, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and an exemption from the requirements to obtain a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements. We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations in this Annual Report and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in our future filings with the SEC. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
In addition, the JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, for new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies, we will be subject to an extended transition period until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (1) the last day of our first fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of our IPO, which closed on November 2, 2021, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30th and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information.