Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, statements we make regarding the outlook for our future business and financial performance
Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, by their nature, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. As a result, our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause such differences include those identified below and those described in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K. The Company assumes no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are the fastest growing food company of scale in the United States over the past two years, focused on acquiring and building disruptive growth brands that bring today’s consumers great tasting food that fits the way they live. Our brands, Rao’s, Michael Angelo’s, noosa and Birch Benders are built with authenticity at their core, providing consumers food experiences that are genuine, delicious and unforgettable, making each of our brands “one-of-a-kind.” Our products are premium and made with simple, high-quality ingredients. Our people are at the center of all that we do. We strive to empower our teams to lead with courage and tenacity, with the goal of providing them with the confidence and agility to connect with our consumers and retail partners to drive unparalleled growth. We believe our focus on “one-of-a-kind” brands, products that people love, and passion for our people makes Sovos Brands a “one-of-a-kind” company and enables us to deliver on our objective of creating a growing and sustainable food enterprise yielding financial growth ahead of industry peers.
Since our inception, we have been focused on building an organization with the capabilities to acquire, integrate, and grow brands as we continue to scale. Our business model is grounded in acquiring “one-of-a-kind” brands, and leveraging a common infrastructure and shared playbook to drive growth. We have a track record of successful deals and have completed the following four acquisitions:
● in January 2017, we completed the acquisition of Bottom Line Food Processors, Inc. d/b/a Michael Angelo’s Gourmet Foods;
● in July 2017, we completed the acquisition of Rao’s Specialty Foods, Inc.;
● in November 2018, we completed the Noosa Acquisition; and
● in October 2020, we completed the Birch Benders Acquisition.
On September 22, 2021, we completed the IPO of 23,334,000 shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share, which excluded the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 3,500,100 shares of common stock, at an offering price to the public of $12.00 per share. The IPO closed on September 27, 2021 and resulted in net proceeds of approximately $263.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. Subsequent to the IPO, the underwriters exercised their options to purchase an additional 3,500,100 shares of common stock. We closed the sale of such additional
shares on October 5, 2021, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $39.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
Emerging Growth Status
As a company with less than $1.07 billion in gross revenue during our last fiscal year, we qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting and other regulatory requirements for up to five years that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include, among other matters:
• exemption from the auditor attestation requirement on the effectiveness of our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
• exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies;
• exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about the audit and the financial statements of the issuer;
• an exemption from the requirement to seek non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute arrangements; and
• reduced disclosure about executive compensation arrangements.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the first sale of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement, which was September 22, 2021, unless, prior to that time, we have more than $1.07 billion in annual gross revenue, have a market value for our common stock held by non-affiliates of more than $700 million as of the last day of our second fiscal quarter of the fiscal year and a determination is made that we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer,” as defined in Rule 12b-2 promulgated under the Exchange Act, or issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period, whether or not issued in a registered offering.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. An emerging growth company can, therefore, delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
Impact of COVID-19; Inflationary Environment
We continue to actively monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business. We have closely monitored and implemented the emerging shifts in government and health agency protocols and safety guidelines related to the COVID-19 pandemic throughout the past two years. We have experienced incremental operating costs at our manufacturing and warehouse facilities to promote safe operations and maintain our ability to supply our products, including frontline worker pay, employee protective equipment and higher utilization of temporary labor. As a result of non-essential travel restrictions during the pandemic, we have experienced reduced employee travel and meeting costs, which partially mitigated our higher operating costs.
We cannot predict the degree to, or the period over, which we will be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting governmental and other measures or changes thereto, including easing of restrictions. The global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, and we continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our
business and remain focused on prioritizing the health of our employees while seeking to maintain the continuity of our product supply throughout the supply chain. We have benefited from changes in consumer shopping and consumption patterns during the COVID-19 pandemic, including dramatic increases of in-home consumption and trial of our products, resulting in increased household penetration of our brands in fiscal 2020. As a result of the strong demand for our products as well as supply chain disruptions, we are currently facing challenges to meet our expected service levels in fiscal 2022.
In fiscal 2021, we experienced increased cost of sales, as a percentage of net sales, contributed by higher costs for logistics, materials, labor and energy. We anticipated continued inflationary pressure and accordingly, we announced price increases with the goal of offsetting increased cost of sales. Since the price increase announcements made in late fiscal 2021, we have experienced increased inflationary pressure and volatility, and accordingly recently announced additional price increases. In addition, to assist in partially mitigating inflation, we are targeting reduced trade spending, seeking to remove our least efficient promotions and drive net price increases. We expect the year-over-year inflation impact to be higher in the first half of fiscal 2022.
Going forward, we expect higher inflation costs to persist as a headwind in the near term given the tight global supply chain. As a result, we will closely monitor our pricing and may announce additional price increases in fiscal 2022. Consistent with the consumer-packaged food industry, we are seeing cost increases in several raw materials including, but not limited to, milk, animal proteins, fruit, resin, and cardboard. Transportation challenges continue to be acute, particularly due to logistical issues at major ports, intermodal and trucking delays and capacity constraints for ocean freight cargo. These challenges have resulted in long lead times and higher logistics costs. Labor-related disruptions, including labor shortages and absenteeism, have been challenges within our operations and among our 3PL providers and other business partners.
We expect to develop additional initiatives to partially mitigate inflationary pressure on top of the various productivity initiatives already in progress. Some of our ongoing supply chain initiatives today include: the further automation of our own production facilities, optimization of our co-manufacturing network, packaging value engineering, and competitive procurement actions. Collectively, we expect the increases in costs to be partially mitigated in fiscal 2022 by the pricing actions, as well as productivity initiatives.
Key Performance Indicators
We regularly review a number of metrics to evaluate our business, measure our progress and make strategic decisions. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin, Adjusted EBITDA margin, brand net sales, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate (the “non-GAAP financial measures”), which are non-GAAP financial measures, are currently utilized by management and may be used by our competitors to assess performance. We believe these measures assist our investors in gaining a meaningful understanding of our performance. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of these measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for definitions and a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, net sales to brand net sales, net income to adjusted net income and diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income.
Results of Operations
The discussion that follows includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal years 2021 and 2020. For a comparison of our results of operations and financial condition for fiscal years 2020 and 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Prospectus filed with the SEC on September 24, 2021 (the “Prospectus”). We have also included certain non-GAAP financial measures for fiscal 2019 that were not included in our Prospectus.
Comparison of Results for the Fiscal Years Ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, selected information from our Consolidated Statements of Operations, including information presented as a percentage of net sales:
(1) Other financial data includes non-GAAP financial metrics. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for definitions and a reconciliation of our net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, net sales to brand net sales, net income to adjusted net income, total operating expenses to adjusted operating expenses, reported income tax (expense) benefit to adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate to adjusted effective tax rate.
Net Sales
Net sales consist primarily of product sales to our customers less cost of trade promotions such as consumer incentives, coupon redemptions, other marketing activities and allowances for unsalable product.
Net sales of $719.2 million represented an increase of $159.1 million, or 28.4%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily due to a $106.3 million, or 34%, increase in Rao’s net sales, the majority of which was driven by higher sauce and frozen shipments to key customers. Household penetration of our sauce business grew to 10.9% in fiscal 2021, up over 260 basis points compared to fiscal 2020. As we exited the fourth quarter of 2021, Rao’s became the #2 pasta & pizza sauce brand in dollar consumption. Higher shipments for noosa, namely in spoonable
yogurt, drove an incremental $10.0 million of net sales. The Birch Benders brand, which was acquired in October 2020 and was therefore not included for a full year in the results for fiscal 2020, accounted for $47.3 million of the increase.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales represents costs directly related to the manufacturing and distribution of products. Such costs include raw materials, labor and overhead required to produce the products, co-manufacturing, packaging, warehousing, shipping and handling, third-party distribution, and depreciation of equipment and leasehold improvements. We manufacture our products in our Austin, Texas and Bellvue, Colorado manufacturing locations. We also use third-party contract manufacturers in the United States, Canada and the European Union. We procure selected elements of raw materials and packaging and receive finished goods. We incur tolling charges related to our contract manufacturing arrangements.
Cost of sales of $498.4 million represented an increase of $125.1 million, or 33.5%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher net sales discussed above. In addition, incremental costs from inflationary pressures and global logistical constraints contributed to higher cost of sales. Consistent with others in our industry, we have faced challenges with supply chain and inflationary headwinds, several of which have intensified in recent months. With Omicron having brought on the latest wave of supply chain disruption, near-term cost and operating pressures related to raw materials, particularly dairy and animal proteins, logistics and labor have intensified. As a result, we have experienced higher ocean freight and port-related costs as well as higher input and materials costs. The Birch Benders brand, which was acquired in October 2020, and was therefore not included for a full year in the results for fiscal 2020, also contributed $35.9 million to the increase.
Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales increased from 66.7% for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020 to 69.3% for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021. The increase in cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was due to cost pressures from incremental costs to meet customer service levels and related inflation as described above, as well as higher promotional spending.
Gross Profit
Gross profit of $220.8 million represented an increase of $34.0 million, or 18.2%, for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales, or gross margin, decreased from 33.3% for fiscal 2020 to 30.7% for fiscal 2021, and was a result of the items discussed above.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses of $184.3 million represented an increase of $35.0 million, or 23.4%, for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020 due to the following:
● Selling, General and Administrative expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses include sales and marketing costs and general and administrative expenses. Selling and marketing costs primarily include consumer facing marketing costs and customer and consumer facing selling expenses, principally comprised of advertising and marketing costs and broker commissions, as well as research and development expenses. General and administrative expenses are comprised of expenses associated with our corporate and administrative functions that support our business, including expenses for employee salaries and benefits, travel and entertainment, professional services, insurance and other corporate expenses, including auditor and tax fees, third-party consultancy fees, office leases and equity-based compensation expense.
Selling, general and administrative expenses of $135.1 million represented an increase of $10.4 million, or 8.4%, for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the inclusion of Birch Benders in results for the full fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, after it was acquired in October of 2020, accounting for $6.7 million of the increase.
The remainder of the increase was driven by higher volume-related selling expenses and higher general and administrative expenses related to being a public company.
● Depreciation and Amortization expenses: Depreciation and amortization expense consists of the depreciation of non-production property and equipment, including leasehold improvements, equipment, capitalized leases and the amortization of customer relationships and finite-lived trademarks.
Depreciation and amortization expenses of $28.9 million represented an increase of $4.1 million, or 16.7%, for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The increase was primarily due to amortization of the intangible assets recognized as part of the Birch Benders Acquisition.
● Loss on Extinguishment of Debt: Loss on extinguishment of debt of $15.4 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 resulted from the extinguishment of the loans associated with our Senior Credit Facilities in June 2021 as well as the payoff of the Initial Second Lien Facility (as defined herein) and partial prepayments of the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility (as defined herein) with proceeds from the IPO and the underwriters’ exercise of their option to purchase additional shares. There was no loss on extinguishment of debt for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020.
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $15.4 million includes $9.4 million of recorded losses in connection with the repayment of the full amounts outstanding under our Senior Credit Facilities in June 2021. Upon the full prepayment of the Initial Second Lien Facility on September 27, 2021, we recognized a loss on the loan extinguishment resulting in a write-off of $4.3 million of the related unamortized issuance costs and discounts. In connection with the partial prepayments of the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility on September 29, 2021 and October 8, 2021, we recognized a proportional loss of $1.4 million on the partial extinguishment of the related unamortized issuance costs and discounts.
● Forgiveness of capital advance: Forgiveness of capital advance of $5.0 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, resulted from the forgiveness of the remaining $5.0 million balance of the original 2016 capital advance of $10.0 million with one of our suppliers, scheduled to be repaid by December 31, 2023, and is now considered forgiven and repaid in full. There was no forgiveness of capital advance for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020.
Equity-Based Compensation Expense
We grant equity-based compensation awards to certain employees, officers and non-employee directors as long-term incentive compensation. We recognize the related expense for these awards ratably over the applicable vesting period. Such expense is recognized as a selling, general and administrative expense. In connection with the IPO, we modified our existing equity-based compensation awards which resulted in a non-cash expense of approximately $0.7 million in our 2021 third quarter, resulted in a non-cash expense of $5.4 million in our 2021 fourth quarter and will result in a non-cash expense of $6.9 million through the first quarter of 2024. In November 2021, we further modified a portion of our existing equity-based compensation awards which resulted in a non-cash expense of approximately $0.6 million in our 2021 fourth quarter. We expect that this modification will result in an incremental non-cash expense of approximately $4.3 million in fiscal 2022 and approximately $1.1 million in the fiscal year ending December 30, 2023. In addition, we expect to record equity-based compensation expense of approximately $14.8 million through our 2024 third quarter resulting from the issuance of grants under the 2021 Plan (as defined herein) in connection with the IPO. In January 2022, we granted annual equity-based compensation awards to certain employees and officers and expect to recognize approximately $7.9 million through the fiscal year ending December 28, 2024 for the service-vesting awards and approximately $6.0 million through the fiscal year ending December 27, 2025 for the performance-vesting awards. We will also incur equity-based compensation expense in the future related to additional equity grants.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest and fees on our Credit Facilities, our Senior Credit Facilities, and amortization of deferred financing costs. We have incurred, and may incur additional, indebtedness to fund acquisitions, and we may choose to prepay on our First Lien Credit Agreement to reduce indebtedness.
In fiscal 2020, we incurred additional indebtedness to fund the Birch Benders Acquisition, and in fiscal 2021, we refinanced our debt and incurred additional indebtedness to repay the outstanding 2018 Term Loan and Incremental Term Loan of $373.2 million and finance a $400.0 million shareholder dividend in June 2021.
On September 27, 2021, using the net proceeds of the IPO we paid the full outstanding principal balance on the Initial Second Lien Facility of $200.0 million plus accrued interest of approximately $2.9 million. Additionally, on September 29, 2021, and October 8, 2021, we prepaid $59.7 million and $39.5 million, respectively, of the outstanding principal balance under the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility, plus total accrued interest of approximately $0.9 million. These repayments will result in a decrease in future annual interest expense.
Interest expense of $30.9 million represented an increase of $11.0 million, or 55.2%, for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The increase in interest expense resulted primarily from a higher balance of borrowings during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The higher balance of borrowings outstanding was primarily driven by the borrowings related to the October 2020 Birch Benders Acquisition and our June 2021 shareholder dividend, partially offset by the payoff of the Initial Second Lien Facility in September 2021 and the partial prepayments of the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility in September and October 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists of federal and various state taxes. Income tax expense of $3.7 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, represented a decrease of $3.0 million compared to income tax expense of $6.7 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The decrease in our income tax expense for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 is primarily attributable to the decrease in earnings before income taxes, the tax deductible costs associated with the IPO that did not require capitalization for federal income tax purposes, the annual remeasurement of the deferred tax balances as a result of the change in the state tax rates, partially offset by an increase in non-deductible expenses for tax purposes related to stock compensation expense driven by the modification of performance equity awards, and a limitation on the deductibility of executive compensation related to becoming a public company. These components resulted in a
decrease to income tax expense for the fiscal year ended December 25,2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020.
Net Income
Net income for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 was $1.9 million compared to net income of $10.8 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The decrease in net income was attributable to the items described above.
EBITDA
EBITDA of $74.3 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 represented an increase of $3.1 million compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The increase was driven by improvement in gross profit, excluding depreciation, due to increases in both volume-related and acquisition-related net sales as discussed in the “-Net Sales,” “-Gross Profit,” and “-Operating Expenses” sections above. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of EBITDA and a reconciliation of our net income to EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA of $115.1 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 represented an increase of $24.0 million compared to the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, as discussed in the “-Net Sales,” “-Gross Profit,” and “-Operating Expenses” sections above. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of our net income to Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted net income for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 was $54.3 million compared to $44.1 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The increase of $10.2 million was attributable to the items described above. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of adjusted net income and a reconciliation of our net income to adjusted net income.
Adjusted Operating Expenses
Adjusted operating expenses for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 was $143.8 million compared to $130.3 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of adjusted operating expenses and a reconciliation of our total operating expenses to adjusted operating expenses.
Adjusted Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Adjusted income tax (expense) benefit for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 was $19.4 million compared to $16.6 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and a reconciliation of our reported income tax (expense) benefit to adjusted income tax (expense) benefit.
Adjusted Effective Tax Rate
The adjusted effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 was 26.3% compared to 27.3% for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of adjusted effective tax rate and a reconciliation of reported effective tax rates to adjusted effective tax rate.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. To supplement this information, we also use EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin, Adjusted EBITDA margin, brand net sales, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate, non-GAAP financial measures, in this Form 10-K. We define EBITDA as net income before net interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, transaction and integration costs, IPO readiness costs, non-cash equity-based compensation, supply chain optimization and non-recurring costs. EBITDA margin is determined by calculating the percentage EBITDA is of net sales. Adjusted EBITDA margin is determined by calculating the percentage Adjusted EBITDA is of net sales. Brand net sales consists of net sales from the Rao’s, Michael Angelo’s, noosa and Birch Benders brands for the identified period regardless of our ownership of the brand at that time. Adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate consists of net income, total operating expenses, reported income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate before impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, transaction and integration costs, IPO readiness, non-cash equity-based compensation, supply chain optimization, non-recurring costs, acquisition amortization and tax-related adjustments that we do not consider in our evaluation of our ongoing operating performance from period to period as discussed further below. Diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income is determined by dividing adjusted net income by the weighted average diluted shares outstanding. Non-GAAP financial measures are included in this Form 10-K because they are key metrics used by management to assess our operating performance. Management believes that non-GAAP financial measures are helpful in highlighting performance trends because non-GAAP financial measures exclude the results of decisions that are outside the control of operating management. Our presentation of non-GAAP financial measures should not be construed to imply that our future results will be unaffected by these items. By providing these non-GAAP financial measures, management believes we are enhancing investors’ understanding of our business and our results of operations, as well as assisting investors in evaluating how well we are executing our strategic initiatives.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin, Adjusted EBITDA margin, brand net sales, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate are not defined under GAAP. Our use of the terms EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin, Adjusted EBITDA margin, brand net sales, adjusted net income and diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies in our industry and are not measures of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP. Our presentation of non-GAAP financial measures are intended as supplemental measures of our performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to operating income, net income, earnings per share, net sales or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP, or as measures of operating cash flows or liquidity.
Non-GAAP financial measures have important limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect any charges for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may need to be replaced in the future;
● EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect the significant interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or, if any, principal payments on our debt;
● EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our income taxes;
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not reflect the impact of impairments of goodwill or intangible assets;
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not reflect the impact of transaction costs and certain integration costs associated with the Birch Benders Acquisition and the Noosa Acquisition as well as costs associated with incomplete potential acquisitions and substantial one-time costs in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 related to a large, uncompleted transaction;
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not reflect costs associated with preparing for our IPO, including public company readiness;
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not reflect the impact of write-downs of fixed assets, product write-offs related to manufacturing optimization, certain operation rationalization initiatives and strategic initiatives;
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not reflect the impact of share-based compensation upon our results of operations; and
● Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, diluted earnings per share from adjusted net income, adjusted operating expenses, adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and adjusted effective tax rate do not include certain expenses that are non-recurring, infrequent and unusual in nature, including extinguishment of debt, forgiveness of capital advance, costs associated with the dividend, enterprise resource planning (“ERP”) implementation costs related to integrating acquisitions, severance costs and certain legal settlements related to the exit of facilities.
In the future we may incur expenses similar to those eliminated in this presentation of non-GAAP financial measures.
The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income, their most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods presented:
(1) Consists of transaction costs and certain integration costs associated with the Birch Benders Acquisition and the Noosa Acquisition as well as costs associated with incomplete potential acquisitions and substantial one-time costs related to a large, uncompleted transaction. For the fiscal years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, $298 and $337, respectively, are included in cost of sales and $3,929 and $12,059, respectively, are included in total operating expenses.
(2) Consists of costs associated with preparing for an IPO, including public company readiness, primarily comprised of professional fees. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
(3) Consists of non-cash equity-based compensation expense associated with the grant of equity-based compensation provided to officers, directors and employees. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
(4) Consists of expenses for professional fees related to supply-chain manufacturing optimization and costs associated with SKU rationalization and certain other strategic initiatives. For the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, there were no costs. For the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, $586 is included in cost of sales and $1,328 is included in total operating expenses.
(5) Consists of costs related to loss on extinguishment of debt, forgiveness of capital advance, legal and consulting costs associated with the dividend, ERP conversion costs related to integrating acquisitions and employee separation costs. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin are calculated by dividing EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, respectively, by net sales for the applicable period.
Brand net sales includes actual or estimated net sales for all of our brands for the periods presented regardless of our ownership during such period. The relative performance of Birch Benders prior to our acquisition may not be indicative of the results for Birch Benders in any future periods. Brand net sales includes net sales of the Birch Benders brand prior to the Birch Benders Acquisition and were derived from estimates prepared by, and are the responsibility of, management. Neither our independent auditors, nor any other independent accountants, have audited, compiled, examined or performed any procedures with respect to such information, nor have they expressed any opinion or any other form of assurance on
such information or its achievability, and assume no responsibility for, and disclaim any association with, the such information. We are providing this information to provide investors with information regarding the relative net sales growth of all of our brands during the periods presented.
The following table provides a reconciliation of brand net sales to net sales, its most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods presented:
The following table provides a reconciliation of adjusted net income to net income, its most directly comparable GAAP measure, and the resulting adjusted diluted earnings per share calculated from adjusted net income, for each of the periods presented:
(1) Consists of transaction costs and certain integration costs associated with the Birch Benders Acquisition as well as costs associated with incomplete potential acquisitions and substantial one-time costs related to a large, uncompleted transaction. For the fiscal years ended December 25, 2021 and December 26, 2020, $298 and $337, respectively, are included in cost of sales and $3,929 and $12,059, respectively, are included in total operating expenses.
(2) Consists of costs associated with preparing for an IPO, including public company readiness, primarily comprised of professional fees. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
(3) Consists of non-cash equity-based compensation expense associated with the grant of equity-based compensation provided to officers, directors and employees. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
(4) Consists of expenses for professional fees related to supply-chain manufacturing optimization and costs associated with SKU rationalization and certain other strategic initiatives. For the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, there are no costs. For the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, $586 is included in cost of sales and $1,328 is included in total operating expenses.
(5) Consists of costs related to loss on extinguishment of debt, forgiveness of capital advance, legal and consulting costs associated with the dividend, ERP conversion costs related to integrating acquisitions and employee separation costs. For all periods presented, these costs are included in total operating expenses.
(6) Amortization costs associated with acquired trade names and customer lists.
(7) Tax effect was calculated using the Company's adjusted annual effective tax rate.
(8) Represents the removal for remeasurement of deferred taxes related to intangibles for changes in deferred rate, the removal of the tax effect of non-deductible transaction costs and prior year adjustments of non-deductible items.
The following table provides a reconciliation of adjusted operating expenses to total operating expenses, its most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods presented:
(1) Consists of expenses for impairment of goodwill and intangible assets.
(2) Consists of transaction costs and certain integration costs associated with the Birch Benders Acquisition as well as costs associated with incomplete potential acquisitions and substantial one-time costs related to a large, uncompleted transaction.
(3) Consists of costs associated with preparing for an IPO, including public company readiness, primarily comprised of professional fees.
(4) Consists of non-cash equity-based compensation expense associated with the grant of equity-based compensation provided to officers, directors and employees.
(5) Consists of expenses for professional fees related to supply-chain manufacturing optimization and costs associated with SKU rationalization and certain other strategic initiatives.
(6) Consists of costs related to loss on extinguishment of debt, forgiveness of capital advance, legal and consulting costs associated with the dividend, ERP conversion costs related to integrating acquisitions and employee separation costs.
We adjust the GAAP financial measures for reported income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate to exclude the effect of impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, transaction and integration costs, IPO readiness, non-cash equity-based compensation, supply chain optimization, acquisition amortization and other non-recurring costs impacting comparability. We excluded the items which we believe may obscure trends in our pre-tax income and the related tax effect of those items on our adjusted effective tax rate, and other impacts to tax expense. This non-GAAP financial measure is intended to provide a meaningful comparison of the Company’s effective tax rate, excluding the pre-tax income and tax effect of the items noted above, for the periods presented. Management uses this non-GAAP financial measure to monitor the effectiveness of adjustments on our tax rate.
The following table provides reconciliations of reported income tax (expense) benefit to adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate to adjusted effective tax rate for fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019:
(1) The adjustments to reported income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate represent the tax effect of the reconciling items included in the adjusted net income table above. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for definitions of our reported income tax (expense) benefit to adjusted income tax (expense) benefit and reported effective tax rate to adjusted effective tax rate.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash flow from operations, cash and cash equivalents and credit capacity under our Credit Facilities and proceeds from equity offerings. As of December 25, 2021, we had cash and equivalents of $66.2 million and availability under our First Lien Credit Agreement of $125.0 million.
We expect to use cash primarily for working capital, capital expenditures, lease obligations, principal and interest payments on our debt and to support potential acquisitions. We estimate that our capital expenditures will be approximately $16 million to $20 million in fiscal 2022, which we plan to fund with cash generated from our operating activities.
We have purchase commitments of approximately $4.8 million and $7.0 million to third-party and related-party manufacturers and suppliers, respectively, over the next 12 months, primarily for materials and supplies used in the manufacture of our products. In addition, as of December 25, 2021, the Company had a commitment to purchase equipment at a co-packing manufacturing facility of $4.8 million to be paid by February 2022.
The capital lease liability for our Bellvue, Colorado facility at December 25, 2021 was $6.8 million, recorded net of imputed interest of $14.7 million. The current portion of the capital lease liability of $19.9 thousand and the long-term portion of $6.8 million is recorded within long-term debt, net of debt issuance costs in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The imputed interest rate is 7.9%.
As of September 27, 2021, we received $263.2 million from the closing of the IPO, and on October 5, 2021, we received an additional $39.5 million from the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. These proceeds were used to pay off the $200.0 million Initial Second Lien Loans and prepay $99.2 million of the Initial First Lien Term Loans. As a result of the prepayment on the Initial First Lien Term Loans, all future principal payments have been eliminated for the remaining term of the loan. Due to the reduction of $299.2 million in debt, we estimate interest expense will be decreased by approximately $22 million over the next 12 months based on the current interest rate. Our total indebtedness was $487.9 million as of December 25, 2021.
We believe that our cash flow from operations, availability under our Revolving Facility (as defined herein) and available cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the issuance of equity, or a combination thereof. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. We may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance future acquisitions, which would result in additional expenses or dilution.
Credit Facilities and Unused Borrowing Capacity
On June 8, 2021, Sovos Intermediate (the “Borrower”) entered into (i) the First Lien Credit Agreement, pursuant to which the First Lien Lenders agreed to provide senior secured credit facilities, consisting of (a) an initial first lien term loan facility in an original principal amount of $580.0 million (the “Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility” and the loans thereunder, the “Initial First Lien Term Loans”) and (b) a revolving facility in an original principal amount of $125.0 million (the “Revolving Facility” and the loans thereunder, the “Initial Revolving Loans”), including a letter of credit facility with a $45.0 million sublimit, and (ii) a Second Lien Credit Agreement, (the “Second Lien Credit Agreement”) among Sovos Intermediate, Sovos Brands Holdings, Inc., Owl Rock Capital Corporation, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the lenders from time to time party thereto (“Second Lien Lenders”), pursuant to which the Second Lien Lenders agreed to provide a second lien secured credit facility, consisting of an initial term loan facility in an original principal amount of $200.0 million (the “Initial Second Lien Facility” and the loans thereunder, the “Initial Second Lien Loans,” and together with the Initial First Lien Term Loans and the Initial Revolving Loans, collectively, the “Credit Facilities”). Our Senior Credit Facilities consisted of (i) an initial term loan facility in an original principal amount equal to $280.0 million, (ii) a revolving credit facility in an original principal amount equal to $45.0 million, including a letter of credit facility with a $15.0 million sublimit, and (iii) an incremental term loan commitment in an original principal amount equal to $100.0 million (collectively, the “Senior Credit Facilities”).
In June 2021, we used the proceeds of the Initial First Lien Term Loans and the Initial Second Lien Loans to repay the full amounts outstanding under our Senior Credit Facilities and finance a dividend of $400.0 million to the sole stockholder of Sovos Intermediate, which was ultimately distributed to the limited partners of the Limited Partnership.
In September 2021, using net proceeds of the IPO, we paid the full outstanding principal balance on the Initial Second Lien Loans of $200.0 million. Additionally, in September 2021 and October 2021, we prepaid $59.7 million and $39.5 million, respectively, of the outstanding principal balance under the Initial First Lien Term Loans
The interest rate for the Initial First Lien Term Loans and the Initial Revolving Loans is (at the Borrower's option) either (a) LIBO Rate (as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement) plus the applicable LIBO Rate spread or (b) Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement) plus the applicable Alternate Base Rate spread. The Initial First Lien Term Loans mature on June 8, 2028 and the Initial Revolving Loans mature on June 8, 2026.
The interest rate for the Initial Second Lien Loans was (at the Borrower’s option) either (a) the LIBO Rate (as defined in the Second Lien Credit Agreement) plus 8.00% per annum or (b) the Alternate Base Rate (as defined in the Second Lien Credit Agreement) plus 7.00% per annum. The Initial Second Lien Loans were originally scheduled to mature on June 8, 2029. As described above, in September 2021, the Initial Second Lien Loans were paid in full.
As of December 25, 2021, we have available credit of $125.0 million under the Revolving Facility. No revolving loans were outstanding as of December 25, 2021 or December 26, 2020. As of December 25, 2021, the effective interest rate for the Initial First Lien Term Loans and Revolving Facility was 4.50%. As of December 26, 2020, the effective interest rate for the Incremental Term Loan and the 2018 Term Loan (each as defined in Note 10. Long-Term Debt to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K) was 5.70%.
The First Lien Credit Agreement contains various financial, affirmative and negative covenants that we must adhere to. Under the First Lien Credit Agreement, the Borrower is required to comply with a springing financial covenant, which requires the Borrower to maintain a first lien net leverage ratio of consolidated first lien net debt to consolidated EBITDA (with certain adjustments as set forth in the First Lien Credit Agreement) of no greater than 6.95:1.00. Such financial covenant is tested only if outstanding revolving loans (excluding any undrawn letters of credit) minus unrestricted cash exceeds 35% of the aggregate revolving credit commitments. The financial covenant is subject to customary “equity cure” rights. In addition, under the First Lien Credit Agreement, an annual excess cashflow calculation is required, to determine if any excess is required to be paid on the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility. As of December 25, 2021, the Company had no outstanding revolving loans, so did not meet the requirement to test the financial covenant under the First Lien Credit Agreement. As of December 26, 2020, the Company was compliant with its financial covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement, and no cash was required to be paid on the Incremental Term Loan and 2018 Term Loan.
Long-term debt as of December 25, 2021 consisted of the following:
Long-term debt as of December 26, 2020 consisted of the following:
Statement of Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $46.9 million for the 52 weeks ended December 25, 2021, a decrease of $16.0 million from $62.9 million for the 52 weeks ended December 26, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $8.9 million decrease in net income, $39.3 million use of cash in operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a $32.2 million increase of non-cash operating activities in the 52 weeks ended December 25, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
The $39.3 million increase in cash used in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to $29.0 million cash used due to a decrease in accrued expenses as a result of payments of incentive compensation, accrued interest and professional fees, and $8.8 million cash used due to an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to capitalized IPO cost payments and increased director and officer liability insurance premium payments. The $32.2 million increase in non-cash charges was primarily related to a $15.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt from the repayment of the Senior Credit Facilities, repayment of the Initial Second Lien Facility and prepayment of the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility, a $7.9 million increase in equity-based compensation from pre-IPO equity plan modifications and new IPO grants, a $5.0 million loss on credit write-off related to forgiveness of the capital advance with one of our suppliers, a $4.0 million increase in amortization of intangibles related to the Birch Benders Acquisition, and a $2.3 million increase in non-cash operating lease expense as a result of our current year adoption of ASC 842, partially offset by a $2.5 million decrease in deferred income taxes.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $14.2 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, a decrease of $136.0 million compared to cash used in investing activities of $150.1 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. The
decrease in cash used in investing activities was related to no acquisitions in fiscal 2021 compared to $146.4 million of cash used in connection with the Birch Benders Acquisition in fiscal 2020, partially offset by increased capital expenditures of $10.4 million due to the addition of a production line and a freezer upgrade at our Austin, Texas manufacturing facility and new production equipment at a co-packing manufacturing facility.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $3.6 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, a difference of $97.2 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of $93.6 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. For the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021, $3.6 million of cash was used in financing activities primarily driven by a $400.0 million dividend payment, $374.1 million repayment of the Senior Credit Facilities, $200.0 million repayment of the Initial Second Lien Facility, and $99.2 million prepayment of the Initial First Lien Term Loan Facility, partially offset by $766.1 million net debt proceeds from the Credit Facilities and $302.7 million in net proceeds from our IPO and the underwriters’ purchase of additional shares. For the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, $93.6 million of cash was provided by financing activities from the $96.7 million net debt proceeds from the Senior Credit Facilities, offset by $3.1 million of debt payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 25, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, income or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements and related notes requires us to make estimates and judgments regarding matters that are uncertain and susceptible to change and that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. Critical accounting policies are defined as those policies that are reflective of significant judgments, estimates and uncertainties, which could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, current conditions, terms of existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, information available from other outside sources and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, as appropriate. We regularly evaluate our estimates, judgments and assumptions for reasonableness and adequacy. Our actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows may be affected. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. The accounting policies that we believe to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant, difficult, subjective or complex judgments are discussed in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We sell a variety of Italian sauces, dry pastas, soups, yogurts, frozen entrées, pancake and waffle mixes, other baking mixes and frozen waffles to retailers through a variety of channels across the United States.
We recognize revenue when performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the goods to our customers. Control is transferred at a point in time, upon delivery of the goods to the customer. The customer is invoiced
with payment terms which are commensurate with the customer’s credit profile. Shipping and/or handling costs that occur before the customer obtains control of the good are deemed to be fulfillment activities (i.e., an expense) rather than a promised service and are recorded in cost of sales.
We assess the goods promised in our customers’ purchase orders and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer a good (or bundle of goods) that is distinct. To identify the performance obligations, we consider all the goods promised, whether explicitly stated or implied based on customary business practices.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration expected to be entitled to in exchange for fulfilled product orders, including estimates of variable consideration. The most common forms of variable consideration include trade promotions, such as consumer incentives, coupon redemptions and other marketing activities, allowances for unsaleable product, and any additional amounts where a distinct good or service cannot be identified or the value cannot be reasonably estimated. Trade promotions are recorded as a reduction to net sales with a corresponding reduction to accounts receivable at the time of revenue recognition for the underlying sale. The recognition of trade promotions requires management to make estimates regarding the volume of incentives that will be redeemed and their total cost.
We do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of significant financing components as we expect, at contract inception, that the period between the transfer of a promised good to a customer and when the customer pays for that good will be one year or less.
Business Combinations
The Company uses the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 805, Business Combinations. Each acquired company’s operating results are included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements starting on the date of acquisition. The purchase price is equivalent to the fair value of consideration transferred. Tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of acquisition are recorded at the acquisition date fair value. Goodwill is recognized for the excess of purchase price over the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Amounts allocated to assets and liabilities are based upon estimated fair values. Such values require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to the identifiable intangible assets. Management makes estimates of fair value based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable and that of a market participant. These estimates are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies, which are inherently uncertain. The separately identifiable intangible assets generally include customer relationships and tradenames.
For any given acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies. We estimate the fair value of such contingencies, which are included as part of the assets acquired or liabilities assumed, as appropriate. Differences from these estimates are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations in the period in which they are identified.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Our total assets include substantial goodwill intangible assets, such as tradenames and trademarks. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually and whenever events or circumstances occur indicating that goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets might be impaired. We perform the annual impairment tests on the first day of the Company’s fourth quarter. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment or a component of an operating segment.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment by performing a qualitative evaluation and a quantitative test. The qualitative assessment evaluates factors including macro-economic conditions, industry- and company-specific factors and historical company performance in assessing fair value. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit or indefinite- lived asset is less than the carrying value, a quantitative test is then performed. Otherwise, no further testing is required.
When using a quantitative approach to assess goodwill for impairment, the Company compares the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying amount, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, impairment is indicated, requiring recognition of an impairment charge for the differential. The Company uses a blended analysis of a discounted cash flow model and a market valuation approach to determine the fair values of its reporting units. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of these underlying assets could result in losses or an inability to recover the carrying value of the asset that may not be reflected in the asset’s current carrying value, thereby possibly requiring impairment charges in the future.
For indefinite-lived intangible assets, impairment is assessed by comparing the fair value of the asset with its carrying value, and a loss is recognized for the difference if the fair value is less than the carrying value. When estimating the fair value, the Company uses certain assumptions, such as forecasted growth rates and cost of capital. These assumptions are consistent with internal projections and operating plans. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances may occur, which could affect the accuracy or validity of the estimates and assumptions. For example, future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in our tradename impairment testing could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values. In addition, changes to, or a failure to achieve business plans or deterioration of macroeconomic conditions could result in reduced cash flows or higher discount rates, leading to a lower valuation that would trigger an impairment of the tradename.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.