Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to the business of the VG Companies and their subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Virgin Galactic Business Combination and Virgin Galactic Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries after consummation of the Virgin Galactic Business Combination. Prior to the Virgin Galactic Business Combination and prior to the series of Vieco 10 reorganization steps, Galactic Ventures, LLC ("GV"), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Vieco 10, was the direct parent of VG Companies.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
The following is a discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. A discussion and analysis of, and a comparison between, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 can be found in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are at the vanguard of a new industry, pioneering a consumer space experience using reusable spaceflight systems. We believe the commercial exploration of space represents one of the most exciting and important technological initiatives of our time. Approximately 600 humans have ever traveled above the Earth’s atmosphere into space to become officially recognized as astronauts, cosmonauts or taikonauts. This industry is growing dramatically due to new products, new sources of private and government funding, and new technologies. Demand is emerging from new sectors and demographics, which we believe is broadening the total addressable market. As government space agencies have retired or reduced their capacity to send humans into space, private companies are beginning to make exciting inroads into the fields of human space exploration. We have embarked on this journey with a mission to put humans into space and return them safely to Earth on a routine and consistent basis. We believe that opening access to space will connect the world to the wonder and awe created by space travel, offering customers a transformative experience, and providing the foundation for a myriad of exciting new industries.
We are a vertically integrated business offering access to space for private individuals, researchers and government agencies. Our missions include flying passengers to space as tourists, as well as flying researchers to space in order to conduct experiments for scientific and educational purposes. Our operations include the design and development, manufacturing, ground and flight testing, and post-flight maintenance of our spaceflight system vehicles. Our spaceflight system is developed using our proprietary technology and processes and is focused on providing space experiences for private astronauts, researcher flights and professional astronaut training.
We intend to offer our customers a unique, multi-day experience culminating in a spaceflight that includes several minutes of weightlessness and views of Earth from space. Our elegant and distinctive spaceflight system - which takes off and lands on a runway - has been designed for optimal safety and comfort. As part of our commercial operations, we have exclusive access to the Gateway to Space facility at Spaceport America located in New Mexico. Spaceport America is the world’s first purpose-built commercial spaceport and will be the site of our initial commercial spaceflight operations. We believe the site provides us with a competitive advantage as it not only has a desert climate with relatively predictable weather conditions preferable to support our spaceflights, it also has airspace that is restricted for surrounding commercial air traffic that facilitates frequent and consistent flight scheduling.
Our primary mission is to launch the commercial program for human spaceflight. In December 2018, we made history by flying our groundbreaking spaceship, VSS Unity, to space. This represented the first flight of a spaceflight system built for commercial service to take humans into space. In February 2019, we flew our second spaceflight with VSS Unity, which carried a crew member in the cabin in addition to the two pilots. After relocating our operations to Spaceport America, we have flown an additional two spaceflights in May and July of 2021. The May flight carried revenue-generating research experiments as part of NASA’s Flight Opportunities Program. This is the third time Virgin Galactic has flown technology experiments in the cabin on a spaceflight. This flight also completed the data submission to the FAA resulting in the approval for the expansion of our commercial space transportation operator license to allow for the carriage of space flight participants. This marked the first time the FAA licensed a spaceline to fly customers and was further validation of the inherent safety of our system.
Our July flight was the 22nd flight of VSS Unity, the fourth rocket powered spaceflight and the first spaceflight with a full crew of four mission specialists in the cabin, including our Founder, Sir Richard Branson.
We believe that the market for commercial human spaceflight is significant and untapped. As of December 31, 2021, we received reservations for approximately 700 spaceflight tickets and collected approximately $90.0 million in deposits from future astronauts. With each ticket purchased, future astronauts will experience a multi-day journey to prepare their mind and body for their upcoming flight, which includes a comprehensive spaceflight training preparation program and culminates with a trip to space on the final day. Each ticket purchased after our ticket sale reopening in 2021 also includes a membership of Virgin Galactic's Future Astronaut community. This membership provides access to events and experiences, including exclusive weeks 'at home' with Virgin Galactic Astronaut 001, Sir Richard Branson.
Following the Company's formation in 2004, we have developed an extensive set of integrated aerospace development capabilities encompassing preliminary vehicle design and analysis, detail design, manufacturing, ground testing, flight testing, and maintenance of our spaceflight system. Our spaceflight system consists of two primary components: our carrier aircraft, the mothership, and our spaceship.
Our mothership is a twin-fuselage, custom-built aircraft designed to carry the spaceship up to an altitude of approximately 45,000 feet where it is released for its flight into space. Using the mothership’s air launch capability, rather than a standard ground-launch, reduces the energy requirements of our spaceflight system as the spaceship does not have to ascend through the higher density atmosphere closest to the Earth’s surface as well as being a fully reusable spaceflight system. The spaceship is a vehicle with the capacity to carry pilots and private astronauts, research experiments and researchers that travel with their experiments for human tended research flights, into space and return them safely to Earth. It is powered by a hybrid rocket propulsion system, which propels the spaceship on a trajectory into space. The hybrid rocket motor utilizes liquid oxidizer and solid fuel and is designed to be a simple, safe, reliable propulsion system for the spaceship. The spaceship’s cabin has been designed to maximize the future astronaut’s safety, experience and comfort. A dozen windows line the sides and ceiling of the spaceship, offering customers the ability to view the blackness of space as well as stunning views of the Earth below.
Our team is currently in various stages of designing, testing and manufacturing additional spaceships and rocket motors in order to meet the expected demand for human spaceflight experiences. Our next generation spaceships will include the various learnings from our flight test program so we are able to design and manufacture our future spaceships to allow for greater predictability, faster turnaround time and easier maintenance. Concurrently, we are also researching and developing new products and technologies to grow our company.
Our operations also include spaceflight opportunities for research and technology development. Prior to Virgin Galactic’s offering, researchers have utilized parabolic aircraft and drop towers to create moments of microgravity and conduct significant research activities related to the space environment. In most cases, these solutions offer only seconds of continuous microgravity time and do not offer access to the upper atmosphere or space itself. Researchers can also conduct experiments on sounding rockets or satellites. These opportunities are expensive, infrequent and may impose highly limiting operational constraints. Our spaceflight system is intended to provide the scientific research community access to space for affordable and repeatable high-quality microgravity. Our suborbital platform is an end-to-end offering, which includes not only our vehicles, but also the hardware such as middeck lockers that we provide to researchers that request them, along with the processes and facilities needed for a successful campaign. The platform offers a routine, reliable and responsive service allowing for experiments to be repeated rapidly and frequently and with the opportunity to be tended in-flight by one or more researchers. This capability will enable scientific experiments as well as educational and research programs to be carried out by a broader range of individuals, organizations and institutions than ever before. Our commitment to advancing research and science has been present in all of our spaceflights to date. Most recently, in May of 2021, we carried payloads into space for research purposes through NASA's Flight Opportunities Program, and our flight in July of 2021 included research payloads from the University of Florida.
We have also leveraged our knowledge and expertise in manufacturing spaceships to occasionally perform engineering services, such as research, design, development, manufacturing and integration of advanced technology systems.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Annual Report on 10-K titled “Risk Factors.”
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. Since then, extraordinary actions have been taken by international, federal, state, and local public health and governmental authorities to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19 in regions throughout the world. These actions have included travel bans, quarantines, "stay-at-home" orders, and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations.
Consistent with the actions taken by governmental authorities, including the U.S. Federal government, the states of California and New Mexico and the United Kingdom, where most of our workforce is located, we have taken appropriately cautious steps to protect our workforce and support community efforts. As part of these efforts, and in accordance with applicable government directives, we initially reduced and then temporarily suspended on-site operations at our facilities in Mojave, California and Spaceport America in New Mexico in March 2020. Starting late March 2020, approximately two-thirds of our employees and contractors were able to complete their duties from home, which enabled much of our critical work to continue, including engineering analysis and drawing releases for VSS Unity, VMS Eve and the second SpaceShipTwo vehicle; process documentation updates; as well as workforce training and education. The remaining one-third of our workforce was unable to perform their normal duties from home. In April 2020, in accordance with our classification within the critical infrastructure designation, we resumed limited operations under revised operational and manufacturing plans that conformed to the COVID-19 health precautions at that time. This included universal facial covering requirements, rearranging facilities to follow social distancing protocols, conducting active daily temperature checks and undertaking regular, thorough disinfecting of surfaces and tools. We also tested employees and contractors for COVID-19 on a regular basis. Following guidance from OSHA, we allowed fully vaccinated employees and contractors to be mask-free in our facilities to the extent permitted by state and local guidelines, while continuing to require the wearing of masks for our unvaccinated population. Our unvaccinated population was also required to test weekly for COVID-19. Virgin Galactic's policy as of December 31, 2021 is that all employees are required to be fully vaccinated, unless such employees are legally entitled to an accommodation. As the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved, we have continued to follow U.S. Federal, State and UK guidance, as applicable to our sites.
Beginning in the summer of 2020, all of our employees whose work requires them to be in our facilities returned back on-site, and we continue to follow Federal, State and international guidance as applicable, to ensure employee safety. For the time being, we are encouraging those employees who are not required onsite and are able to work from home to continue doing so.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the protocols and procedures we have implemented in response to the pandemic have caused and continue to cause delays to our business and operations, which has led to accumulated impacts to both schedule and cost efficiency and some delays in operational and maintenance activities, including delays in our test flight program. We expect this to continue. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and results of our future operations will depend on future developments, such as the ultimate duration and scope of the pandemic and its impact on our operations necessary to complete the development of our spaceflight systems, our scheduled spaceflight test programs and commencement of our commercial flights. In addition to existing travel restrictions, countries may continue to maintain or reimpose closed borders, impose prolonged quarantines and/or further restrict travel. We believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand at December 31, 2021, and management's operating plan, will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the issuance of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. If the pandemic worsens and we experience an additional delay, we may take additional actions, such as further reducing costs.
Commercial Launch of Our Human Spaceflight Program
We are in the final phases of developing our commercial spaceflight program. Prior to commercialization, we must complete a period of planned maintenance and enhancements to the vehicles. Following the enhancement period, we intend to complete the vehicle testing program, including the planned research test flight with the Italian Air Force, before starting commercial flights. Commercial service is currently expected to commence in the fourth quarter of 2022. Any delays in successful completion of our test flight program, whether due to the impact of COVID-19 or otherwise, will impact our ability to generate revenue from human spaceflight.
We recently became the first spaceline to receive FAA approval to carry commercial customers to space. This was through an update to our existing commercial spaceflight license which we have held since 2016.
Customer Demand
While not yet in commercial service for human spaceflight, we have already received significant interest from potential future astronauts. Going forward, we expect the size of our backlog and the number of future astronauts that have
flown to space on our spaceflight system to be an important indicator of our future performance. As of December 31, 2021, we had reservations for space flights for approximately 700 future astronauts. In August 2021, following Sir Richard Branson's successful test flight, we reopened ticket sales and increased the pricing of our consumer offerings to a base price of $450,000 per seat. As of December 31, 2021, we received approximately 100 additional reservations since reopening ticket sales. The customer deposits received represents more than $160.0 million in expected future revenue upon completion of space flights.
Available Capacity and Annual Flight Rate
We face constraints of resources and competing demand for our human spaceflights. We expect to commence commercial operations with a single spaceship, VSS Unity, and a single mothership carrier aircraft, VMS Eve, which together comprise our only spaceflight system. As a result, our annual flight rate will be constrained by the availability and capacity of this spaceflight system. To reduce this constraint, we are currently developing our newest spaceship, VSS Imagine and expect to commence flight test in the second half of 2022. We intend to expand our fleet with our next generation vehicles, our Delta class spaceships and our next generation motherships, which will allow us to increase our annual flight rate. We believe that expanding the fleet will allow us to increase our annual flight rate once commercialization is achieved.
Safety Performance of Our Spaceflight Systems
Our spaceflight systems are highly specialized with sophisticated and complex technology. We have built operational processes to ensure that the design, manufacture, performance and servicing of our spaceflight systems meet rigorous quality standards. However, our spaceflight systems are still subject to operational and process risks, such as manufacturing and design issues, human errors, or cyber-attacks. Any actual or perceived safety issues may result in significant reputational harm to our business and our ability to generate human spaceflight revenue.
Component of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have primarily generated revenue by transporting scientific commercial research and development payloads using our spaceflight systems and by providing engineering services as a subcontractor to the primary contractor of a long-term contract with the U.S. government. We also have generated revenues from sponsorship arrangements.
Following the commercial launch of our human spaceflight services, we expect the significant majority of our revenue to be derived from ticket sales to fly to space and related services. We also expect that we will continue to receive a small portion of our revenue by providing services relating to the research, design, development, manufacture and integration of advanced technology systems.
Cost of Revenue
Costs of revenue related to spaceflights includes costs related to the consumption of a rocket motor, fuel, payroll and benefits for our pilots and ground crew, and maintenance. Cost of revenue related to the payload and engineering services consists of expenses related to materials and human capital, such as payroll and benefits. Once we have completed our test flight program and commenced commercial operations, we will capitalize the cost to construct any additional spaceship vehicles. Cost of revenue will include vehicle depreciation once those spaceships are placed into service. We have not capitalized any spaceship development costs to date.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is calculated based on the difference between our revenue and cost of revenue. Gross margin is the percentage obtained by dividing gross profit by our revenue. Our gross profit and gross margin has varied historically based on the mix of revenue-generating spaceflights and engineering services. As we approach the commercialization of our spaceflights, we expect our gross profit and gross margin may continue to vary as we scale our fleet of spaceflight systems.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of human capital related expenses for employees involved in general corporate functions, including executive management and administration, accounting, finance, tax, legal, information technology, marketing and commercial, and human resources; depreciation expense and rent relating to facilities, including a portion of the lease with Spaceport America, and equipment; professional fees; and other general corporate costs. Human
capital expenses primarily include salaries, cash bonuses, stock-based compensation and benefits. As we continue to grow as a company, we expect that our selling, general and administrative costs will increase on an absolute dollar basis.
Research and Development
Research and development expense represents costs incurred to support activities that advance our human spaceflight system towards commercialization, including basic research, applied research, concept formulation studies, design, development, and related testing activities. Research and development costs consist primarily of the following costs for developing our spaceflight systems:
•flight testing programs, including rocket motors, fuel, and payroll and benefits for pilots and ground crew performing test flights;
•equipment, material, and labor hours (including from third party contractors) for developing the spaceflight system’s structure, spaceflight propulsion system, and flight profiles; and
•rent, maintenance, and depreciation of facilities and equipment and other overhead expenses allocated to the research and development departments.
As of December 31, 2021, our current primary research and development objectives focus on the development of our mothership and spaceship vehicles for commercial spaceflights and developing our rocket motor, a hybrid rocket propulsion system that will be used to propel our spaceship vehicles into space. The Company is no longer developing an orbital spaceflight offering. The successful development of mothership, spaceship and rocket motor involves many uncertainties, including:
•our ability to recruit and retain skilled engineering and manufacturing staff;
•timing in finalizing spaceflight systems design and specifications;
•successful completion of flight test programs, including flight safety tests;
•our ability to obtain additional applicable approvals, licenses or certifications from regulatory agencies, if required, and maintaining current approvals, licenses or certifications;
•performance of our manufacturing facilities despite risks that disrupt productions, such as natural disasters and hazardous materials;
•performance of a limited number of suppliers for certain raw materials and components;
•performance of our third-party contractors that support our research and development activities including the quality of components and subassemblies;
•our ability to maintain rights from third parties for intellectual properties critical to research and development activities;
•continued access to launch sites and airspace;
•our ability to continue funding and maintain our current research and development activities; and
•the impact of the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables could delay the development of spaceship and rocket motor, which in turn could impact when we are able to commence our human spaceflights.
As we are currently still in our final development and testing stage of our spaceflight system, we have expensed all research and development costs associated with developing and building our spaceflight system. We expect that our research and development expenses will decrease once technological feasibility is reached for our spaceflight systems as the costs incurred to manufacture additional spaceship vehicles, built by leveraging the invested research and development, will no longer qualify as research and development activities.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants
Change in fair value of warrants reflects the non-cash change in the fair value of warrants. Certain warrants issued as part of the Company's initial public offering in 2017 and assumed upon the consummation of the Business Combination were recorded at their fair value on the date of the Business Combination and are remeasured as of any warrant exercise date and at the end of each reporting period.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net consists primarily of interest earned on cash and cash equivalents held by us in interest bearing demand deposit accounts and cash equivalents, as well as interest expense related to our finance lease obligations.
Other Income
Other income consists of miscellaneous non-operating items, such as gains on marketable securities and handling fees related to customer refunds.
Income Tax Provision
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and the United Kingdom. Our income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal, state, and foreign income taxes based on enacted federal, state, and foreign tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and express the relationship of certain line items as a percentage of revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparisons of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
Comparison of Results of Operations for Year Ended December 31, 2021 to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue increased by $3.1 million, or 1,283.2%, to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to sponsorship revenue and revenue earned under government contracts from progress on the completion of certain technical milestones related to payload services. In addition, we recognized revenue related to the performance of our spaceflights in May and July of 2021. Revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to engineering services provided under long-term U.S. government contracts that ended in early 2020.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
We recorded $0.3 million and $0.2 million of cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Cost of revenue primarily relates to the incremental costs related to the completion of payload services, labor costs provided for engineering services under long-term U.S. government contracts, and agent fees related to sponsorship revenue.
Gross profit increased by $3.0 million, or 4,546.2%, to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 64.4% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $56.6 million, or 48.5%, to $173.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $116.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $24.9 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $15.6 million increase in salary, bonus, and other benefits, a $9.8 million increase in marketing related expenses primarily attributable to our spaceflights in May and July 2021 and our re-opening of ticket sales and a $4.2 million increase in consulting fees.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $9.4 million, or 5.9%, to $149.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $158.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due a $27.3 million decrease in contract labor, materials, and other direct costs associated with the development of our spaceflight system. This decrease was partially offset by a $9.0 million increase in salary, bonus and related benefits, a $6.6 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $2.6 million increase in flight related costs.
Change in the Fair Value of Warrants
Change in fair value of warrants reflects the non-cash change in the fair value of warrants. Certain warrants issued as part of the Company's initial public offering in 2017 and assumed upon the consummation of the Business Combination were recorded at their fair value on the date of the Business Combination and are remeasured as of any warrant exercise date and at the end of each reporting period. As of December 31, 2021, there are no warrants outstanding.
Interest Income, net
Interest income decreased by $1.1 million or 47.2%, to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease were due to significant reductions in interest rates offered for cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash held in interest-bearing accounts.
Other Income, net
The changes in other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020 were not material.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We have accumulated net operating losses at the federal and state level as we have not yet started commercial operations. We maintain a substantially full valuation allowance against our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. The income tax expenses shown above are primarily related to minimum state filing fees in the states where we have operations as well as corporate income taxes for our operations in the United Kingdom, which operates on a cost-plus arrangement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $550.0 million and $380.9 million in marketable securities. Our principal sources of liquidity have come from our sales of our common stock.
Historical Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $230.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $352.9 million of net losses, adjusted for non-cash items, which primarily included depreciation and amortization expense of $11.5 million, stock based compensation expense of $61.8 million and change in fair value of warrants of $34.7 million, as well as a $14.2 million of cash provided from working capital.
Net cash used in operating activities was $233.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $644.9 million of net losses, adjusted for non-cash items, which primarily included depreciation and amortization expense of $9.8 million, stock based compensation expense of $30.3 million, and change in fair value of warrants of $371.9 million, as well as a $0.3 million decrease in cash consumed by working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $387.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $382.9 million purchases of marketable securities, as well as $4.6 million in purchases of capital expenditures.
Net cash used in investing activities was $17.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of purchases of manufacturing equipment, leasehold improvements at the Mojave Air and Space Port facility, purchases of furniture and fixtures, IT infrastructure upgrades and construction activities at the Gateway to Space facility and at spaceflight systems fueling facilities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $489.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $500.0 million cash received from sale and issuance of common stock and $20.0 million in cash received from issuance of common stock pursuant to stock options exercised, offset by $23.4 million in tax withholdings for stock options exercised and settlement of vested restricted stock units and $6.8 million in transaction costs incurred for the issuance of common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $436.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting primarily of cash received from the sale and issuance of common stock, offset by withholding taxes paid on behalf of employees related to net-settled stock-based award issuances, professional and other fees related to financing transaction costs.
Contractual Obligations
We lease certain facilities and data centers under non-cancellable operating lease arrangements that expire at various dates through 2065. As of December 3, 2021, the value of our obligations under operating leases was $80.1 million. See Note 16 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our lease obligations.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to advance the development of our spaceflight system and the commercialization of our human spaceflight operations. In addition, we expect cost of revenue to increase significantly as we commence commercial operations and add additional spaceships to our operating fleet.
Specifically, our operating expenses will increase as we:
•scale up our manufacturing processes and capabilities to support expanding our fleet with additional spaceships, carrier aircraft and rocket motors upon commercialization;
•pursue further research and development on our future human spaceflights, including those related to our research and education efforts, supersonic and hypersonic point-to-point travel;
•hire additional personnel in research and development, manufacturing operations, testing programs, maintenance operations and guest services as we increase the volume of our spaceflights upon commercialization;
•seek regulatory approval for any changes, upgrades or improvements to our spaceflight technologies and operations in the future, especially upon commercialization;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•hire additional personnel in management to support the expansion of our operational, financial, information technology, and other areas to support our operations as a public company.
Although we believe that our current capital is adequate to sustain our operations for a period of time, changing circumstances may cause us to consume capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more money than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control. Additionally, we are in the final phases of developing our commercial spaceflight program. While we anticipate initial commercial launch with a single spaceship, we currently have two additional spaceship vehicles under construction. We anticipate the costs to manufacture additional vehicles will begin to decrease as we continue to scale up our manufacturing processes and capabilities. Until we achieve technological feasibility with our spaceflight systems, we will not capitalize expenditures incurred to construct any additional components of our spaceflight systems and we will continue to expense these costs as incurred to research and development.
Short-term Liquidity and Capital Resources
For at least the next twelve months, we expect our principal demand for funds will be for our ongoing activities described above. We expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements primarily through our cash and cash equivalents on hand. Further, on January 19, 2022, the Company completed an offering of $425 million aggregate principal amount of
convertible senior notes due 2027. The 2027 Notes are senior, unsecured obligations of the Company, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.50% per year. Interest is payable in cash semi-annually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year, beginning on August 1, 2022. We believe we will have sufficient liquidity available to fund our business needs, commitments and contractual obligations in a timely manner for the next twelve months.
Long-term Liquidity and Capital Resources
Beyond the next twelve months, our principal demand for funds will be to sustain our operations, including the construction of additional motherships and spaceship vehicles, and for the payment of principal amount of our convertible senior notes as it becomes due. We expect to begin generating revenue from our human spaceflight program, which is expected to launch in the fourth quarter of 2022. To the extent this source of capital as well as the sources of capital described above are insufficient to meet our needs, we may also conduct additional public offerings of our securities or refinance debt. We expect these resources will be adequate to fund our ongoing operating activities.
The commercial launch of our human spaceflight program and the anticipated expansion of our fleet have unpredictable costs and are subject to significant risks, uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control, that may affect the timing and magnitude of these anticipated expenditures. Some of these risk and uncertainties are described in more detail in this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading Item 1A. “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements and, therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Please refer to Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about these critical accounting policies, as well as a description of our other significant accounting policies.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials expected to be used for the development of the human spaceflight program and customer-specific contracts. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. At the end of each period we evaluate whether the utility of our inventories have diminished through damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price or other causes, and if so, a loss is recognized in the period in which it occurs. We determine the costs of other product and supply inventories by using the first-in first-out or average cost methods. Our status of pre-technological feasibility means that material issued from inventory into production of our vehicles, labor charges and overhead charges are charged to research and development expense.
Research and Development
We conduct research and development activities to develop existing and future technologies that advance our spaceflight system towards commercialization. Research and development activities include basic research, applied research, concept formulation studies, design, development, and related test program activities. Costs incurred for developing our spaceflight system and flight profiles primarily include equipment, material, and labor hours. Costs incurred for performing test flights primarily include rocket motors, fuel, and payroll and benefits for pilots and ground crew. Research and development costs also include rent, maintenance, and depreciation of facilities and equipment and other allocated overhead expenses. We expense all research and development costs as incurred. Once we have achieved technological feasibility, we will capitalize the costs to construct any additional components of our spaceflight systems.
Income Taxes
We record income tax expense for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for
operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized. Our assessment considers the recognition of deferred tax assets on a jurisdictional basis. Accordingly, in assessing its future taxable income on a jurisdictional basis, we consider the effect of our transfer pricing policies on that income. We have placed a valuation allowance against U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets since the recovery of the assets is uncertain.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. As we grow, we will face increased complexity in determining the appropriate tax jurisdictions for revenue and expense items. We adjust these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The income tax expense includes the effects of any accruals that we believe are appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
We have not yet started commercial operations and as such we are accumulating net operating losses at the federal and state levels, which are reflected in the income tax provision section of the balance sheet. The presented income taxes in these statements are primarily related to minimum state filing fees in the states where we have operations as well as corporate income taxes for our operations in the United Kingdom, which operates on a cost-plus arrangement and therefore incurs income tax expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
In connection with the Virgin Galactic Business Combination, our board of directors and stockholders adopted the 2019 Incentive Award Plan (the "2019 Plan"). Pursuant to the 2019 Plan, up to 21,208,755 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuance to employees, consultants and directors. Please refer to Note 14 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding stock-based compensation.
Warrant Liability
We account for the public and private placement warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized as a component of non-operating income (expense) on the statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Please refer to Note 2(k) in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the fair value measurement of our warrant liability. All public warrants were either exercised or redeemed as of April 30, 2020. All remaining outstanding private placement warrants have been redeemed through cashless exercises as of July 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 4 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.