ITEM 7.	MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, seen from our perspective, which should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Executive Overview
The following are factors that regularly affect our operating results and financial condition. In addition, our business is subject to the risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Management currently considers the following events, trends, and uncertainties to be most important to understanding our financial condition and operating performance:
Product Costs and Supply
The level of profitability in the retail propane, fuel oil, natural gas and electricity businesses is largely dependent on the difference between retail sales price and our costs to acquire and transport products. The unit cost of our products, particularly propane, fuel oil and natural gas, is subject to volatility as a result of supply and demand dynamics or other market conditions, including, but not limited to, economic and political factors impacting crude oil and natural gas supply or pricing. We enter into product supply contracts that are generally one-year agreements subject to annual renewal, and also purchase product on the open market. We attempt to reduce price risk by pricing product on a short-term basis. Our propane supply contracts typically provide for pricing based upon index formulas using the posted prices established at major supply points such as Mont Belvieu, Texas, or Conway, Kansas (plus transportation costs) at the time of delivery.
To supplement our annual purchase requirements, we may utilize forward fixed price purchase contracts to acquire a portion of the propane that we resell to our customers, which allows us to manage our exposure to unfavorable changes in commodity prices and to assure adequate physical supply. The percentage of contract purchases, and the amount of supply contracted for under forward contracts at fixed prices, will vary from year to year based on market conditions.
Changes in our costs to acquire and transport products can occur rapidly over a short period of time and can impact profitability. There is no assurance that we will be able to pass on product acquisition and transportation cost increases fully or immediately, particularly when such costs increase rapidly. Therefore, average retail sales prices can vary significantly from year to year as our costs fluctuate with the propane, fuel oil, crude oil and natural gas commodity markets and infrastructure conditions. In addition, periods of sustained higher commodity and/or transportation prices can lead to customer conservation, resulting in reduced demand for our product.
The wholesale cost of propane was elevated compared to recent historical averages coming into fiscal 2022, and continued to rise during much of the first half of fiscal 2022 as U.S. propane inventory levels were well below historical averages. This was due to an imbalance between supply and demand, as well as from macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, such as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which impacted commodity prices both globally and in the United States. However, as we progressed through the second half of the fiscal year, the nation’s propane inventory levels improved as higher propane production outpaced demand, which led to a decline in wholesale propane prices. According to the Energy Information Administration, U.S. propane inventory levels at the end of September 2022 were 84.4 million barrels, which was 16.7% higher than September 2021 levels and 2.2% lower than the five-year average for
September. Despite the improvement in propane inventory levels and the resulting decline in wholesale propane prices during the second half of the fiscal year, average posted propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) for fiscal 2022 were 39.1% higher than the prior year. Consistent with our established practice, we adjusted customer pricing as market conditions allowed.
Seasonality
The retail propane and fuel oil distribution businesses, as well as the natural gas marketing business, are seasonal because these fuels are primarily used for heating in residential and commercial buildings. Historically, approximately two-thirds of our retail propane volume is sold during the six-month peak heating season from October through March. The fuel oil business tends to experience greater seasonality given its more limited use for space heating and approximately three-fourths of our fuel oil volumes are sold between October and March. Consequently, sales and operating profits are concentrated in our first and second fiscal quarters. Cash flows from operations, therefore, are greatest during the second and third fiscal quarters when customers pay for product purchased during the winter heating season. We expect lower operating profits and either net losses or lower net income during the period from April through September (our third and fourth fiscal quarters). To the extent necessary, we will reserve cash from the second and third quarters for distribution to holders of our Common Units in the fourth quarter and the following fiscal year first quarter.
Weather
Weather conditions have a significant impact on the demand for our products, in particular propane, fuel oil and natural gas, for both heating and agricultural purposes. Many of our customers rely heavily on propane, fuel oil or natural gas as a heating source. Accordingly, the volume sold is directly affected by the severity of the winter weather in our service areas, which can vary substantially from year to year. In any given area, sustained warmer than normal temperatures will tend to result in reduced propane, fuel oil and natural gas consumption, while sustained colder than normal temperatures will tend to result in greater consumption.
Hedging and Risk Management Activities
We engage in hedging and risk management activities to reduce the effect of price volatility on our product costs and to ensure the availability of product during periods of short supply. We enter into propane forward, options and swap agreements with third parties, and use futures and options contracts traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”) to purchase and sell propane, fuel oil, crude oil and natural gas at fixed prices in the future. The majority of the futures, forward and options agreements are used to hedge price risk associated with propane and fuel oil physical inventory, as well as, in certain instances, forecasted purchases of propane or fuel oil. In addition, we sell propane and fuel oil to customers at fixed prices, and enter into derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices as a result of selling the fixed price contracts. Forward contracts are generally settled physically at the expiration of the contract whereas futures, options and swap contracts are generally settled at the expiration of the contract through a net settlement mechanism. Although we use derivative instruments to reduce the effect of price volatility associated with priced physical inventory and forecasted transactions, we do not use derivative instruments for speculative trading purposes. Risk management activities are monitored by an internal Commodity Risk Management Committee, made up of six members of management and reporting to our Audit Committee, through enforcement of our Hedging and Risk Management Policy.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Customer Demand Patterns
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in commodity and stock market volatility, significant government stimulus and uncertainty about economic conditions. As a result, we experienced a period of lower revenues in certain customer sectors, particularly during the period from March 2020 through December 2020, as well as an increase in usage in our residential and certain other customer segments that benefited from stay-at-home initiatives and the demand for temporary, portable energy solutions. As economic and business conditions continue to evolve, more people are returning to work and demand in these residential and certain other customer segments have moderated back to more historical levels. Nonetheless, as we navigate through fiscal 2023 and beyond, we continue to refine alternative operational plans, inclusive of manpower levels, to address different customer demand scenarios, and to adapt our operational model to the potential for shifting demand patterns in the future.
Inflation and Other Cost Increases
In addition to the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been impacted by other global and economic events. We are experiencing increased inflation in the costs of various goods and services we use to operate our business, including higher wholesale costs for the products we distribute. Although we have not experienced significant disruptions with securing the products we sell, inflationary factors and competition for resources across the supply chain has resulted in increased costs in a wide variety of areas, including labor, vehicle and transportation costs, and the cost of tanks and other equipment. These and other factors may continue to impact our product costs, expenses, and capital expenditures, and could continue to have an impact on consumer demand as consumers manage the impact of inflation on their resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included within the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements section elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Certain amounts included in or affecting our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures must be estimated, requiring management to make certain assumptions with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty at the time the financial statements are prepared. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We are also subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ from estimated results. Estimates are used when accounting for depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets, employee benefit plans, self-insurance and litigation reserves, environmental reserves, allowances for doubtful accounts, asset valuation assessments and valuation of derivative instruments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any effects on our business, financial position or results of operations resulting from revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known to us. Management has reviewed these critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of our Board of Supervisors. We believe that the following are our critical accounting estimates:
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We estimate our allowances for doubtful accounts using a specific reserve for known or anticipated uncollectible accounts, as well as an estimated reserve for potential future uncollectible accounts taking into consideration our historical write-offs. If the financial condition of one or more of our customers were to deteriorate resulting in an impairment in their ability to make payments, additional allowances could be required. As a result of our large customer base, which is comprised of approximately 1.0 million customers, no individual customer account is material. Therefore, while some variation to actual results occurs, historically such variability has not been material. Schedule II, Valuation and Qualifying Accounts, provides a summary of the changes in our allowances for doubtful accounts during the period.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits. We estimate the rate of return on plan assets, the discount rate used to estimate the present value of future benefit obligations and the expected cost of future health care benefits in determining our annual pension and other postretirement benefit costs. We use the Society of Actuaries’ mortality scale (MP-2021) and other actuarial life expectancy information when developing the annual mortality assumptions for our pension and postretirement benefit plans, which are used to measure net periodic benefit costs and the obligation under these plans. While we believe that our assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in our actual experience or significant changes in market conditions may materially affect our pension and other postretirement benefit obligations and our future expense.
We contribute to multi-employer pension plans (“MEPPs”) in accordance with various collective bargaining agreements covering union employees. As one of the many participating employers in these MEPPs, we are responsible with the other participating employers for any plan underfunding. Due to the uncertainty regarding future factors that could impact the withdrawal liability, we are unable to determine the timing of the payment of the future withdrawal liability, or additional future withdrawal liability, if any.
Accrued Insurance. Our accrued insurance represents the estimated costs of known and anticipated or unasserted claims for incidents related to general and product, workers’ compensation and automobile liabilities. For each claim, we record a provision up to the estimated amount of the probable claim utilizing actuarially determined loss development factors applied to actual claims data. Our insurance provisions are susceptible to change to the extent that actual claims development differs from historical claims development. We maintain insurance coverage wherein our net exposure for insured claims is limited to the insurance deductible, claims above which are paid by our insurance carriers. For the portion of our estimated insurance liability that exceeds our deductibles, we record an asset related to the amount of the liability expected to be paid by the insurance companies. Historically, we have not experienced significant variability in our actuarial estimates for claims incurred but not reported. Accrued insurance provisions for reported claims are reviewed at least quarterly, and our assessment of whether a loss is probable and/or reasonably estimable is updated as necessary. Due to the inherently uncertain nature of, in particular, product liability claims, the ultimate loss may differ materially from our estimates. However, because of the nature of our insurance arrangements, those material variations historically have not, nor are they expected in the future to have, a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.
Loss Contingencies. In the normal course of business, we are involved in various claims and legal proceedings. We record a liability for such matters when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amounts can be reasonably estimated. The liability includes probable and estimable legal costs to the point in the legal matter where we believe a conclusion to the matter will be reached. When only a range of possible loss can be established, the most probable amount in the range is accrued. If no amount within this range is a better estimate than any other amount within the range, the minimum amount in the range is accrued.
Fair Values of Acquired Assets and Liabilities. From time to time, we enter into material business combinations. In accordance with accounting guidance associated with business combinations, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair value as of the acquisition date. Fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based upon available information and may involve us engaging an independent third party to perform an appraisal. Estimating fair values can be complex and subject to significant business judgment. Estimates most commonly impact property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, including goodwill. Generally, we have, if necessary, up to one year from the acquisition date to finalize our estimates of acquisition date fair values.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Net income for fiscal 2022 was $139.7 million, or $2.21 per Common Unit, compared to $122.8 million, or $1.96 per Common Unit, in fiscal 2021.
Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Adjusted EBITDA, as defined and reconciled below) increased $15.3 million, or 5.6%, to $291.0 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $275.7 million in the prior year.
Retail propane gallons sold in fiscal 2022 of 401.3 million gallons decreased 4.4% compared to the prior year, primarily due to unseasonably warm and inconsistent temperatures throughout the heating season, customer conservation stemming from the high commodity price environment, and more normalized volumes in certain customer segments that benefitted from COVID restrictions in previous years. Average temperatures (as measured by heating degree days) across all of our service territories for fiscal 2022 were 10% warmer than normal and comparable to the prior year. However, average temperatures during the critical heat-related demand months of December 2021 through February 2022 were approximately 2.0% warmer than the same period in the prior year.
Average propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) for fiscal 2022 increased 39.1% compared to the prior year. Total gross margin for fiscal 2022 of $789.3 million decreased $13.9 million, or 1.7%, compared to the prior year. Gross margin for fiscal 2022 included a $27.9 million unrealized loss attributable to the mark-to-market adjustment for derivative instruments used in risk management activities, compared to a $43.1 million unrealized gain in the prior year. These non-cash adjustments, which were reported in cost of products sold, were excluded from Adjusted EBITDA for both periods. Excluding the impact of the unrealized mark-to-market adjustments, gross margin for fiscal 2022 increased $57.1 million, or 7.5%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to prudent selling price management during a rising and volatile commodity price environment, as well as from the favorable impact of commodity hedges that matured during the period. Our hedging and risk management activities are intended to reduce the effect of price volatility associated with forecasted purchases of propane and propane sold on a fixed price basis. The commodity hedges that matured during fiscal 2022 were principally comprised of net long positions that were favorably impacted from the significant rise in commodity prices.
Combined operating and general and administrative expenses of $524.2 million for fiscal 2022 increased 8.0% compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher payroll and benefit-related expenses, higher vehicle lease and operating costs, higher variable compensation, higher provisions for doubtful accounts, as well as other inflationary effects on our operating costs.
During fiscal 2022, we utilized cash flows from operating activities to repay $42.4 million of debt. As a result of the combination of higher earnings and lower debt, our consolidated leverage ratio, as defined in our credit agreement, improved to 3.60x for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022.
In addition to the improvement in earnings, we succeeded in accomplishing a number of significant goals in fiscal 2022 that provide further support for our long-term strategic growth initiatives. The following highlights a few noteworthy accomplishments for fiscal 2022:
•We acquired a 25% equity stake in Independence Hydrogen, Inc. (“IH”), a veteran-owned and operated start-up company developing a gaseous hydrogen ecosystem, for $30.0 million;
•We made additional investments in Oberon Fuels, Inc. (“Oberon”), to support the commercialization of renewable dimethyl ether (“rDME”) as a blend with propane, including our construction of the world’s first commercial Propane+rDME blending facility in our Placentia, California location;
•We entered into an agreement with Adirondack Farms, a family-owned dairy farm in upstate New York, to produce renewable natural gas from dairy cow manure;
•We announced a collaboration agreement with Iwatani Corporation of America, a wholly owned subsidiary of Iwatani Corporation, Japan’s largest distributor of propane and only fully integrated supplier of hydrogen, to help accelerate the adoption of Propane+rDME, and to explore opportunities to further advance investments in the hydrogen infrastructure in the United States;
•We acquired and successfully integrated a well-run propane business in an attractive market in New Mexico;
•We extended our reach in certain strategic markets that were not previously served by our existing propane footprint; and,
•We strengthened our balance sheet by reducing debt by over $42.0 million with cash flows from operating activities.
On October 20, 2022, we announced that our Board of Supervisors declared a quarterly distribution of $0.325 per Common Unit for the three months ended September 24, 2022. This quarterly distribution rate equates to an annualized rate of $1.30 per Common Unit. The distribution was paid on November 8, 2022 to Common Unitholders of record as of November 1, 2022.
As we look ahead to fiscal 2023, our anticipated cash requirements include: (i) maintenance and growth capital expenditures of approximately $45.0 million; (ii) capital expenditures of approximately $33.0 million to support the buildout of our renewable energy platform; (iii) approximately $63.8 million of interest and income tax payments; and (iv) approximately $82.4 million of distributions to Unitholders, based on the current annualized rate of $1.30 per Common Unit. Based on our liquidity position, which includes availability of funds under the revolving credit facility and expected cash flow from operating activities, we expect to have sufficient funds to meet our current and future obligations.
Although uncertainties exist regarding the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and businesses, effects from the conflict in Ukraine and related price volatility and geopolitical instability and continued inflationary impacts on commodity prices and our expense base, we believe our efficient and flexible business model, as well as the recent steps taken to strengthen our balance sheet, leave us well positioned to manage our business through such uncertainties as they continue to unfold. Nonetheless, as we progress through fiscal 2023, we will continue to adapt to these and other changing circumstances and make decisions to help ensure the long-term sustainability of our businesses, and to be able to be opportunistic for strategic growth initiatives.
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
Revenues
As discussed above, average temperatures (as measured in heating degree days) across all of our service territories for fiscal 2022 were 10% warmer than normal and comparable to the prior year period. The weather during fiscal 2022 was characterized by widespread warm temperatures throughout most of our service territories during the critical heat-related demand month of December which lasted into much of January. While a cooling trend arrived late in January, warmer weather returned in mid-February. Average temperatures during the critical heat-related demand months of December 2021 through February 2022 were approximately 2% warmer than the same period in the prior year. The unseasonably warm and erratic weather pattern throughout the majority of fiscal 2022 led to inconsistent heat-related demand, while elevated selling prices due to significantly higher wholesale costs contributed to customer conservation. In addition, volumes in the prior year benefitted from incremental outdoor heating and cooking demand associated with COVID-19 restrictions and more consumers staying at home at that time.
Revenues from the distribution of propane and related activities of $1,313.6 million for fiscal 2022 increased $173.1 million, or 15.2%, compared to $1,140.5 million for the prior year, primarily due to higher average retail selling prices associated with higher wholesale costs, offset to an extent by lower volumes sold. Average propane selling prices for fiscal 2022 increased 21.9% compared to the prior year, reflecting a rise in average wholesale costs, resulting in a $232.3 million increase in revenues. Retail propane gallons sold decreased 18.4 million gallons, or 4.4%, to 401.3 million gallons, resulting in a decrease in revenues of $48.7 million. Included within the propane segment are revenues from risk management activities of $20.0 million for fiscal 2022, which decreased $10.5 million primarily due to a lower notional amount of hedging contracts used in risk management activities that were settled physically.
Revenues from the distribution of fuel oil and refined fuels of $95.2 million for fiscal 2022 increased $28.1 million, or 41.8%, from $67.1 million for the prior year, primarily due to higher average selling prices associated with higher wholesale costs, partially offset by lower volumes sold. Average selling prices for fuel oil and refined fuels increased 49.7%, resulting in a $31.5 million increase in revenues. Fuel oil and refined fuels gallons sold decreased 1.3 million gallons, or 5.3%, resulting in a $3.4 million decrease in revenues.
Revenues in our natural gas and electricity segment increased $9.1 million, or 29.9%, to $39.5 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $30.4 million in the prior year, resulting from higher average selling prices, reflecting higher average wholesale costs, offset to an extent by lower volumes sold, primarily due to the impact of warmer temperatures on customer demand and a lower customer base.
Cost of Products Sold
The cost of products sold reported in the consolidated statements of operations represents the weighted average unit cost of propane, fuel oil and refined fuels, and natural gas and electricity sold, including transportation costs to deliver product from our supply points to storage or to our customer service centers. Cost of products sold also includes the cost of appliances and related parts sold or installed by our customer service centers computed on a basis that approximates the average cost of the products.
Given the retail nature of our operations, we maintain a certain level of priced physical inventory to help ensure that our field operations have adequate supply commensurate with the time of year. Our strategy has been, and will continue to be, to keep our physical inventory priced relatively close to market for our field operations. Consistent with past practices, we principally utilize futures and/or options contracts traded on the NYMEX to mitigate the price risk associated with our priced physical inventory. In addition, we sell propane and fuel oil to customers at fixed prices, and enter into derivative instruments to hedge a portion of our exposure to fluctuations in commodity prices as a result of selling the fixed price contracts. At expiration, the derivative contracts are settled by the delivery of the product to the respective party or are settled by the payment of a net amount equal to the difference between the then market price and the fixed contract price or option exercise price. Under this risk management strategy, realized gains or losses on futures or options contracts, which are reported in cost of products sold, will typically offset losses or gains on the physical inventory once the product is sold (which may or may not occur in the same accounting period). We do not use futures or options contracts, or other derivative instruments, for speculative trading purposes. Unrealized non-cash gains or losses from changes in the fair value of derivative instruments that are not designated as cash flow hedges are recorded within cost of products sold. Cost of products sold excludes depreciation and amortization; these amounts are reported separately within the consolidated statements of operations.
From a commodity perspective, as discussed above, wholesale propane prices trended higher throughout much of the first half of the fiscal year before generally receding during the second half of the fiscal year. Overall, average posted propane prices (basis Mont Belvieu, Texas) and fuel oil prices during fiscal 2022 were 39.1% and 81.6% higher than the prior year, respectively. The net change in the fair value of derivative instruments during the fiscal year resulted in unrealized non-cash losses of $27.9 million and unrealized non-cash gains of $43.1 million reported in cost of products sold in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, resulting in a year-over-year increase of $71.1 million in cost of products sold, all of which was reported in the propane segment.
Cost of products sold associated with the distribution of propane and related activities of $601.1 million for fiscal 2022 increased $189.4 million, or 46.0%, compared to the prior year. Higher average wholesale costs contributed to a $148.6 million increase in cost of products sold, while lower volumes sold contributed to a $19.4 million decrease. Included within the propane segment are costs from other propane activities which decreased $10.9 million compared to the prior year due to a lower notional amount of hedging contracts used in risk management activities that were settled physically, coupled with the net increase in cost of products sold of $71.1 million resulting from the mark-to-market adjustments on derivative instruments in both periods discussed above.
Cost of products sold associated with our fuel oil and refined fuels segment of $68.3 million for fiscal 2022 increased $27.1 million, or 65.9%, compared to the prior year. Higher average wholesale costs contributed to an increase in cost of products sold of $29.3 million, while lower volumes sold contributed to a $2.2 million decrease.
Cost of products sold in our natural gas and electricity segment of $27.3 million for fiscal 2022 increased $9.7 million, or 55.6%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher natural gas and electricity wholesale costs, partially offset by lower usage.
Operating Expenses
All costs of operating our retail distribution and appliance sales and service operations are reported within operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. These operating expenses include the compensation and benefits of field and direct operating support personnel, costs of operating and maintaining our vehicle fleet, overhead and other costs of our purchasing, training and safety departments and other direct and indirect costs of operating our customer service centers.
Operating expenses of $442.4 million for fiscal 2022 increased $31.0 million, or 7.5%, compared to $411.4 million in the prior year, due primarily to higher payroll and benefit-related costs, including higher variable compensation expense, higher vehicle lease and operating costs, higher provisions for doubtful accounts, as well as other inflationary effects on our operating costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
All costs of our back office support functions, including compensation and benefits for executives and other support functions, as well as other costs and expenses to maintain finance and accounting, treasury, legal, human resources, corporate development and the information systems functions are reported within general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
General and administrative expenses of $81.8 million for fiscal 2022 increased $7.7 million, or 10.3%, compared to $74.1 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher payroll and benefit-related costs, including higher variable compensation expense given the year-over-year increase in earnings, as well as other inflationary effects on our expense base.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense of $58.8 million in fiscal 2022 decreased $45.7 million from $104.6 million in the prior year, primarily as a result of lower amortization expense attributable to the conclusion of the amortization period for certain intangible assets from prior business acquisitions.
Interest Expense, net
Net interest expense of $60.7 million for fiscal 2022 decreased $7.5 million from $68.1 million in the prior year, primarily due to the impact of the refinancing of two tranches of senior notes at lower rates in the third quarter of the prior year, as well as a lower average
level of outstanding debt. During fiscal 2022, we reduced total outstanding borrowings by $42.4 million with cash flows from operating activities. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we repurchased, satisfied and discharged all of our previously outstanding $525.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.5% senior notes due June 1, 2024 (the “2024 Senior Notes”) and $250.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.75% senior notes due March 1, 2025 (the “2025 Senior Notes”) with net proceeds from the issuance of $650.0 million in aggregate principal balance of 5.0% senior notes due June 1, 2031 (the “2031 Senior Notes”) and borrowings under our senior secured revolving credit facility, as described and defined below, pursuant to a tender offer and redemption. In connection with this tender offer and redemption during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we recognized a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $16.0 million, consisting of $11.5 million for the redemption premium and related fees, as well as the write-off of $4.5 million in unamortized debt origination costs.
Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA
Net income for fiscal 2022 amounted to $139.7 million, or $2.21 per Common Unit, compared to $122.8 million, or $1.96 per Common Unit, in fiscal 2021. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for fiscal 2022 amounted to $259.6 million, compared to $296.6 million for fiscal 2021.
Net income and EBITDA for fiscal 2022 included (i) a $2.6 million loss on our equity investments in unconsolidated affiliates; and (ii) a $0.8 million pension settlement charge. Net income and EBITDA for fiscal 2021 included (i) a $16.0 million loss on debt extinguishment; (ii) a $4.3 million charge resulting from our withdrawal from a multi-employer pension plan; (iii) a $1.0 million pension settlement charge; and (iv) a $0.9 million loss on our equity investment in an unconsolidated affiliate. Excluding the effects of these items, as well as the unrealized non-cash mark-to-market adjustments on derivative instruments in both years, Adjusted EBITDA increased to $291.0 million for fiscal 2022, compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $275.7 million for fiscal 2021.
EBITDA represents net income before deducting interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA excluding the unrealized net gain or loss on mark-to-market activity for derivative instruments and other items, as applicable, as provided in the table below. Our management uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental measures of operating performance and we are including them because we believe that they provide our investors and industry analysts with additional information to evaluate our operating results. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not recognized terms under US GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income or net cash provided by operating activities determined in accordance with US GAAP. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as determined by us excludes some, but not all, items that affect net income, they may not be comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table sets forth our calculations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA:
We also reference gross margins, computed as revenues less cost of products sold as those amounts are reported on the consolidated financial statements. Our management uses gross margin as a supplemental measure of operating performance and we are including it as we believe that it provides our investors and industry analysts with additional information that we determined is useful
to evaluate our operating results. As cost of products sold does not include depreciation and amortization expense, the gross margin we reference is considered a non-GAAP financial measure.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
We are omitting from this section our discussion of the earliest of the three years of financials included in this Form 10-K. The discussion for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 25, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on November 24, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Analysis of Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2022 amounted to $220.5 million, a decrease of $6.0 million compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to a higher level of variable-based compensation payments for awards earned in the respective prior fiscal year, the payment of the employer portion of social security payroll tax that was deferred during a certain portion of fiscal 2020 under the CARES Act, and a larger increase in working capital compared to the prior year, which stemmed from the rise in average wholesale costs of propane (discussed above).
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities of $94.4 million for fiscal 2022 consisted of capital expenditures of $44.4 million (including $24.3 million to support the growth of operations and $20.1 million for maintenance expenditures), a $30.0 million investment in IH (plus direct transactions costs), as well as $25.6 million used in the acquisition of a retail propane business and other investing activities involving Oberon (see Part IV, Note 4 of this Annual Report in relation to these transactions). This was partially offset by approximately $6.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment, as well as the sale of certain assets and operations in a non-strategic market of the propane segment.
Net cash used in investing activities of $34.1 million for fiscal 2021 consisted of capital expenditures of $29.9 million (including $15.4 million to support the growth of operations and $14.5 million for maintenance expenditures), $8.7 million used in the acquisition of a retail propane business and other investing activities involving Oberon, partially offset by $4.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2022 of $127.8 million reflected the quarterly distribution to Common Unitholders at a rate of $0.325 per Common Unit paid in respect of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and the first three quarters of fiscal 2022, net repayments of borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $42.4 million, and other financing activities of $3.7 million.
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2021 of $189.8 million reflected the quarterly distribution to Common Unitholders at a rate of $0.30 per Common Unit paid in respect of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, the first and second quarters of fiscal 2021 and the quarterly distribution at a rate of $0.325 per Common Unit paid in respect of the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Also reflected in financing activities for fiscal 2021 was proceeds of $650.0 million from the issuance of the 2031 Senior Notes which were used, along with borrowings of $125.0 million under the revolving credit facility, to repurchase, satisfy and discharge all of the previously outstanding 2024 Senior Notes and 2025 Senior Notes, with an aggregate par value of $775.0 million, as well as to pay tender premiums and other related fees of $11.3 million and debt issuance costs of $10.8 million, pursuant to a tender offer and redemption.
Summary of Long-Term Debt Obligations and Revolving Credit Lines
As of September 24, 2022, our long-term debt consisted of $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.875% senior notes due March 1, 2027, $650.0 million of the 2031 Senior Notes and $89.6 million outstanding under our $500.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”) provided by our credit agreement. See Part IV, Note 10 of this Annual Report.
The aggregate amounts of long-term debt maturities subsequent to September 24, 2022 are as follows: fiscal 2023: $-0-; fiscal 2024: $-0-; fiscal 2025: $89.6 million; fiscal 2026: $-0-; fiscal 2027: $350.0 million; and thereafter: $650.0 million.
Total Consolidated Leverage Ratio. Total Consolidated Leverage Ratio, as defined by our credit agreement, represents Adjusted EBITDA calculated on a trailing twelve-month basis plus non-cash compensation costs recognized under our Restricted Unit Plans for
the same period. To calculate the Total Consolidated Leverage Ratio, divide gross borrowings outstanding as of the current period’s balance sheet date by our Adjusted EBITDA.
Partnership Distributions
We are required to make distributions in an amount equal to all of our Available Cash, as defined in our Third Amended and Restated Partnership Agreement, as amended (the “Partnership Agreement”), no more than 45 days after the end of each fiscal quarter to holders of record on the applicable record dates. Available Cash, as defined in the Partnership Agreement, generally means all cash on hand at the end of the respective fiscal quarter, less the amount of cash reserves established by the Board of Supervisors in its reasonable discretion for future cash requirements. These reserves are retained for the proper conduct of our business, the payment of debt principal and interest and for distributions during the next four quarters. The Board of Supervisors reviews the level of Available Cash on a quarterly basis based upon information provided by management.
Pension Plan Assets and Obligations
We have a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan which was originally designed to cover all of our eligible employees who met certain requirements as to age and length of service. Effective January 1, 1998, we amended the defined benefit pension plan to provide benefits under a cash balance formula as compared to a final average pay formula which was in effect prior to January 1, 1998. Our defined benefit pension plan was frozen to new participants effective January 1, 2000 and, in furtherance of our effort to minimize future increases in our benefit obligations, effective January 1, 2003, all future service credits were eliminated. Therefore, eligible participants will receive interest credits only toward their ultimate defined benefit under the defined benefit pension plan. We made contribution payments to the defined benefit pension plan of $3.3 million, $6.3 million and $3.8 million in fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. As of September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021, the plan’s projected benefit obligation exceeded the fair value of plan assets by $20.8 million and $25.2 million, respectively. The net liability recognized in the consolidated financial statements for the defined benefit pension plan decreased by $4.4 million during fiscal 2022, which was primarily attributable to the contributions made during the year, as well as the increase in the discount rate used to measure the benefit obligation. During fiscal 2023, we expect to contribute approximately $3.3 million to the defined benefit pension plan.
Our investment policies and strategies, as set forth in the Investment Management Policy and Guidelines, are monitored by a Benefits Committee comprised of five members of management. The Benefits Committee employs a liability driven investment strategy, which seeks to increase the correlation of the plan’s assets and liabilities to reduce the volatility of the plan’s funded status. The execution of this strategy has resulted in an asset allocation that is largely comprised of fixed income securities. A liability driven investment strategy is intended to reduce investment risk and, over the long-term, generate returns on plan assets that largely fund the annual interest on the accumulated benefit obligation. For purposes of measuring the projected benefit obligation as of September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021, we used a discount rate of 5.125% and 2.50%, respectively, reflecting current market rates for debt obligations of a similar duration to our pension obligations. With other assumptions held constant, an increase or decrease of 100 basis points in the discount rate would have an immaterial impact on net pension and postretirement benefit costs.
During fiscal 2022, lump sum pension settlement payments of $3.3 million exceeded the interest and service cost components of the net periodic pension cost of $2.2 million. As a result, we recorded a non-cash settlement charge of $0.8 million during fiscal 2022 in order to accelerate recognition of a portion of cumulative unamortized losses. Similarly, during fiscal 2021, lump sum pension settlement payments of $3.9 million exceeded the interest and service cost components of the net periodic pension cost of $2.3 million. As a result, we recorded a non-cash settlement charge of $1.0 million during fiscal 2021, also in order to accelerate recognition of a portion of cumulative unamortized losses. During fiscal 2020, lump sum pension settlement payments of $3.6 million exceeded the interest and service cost components of the net periodic pension cost of $2.7 million. As a result, we recorded a non-cash settlement charge of $1.1 million during fiscal 2020, also in order to accelerate recognition of a portion of cumulative unamortized losses. These unrecognized losses were previously accumulated as a reduction to partners’ capital and were being amortized to expense as part of our net periodic pension cost.
We also provide postretirement health care and life insurance benefits for certain retired employees. Partnership employees hired prior to July 1993 and who retired prior to March 1998 are eligible for postretirement health care and life insurance benefits if they reached a specified retirement age while working for the Partnership. Effective March 31, 1998, we froze participation in the postretirement health care benefit plan, with no new retirees eligible to participate in the plan. All active employees who were eligible to receive health care benefits under the postretirement plan subsequent to March 1, 1998, were provided an increase to their accumulated benefits under the cash balance pension plan. Our postretirement health care and life insurance benefit plans are unfunded. Effective January 1, 2006, we changed our postretirement health care plan from a self-insured program to one that is fully insured under which we pay a portion of the insurance premium on behalf of the eligible participants.
Contractual and Other Obligations
The following table summarizes payments due under our known contractual and other obligations as of September 24, 2022:
(a)Payments exclude costs associated with insurance, taxes and maintenance, which are not material to the operating lease obligations.
(b)The timing of when payments are due for our self-insurance obligations is based on estimates that may differ from when actual payments are made. In addition, the payments do not reflect amounts to be recovered from our insurance providers, which amount to $3.5 million, $2.9 million, $2.5 million, $1.7 million, $0.8 million and $4.2 million for each of the next five fiscal years and thereafter, respectively, and are included in other assets on the consolidated balance sheet.
(c)Amounts represent estimated minimum funding requirements for our pension plan.
(d)These amounts are included in our consolidated balance sheet and primarily include payments for postretirement and incentive benefits, as well as other contractual obligations.
Additionally, we have standby letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $48.9 million, in support of retention levels under our casualty insurance programs and certain lease obligations, which expire periodically through April 30, 2023.
Operating Leases
We lease certain property, plant and equipment for various periods under noncancelable operating leases, including 84% of our vehicle fleet, approximately 27% of our customer service centers and portions of our information systems equipment. Rental expense under operating leases was $41.0 million, $37.8 million and $31.9 million for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2019, respectively. Future minimum rental commitments under noncancelable operating lease agreements as of September 24, 2022 are presented in the table above.
Guarantees
Certain of our operating leases, primarily those for transportation equipment with remaining lease periods scheduled to expire periodically through fiscal 2032, contain residual value guarantee provisions. Under those provisions, we guarantee that the fair value of the equipment will equal or exceed the guaranteed amount upon completion of the lease period, or we will pay the lessor the difference between fair value and the guaranteed amount. Although the fair value of equipment at the end of its lease term has historically exceeded the guaranteed amounts, the maximum potential amount of aggregate future payments we could be required to make under these leasing arrangements, assuming the equipment is deemed worthless at the end of the lease term, was approximately $34.0 million. The fair value of residual value guarantees for outstanding operating leases was de minimis as of September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021.
Recently Issued/Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Part IV, Note 2 of this Annual Report.