Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A or in other parts of this report.
The following section generally discusses fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, and are incorporated herein by reference.
Amounts reported in millions are rounded based on the amounts in thousands. As a result, the sum of the components reported in millions may not equal the total amount reported in millions due to rounding. In addition, percentages presented are calculated from the underlying numbers in thousands and may not add to their respective totals due to rounding.
Overview
Splunk provides innovative solutions that use data from digital systems to help organizations identify opportunities for optimization and innovation and keep those systems secure and performing effectively. This class of data is growing significantly as a direct result of the prevalence and importance of digital systems used by today’s organizations. Decades of investment in digital transformation have integrated the hardware and software that comprise digital systems into every aspect of how modern organizations operate. The data generated by these systems contains a comprehensive, real-time record of operations, interactions, and transactions that our offerings convert into insights and actions that improve technology and business outcomes. Our solutions for Security and Observability empower users in technology roles, including Development Operations (“DevOps”), IT Operations (“ITOps”), and cyber security, to monitor and secure digital systems more quickly and efficiently. Business users leverage our offerings to gain visibility into their digital processes to deliver better experiences, improve decisions and drive better results.
Our offerings provide visibility to our customers’ diverse technology infrastructure including systems deployed on the edge, on premises, and in private and public cloud environments, running software ranging from monolithic apps to cloud native ones. We also believe our offerings empower operational transformation, helping customers move from reactive, non-
scalable and ineffective approaches to proactive, automated, and AI-assisted processes that drive better outcomes even as the scale and complexity of their technology continue to grow.
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly increased the importance of being a digital, data-driven organization and we believe the importance of data-driven innovation will only continue to increase over time. The events of 2020 and 2021 accelerated the adoption of new ways to work and exerted an enormous amount of pressure on organizations of all kinds to deliver better experiences and outcomes, and to enable entirely new offerings and business models. We believe this global shift in the business environment and the related challenges are here to stay and that Splunk enables organizations to rise to these challenges by leveraging technology to achieve greater efficiency, agility, security, and drive a sustained competitive advantage. When organizations use Splunk to improve their security postures and build resilience, they are able to innovate more effectively.
We typically base our cloud services annual subscription fees on the volume of data indexed per day including a fixed amount of data storage or purchased infrastructure and data storage our customers require to support the underlying workload. We are seeing an increasing number of customers shift to workload-based pricing. We recognize the revenues associated with our cloud services ratably over the associated subscription term. For our license offerings, we typically base the license fees on either the estimated daily data indexing capacity or the compute power consumed to support our customers' workload and we generally recognize the license fee portion of these arrangements upfront. As a result, the timing of when we enter into large license contracts may lead to fluctuations in our revenues and operating results because our expenses are largely fixed in the short-term.
Our revenue mix has shifted from sales of licenses to the delivery of cloud services and we expect it will continue to shift in favor of cloud services. Our transition to a predominantly cloud services delivery model has impacted, and it will continue to impact, our operating margins and revenue as an increasing percentage of our sales becomes recognized ratably. Our shift to a cloud services delivery model is dependent on customer choice and our ability to predict our revenue and margins in any particular period has been, and may continue to be, limited. We have also shifted from generally invoicing our multi-year contracts upfront to invoicing on an annual basis. Accordingly, we have seen the timing of our cash collections extend over a longer period of time with the transition to an annual billings model than it has historically.
We intend to continue investing for long-term growth. We have invested and intend to continue to invest in product development to deliver additional features and performance enhancements, deployment models and solutions that can address new end markets. We expect to continue to expand our sales and marketing organizations to market and sell our offerings both in the United States and internationally.
We have utilized and expect to continue to engage in acquisitions to contribute to our long-term growth objectives. During fiscal 2021, we acquired companies that expand our observability capabilities, including companies that offer auto-instrumentation, real user monitoring, application performance monitoring, advanced synthetic monitoring, web optimization and network performance monitoring. During fiscal 2022, we have continued to invest in our long-term growth including through our acquisition of TruSTAR Technology, Inc., a provider of an intelligence platform for cybersecurity and threat data.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has created significant global economic uncertainty, adversely impacted the business of some of our customers, partners and vendors, and has impacted our business and results of operations in the past and could further impact our results of operations and our cash flows in the future.
COVID-19 has impacted, and could further impact, our business and that of our customers as a result of quarantines, various local, state and federal government public health orders, and other restrictions. For example, we are monitoring office use in the global offices we have selected to re-open, allowing all of our employees to continue to work remotely if they prefer, allowing our employees to elect not to travel, implementing in-person, onsite and travel safety protocols, and we have shifted certain of our customer-focused and corporate events to online-only or hybrid experiences. These operational changes could extend into future quarters. The long-term impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration, spread, and severity of the virus and its variants, as well as the efficacy of vaccines and vaccine distribution, the response of our U.S. employees to the federal vaccine mandate, and the timing and trajectory of the economic recovery as well as consumer behavior as the recovery develops. Our future performance will also depend on the continuing impact of COVID-19 on our customers, partners, employee productivity and retention and sales cycles, including as a result of travel restrictions and limitations. These potential developments are uncertain and cannot be predicted and as such, the extent to which COVID-19 will continue to impact our business, operations, financial condition and
results of operations over the long term is unknown. Furthermore, due to our shift to a cloud services delivery model, the effect of COVID-19 may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
As additional COVID-19 variants emerge, we will continue to evaluate our return to work and distributed workforce strategies taking into consideration factors such as treatments, vaccines progress, and public health recommendations.We also continue to evaluate our real estate needs and have in the past made the decision to exit certain office space leases. As we continue to assess how and to what extent our employees will gradually return to work in our offices, we may decide to exit additional office space leases which could result in further losses associated with our real estate lease assets.
See Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Form 10-K for further discussion of the impact and possible future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Key Business Metrics
We use certain key financial and operating metrics to evaluate our performance and monitor the growth of our business as we continue to shift to a cloud services delivery model.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We use cloud annual recurring revenue (“Cloud ARR”) and total annual recurring revenue (“Total ARR”) to identify the annual recurring value of customer contracts at the end of a reporting period and to monitor the growth of our recurring business as we continue to shift to a cloud services delivery model. Cloud ARR represents the annualized revenue run-rate of active cloud services contracts at the end of a reporting period. Total ARR represents the annualized revenue run-rate of active cloud services, term license and maintenance contracts at the end of a reporting period. Each contract is annualized by dividing the contract value by the number of days in the contract term and then multiplying by 365. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, and does not represent our revenue under U.S. GAAP on an annualized basis, as it is an operating metric that can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. ARR is not intended to be a replacement for forecasts of revenue.
The following presents our Cloud ARR and Total ARR (in millions):
Number of Customers with ARR Greater than $1 Million
We monitor the number of customers with Cloud ARR and Total ARR greater than $1 million at the end of a reporting period. An increase in this metric is an indicator of our ability to attract and scale with large enterprise customers who may have a broader array of use cases that align with the Splunk platform. The following presents the number of our customers with Cloud ARR and Total ARR greater than $1 million:
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
We quantify our net expansion across existing cloud customers through our cloud dollar-based net retention rate (“Cloud DBNRR”). We calculate Cloud DBNRR by dividing the Cloud ARR at the end of a period (“Cloud Current Period ARR”) by the Cloud ARR of the same group of customers at the beginning of that 12-month period. Cloud Current Period ARR includes existing customer renewals and expansion, is net of existing customer contraction and churn, and excludes new customers. For the trailing 12-month Cloud DBNRR, we take the dollar-weighted average of the Cloud DBNRR over the trailing 12 months. The following presents our trailing 12-month Cloud DBNRR:
Remaining Performance Obligations (“RPO”) Bookings
RPO Bookings is an indicator of overall bookings momentum. We calculate total RPO Bookings as total revenue plus the change in total RPO. Total RPO is separately disclosed in Note 9 “Revenue” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K. The following presents our total RPO Bookings (in millions):
Below is a calculation of fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 total RPO Bookings:
Financial Summary
(Dollars in millions)
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
Cloud services revenues. Cloud services allow customers to use hosted software over the contract period without taking possession of the software. We recognize the revenues associated with our cloud services ratably, over the associated subscription term.
License revenues. License revenues consist of revenues from term licenses, and to a much lesser extent perpetual licenses, under which we generally recognize the license fee portion of the arrangement upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. License revenues reflect the revenues recognized from sales of licenses to new customers and additional licenses to existing customers, including sales from the renewal of term licenses. Seasonal trends that contribute to increased sales activity in the fourth fiscal quarter often result in lower sequential revenues in the first fiscal quarter, and we expect this trend to continue.
Maintenance and services revenues. Maintenance and services revenues consist of revenues from maintenance agreements and professional services and training.
•Maintenance revenues. When a term license is purchased, maintenance is bundled with the license for the term of the license period. While we only sell perpetual licenses on an exception basis, for any existing perpetual license customers, maintenance is usually renewed on an annual basis. Customers with maintenance agreements are entitled to receive support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they become available during the maintenance period. We recognize the revenues associated with maintenance agreements ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the associated maintenance period. Maintenance revenues as a percentage of total revenues were 17.6% and 21.4% for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
•Professional services and training revenues. We have a professional services organization focused on helping our customers deploy our software in highly complex operational environments and train their personnel. Training and professional services have stated billing rates per service hour or are provided on a subscription basis, accordingly, revenues are recognized as services are delivered or ratably over the subscription period. We have experienced continued growth in our professional services revenues primarily due to the deployment of our software with some customers that have large, highly complex IT environments.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of cloud services revenues. Cost of cloud services revenues includes salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes for our cloud services organization, allocated overhead for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT, amortization of acquired intangible assets and third-party hosting fees. We recognize expenses related to our cloud services organizations as they are incurred.
Cost of license revenues. Cost of license revenues includes all direct costs to deliver our products, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes, allocated overhead for facilities and IT and amortization of acquired intangible assets. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred.
Cost of maintenance and services revenues. Cost of maintenance and services revenues includes salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes for our maintenance and services organizations, third-party consulting services and allocated overhead for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT. We recognize expenses related to our maintenance and services organizations as they are incurred.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are classified into three categories: research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative. For each category, the largest component is personnel costs, which include salaries, employee benefit costs, bonuses, commissions as applicable, stock-based compensation and related expenses such as employer taxes. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for depreciation of equipment, facilities and IT. Allocated costs for facilities include costs for compensation of our facilities personnel, leasehold improvements and rent. Our allocated costs for IT include costs for compensation of our IT personnel, costs associated with our IT infrastructure and software subscriptions. Operating expenses are generally recognized as incurred.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs attributable to our research and development personnel. We have devoted our product development efforts primarily to enhancing the functionality and expanding the capabilities of our software and services. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase, in absolute dollars, as we increase our research and development headcount to further strengthen and enhance our software and services and invest in the development of our solutions and apps.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our sales, marketing and business development personnel, commissions earned by our sales personnel, and the cost of marketing and business development programs, including advertising programs to promote our brand and awareness, demand generating activities and customer events. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase, in absolute dollars, as we continue to hire additional personnel and invest in marketing programs.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel; our legal, accounting and other professional services fees; and other corporate expenses. We anticipate continuing to incur additional expenses due to growing our operations, including higher legal, corporate insurance and accounting-related expenses.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense related to our convertible senior notes, gain on extinguishment of convertible senior notes, a strategic investment impairment loss, foreign exchange gains and losses, interest income on our investments and cash and cash equivalents balances and changes in the fair value of forward exchange contracts.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
Our income tax provision (benefit) consists of federal, state and foreign income taxes. Because of our history of U.S. operating losses, we have established a full valuation allowance on our U.S. deferred tax assets. We regularly assess the need for the valuation allowance. If we determine that an adjustment is needed, we will record the necessary adjustment in the period that the determination is made.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, deferred sales commissions and business combinations have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Our contracts with customers often contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. We apply significant judgment in identifying and accounting for each performance obligation, as a result of evaluating the terms and conditions in contracts. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP based on an observable standalone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including the price charged to customers, our discounting practices, and our overall pricing objectives, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable, we estimate the SSP using the residual approach.
Deferred Sales Commissions
Sales commissions paid to our sales force and the related payroll taxes are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Costs related to new cloud services and term license contracts are amortized in proportion to the transfer of related services and delivery of licenses, including renewals, over the average period of benefit. We have determined that the average period of benefit related to these costs is five years, which is longer than our customers’ initial contract periods, but reflects the average period of benefit, including expected contract renewals. In arriving at this average period of benefit we considered the nature of our customer contracts, the duration of our relationships with customers, and the estimated life cycles of our technology. Costs related to renewals are amortized over the contract period. In capitalizing and amortizing deferred commissions, we have elected to apply a portfolio approach.
Business Combinations
We use our best estimates and assumptions to allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. We apply significant
judgment in determining the fair value of the intangible assets acquired, which involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to revenue growth rates, royalty rate and technology migration curve. While we use our best estimates and judgments, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions quarterly and record any adjustments to our preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that we are within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed during the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are included in our consolidated statements of operations.
For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 1 “Description of the Business and Significant Accounting Policies” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenues for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
_________________________
(1)Calculated as a percentage of the associated revenues.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2022 and 2021
Revenues
(Dollars in millions)
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Total revenues increased $444.3 million, or 19.9%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $389.7 million, or 70.3%, in cloud services revenues
+ increase of $85.1 million, or 8.8%, in license revenues
- decrease of $30.5 million, or (4.3)%, in maintenance and services revenues
Our transition to a cloud services delivery model has impacted, and it will continue to impact the timing of our recognition of revenue as an increasing percentage of our sales becomes recognized ratably. The increase in cloud services revenues reflects the continued customer adoption of our cloud services offerings. Our customers are increasingly purchasing our Splunk Cloud service as it delivers the benefits of Splunk Enterprise, while eliminating the need to purchase, deploy and manage infrastructure. The increase in license revenues is a result of increased license bookings during fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021. Maintenance and services revenues decreased as our customers shift to a cloud services delivery model.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
(Dollars in millions)
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Total cost of revenues increased $186.6 million or 34.1% primarily due to the increase in cloud services cost of revenues, as a result of our ongoing transition from a license to a cloud services delivery model.
Cloud services cost of revenues increased $146.0 million or 57.9%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $94.0 million in third-party hosting fees to support our cloud services
+ increase of $26.7 million in salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $13.1 million in third-party consulting services
+ increase of $10.5 million in overhead expenses
Maintenance and services cost of revenues increased $52.3 million, or 19.1%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $34.6 million in salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $15.2 million in third-party consulting services
Total gross margin decreased primarily due to a shift in the overall revenue mix in favor of cloud services, which have lower gross margins than our license business. The decrease in maintenance and services gross margin is primarily attributable to a decline in maintenance and services revenues and an increase in costs as we scale our cloud services related professional services.
Operating Expenses
(Dollars in millions)
Research and Development Expense
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Research and development expense increased $238.5 million, or 30.2%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $165.0 million in salaries and benefits, which includes a $55.9 million increase in stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $43.3 million in third-party hosting fees to support our product development efforts
+ increase of $17.8 million in third-party consulting services
+ increase of $8.5 million in overhead and other expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Sales and marketing expense increased $198.5 million, or 14.9%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $134.1 million in salaries and benefits, which includes a $48.1 million increase in stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $20.8 million in overhead and other expenses
+ increase of $19.5 million in third-party consulting services
+ increase of $14.8 million in marketing expenses
+ increase of $5.1 million in travel-related expenses
General and Administrative Expense
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
General and administrative expense increased $187.2 million, or 55.9%, primarily due to the following:
+ increase of $128.9 million in salaries and benefits, which includes a $48.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense as we increased headcount
+ increase of $55.2 million in facility exit costs representing the loss on the termination of a lease in San Jose, CA
+ increase of $3.7 million in overhead and other expenses
Interest and Other Income (Expense), net
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Interest and other income (expense), net reflects a net increase in expense of $53.1 million, primarily due to an increase in interest expense related to our convertible notes driven by the issuance of the 2026 Notes in July 2021 and the issuance of the 2027 Notes in June 2020, which contributed less than eight months of interest expense during fiscal 2021.
Income Tax Provision
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Our income tax provision increased primarily due to increases in foreign profits and associated taxes, greater sales to countries that impose withholding taxes, and reduced stock compensation tax benefits in foreign jurisdictions.
Seasonality, Cyclicality and Quarterly Trends
Our quarterly results reflect seasonality in the sale of our offerings. Historically, a pattern of increased license sales in the fourth fiscal quarter as a result of industry buying patterns has positively impacted sales activity in that period, which can result in lower sequential revenue in the first fiscal quarter. We expect some of this seasonality to continue in fiscal 2023 and beyond as license sales activity continues, however we expect the impact of this seasonality to decrease over time as a higher percentage of our revenues come from cloud services. As we continue to expect seasonally higher bookings and billings in the fiscal fourth quarter, with more of our revenue being recognized ratably there will also be a seasonal impact on our remaining performance obligations and deferred revenue. Our gross margins and operating losses have been affected by these historical trends because the majority of our expenses are relatively fixed in the short term. The timing of revenues in relation to our expense activity, which generally does not correlate directly with revenues, has an impact on cost of revenues, research and development expense, sales and marketing expense and general and administrative expense as a percentage of total revenues in each fiscal quarter during the year. The majority of our expenses are personnel-related and include salaries, stock-based compensation, benefits and incentive-based compensation plan expenses. As a result, we have not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations in the timing of expenses from period to period. Although these seasonal factors are common in the technology industry, historical patterns should not be considered a reliable indicator of our future sales activity or performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
(In millions)
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, investments and net accounts receivable. From time to time, we have also issued convertible debt to supplement our working capital. As of January 31, 2022, we had $1.8 billion of cash, cash equivalents and investments of which $287.6 million was held by foreign subsidiaries. We believe that these funds will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months.
In June 2021, our board of directors authorized and approved a stock repurchase program of up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock. During fiscal 2022 we repurchased 6.9 million shares of common stock with a total price of $1.0 billion, under trading plans complying with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act, at an average price of $145.23 per share. The repurchased shares are reflected as treasury stock on our consolidated balance sheets and statement of stockholders’ equity. The repurchase program was complete as of October 31, 2021.
We intend to continue to focus our capital expenditures in fiscal 2023 to support the growth in our operations, including acquisition-related activities. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced software and services offerings, the investments in our office facilities and our systems infrastructure, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings and our planned investments, particularly in our product development efforts or acquisitions of complementary businesses, applications or technologies.
Beginning in fiscal 2020, we shifted from generally invoicing our multi-year contracts upfront to invoicing on an annual basis. Accordingly, the timing of our cash collections will extend over a longer period of time than it has historically.
In July 2021, we issued $1 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) with Silver Lake Alpine, L.P., Silver Lake Alpine (Offshore Master), L.P. and Silver Lake Partners VI, L.P. as the purchasers. The 2026 Notes are general senior, unsecured obligations of Splunk. The total proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes was $981.7 million, net of issuance costs. In June 2020, we issued $1.27 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”), including the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of the 2027 Notes of their option to purchase an additional $165.0 million principal amount of 2027 Notes. The 2027 Notes are general senior, unsecured obligations of Splunk. The total proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes was $1.25 billion, net of initial purchaser discounts and other issuance costs. In connection with the issuance of the 2027 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the “2027 Capped Calls”). We used approximately $137.4 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2027 Notes to pay the cost of the 2027 Capped Calls and $691.6 million to repurchase, for cash, approximately $488.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2023 Notes. In September 2018, we issued $1.27 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2023 Notes”) and $862.5 million aggregate principal amount of 1.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”). In connection with the issuance of the 2023 Notes and the 2025 Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the “2023 and 2025 Capped Calls”). The premiums paid for the purchase of the 2023 and 2025 Capped Calls were $274.3 million. Refer to Note 7 “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities consist of our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year.
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Net cash provided by operating activities was $128.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $190.9 million in the prior year. Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to higher cash collections from customers relative to payments to vendors and employees.
Investing Activities
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Net cash used in investing activities of $333.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 primarily consisted of marketable securities purchases of $210.6 million, net of maturities, cash consideration paid related to the TruSTAR acquisition, net of cash acquired, of $80.3 million, purchases of strategic investments of $23.8 million, purchases of property and equipment of $10.7 million and cash used for the development of internal-use software of $9.4 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $797.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $908.7 million maturities of marketable securities, offset by cash consideration paid related to the Rigor, Plumbr and Flowmill acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $56.4 million, purchases of property and equipment of $37.1 million and cash used for the development of internal-use software of $14.6 million.
Financing Activities
Fiscal 2022 - 2021
Net cash used in financing activities of $136.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 primarily consisted of $1.0 billion of repurchases of common stock and taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards of $201.0 million, offset by net proceeds of $982.2 from the issuance of the 2026 Notes, and proceeds of $79.9 million from our employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $382.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 of $440.2 million proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes, net of capped calls purchases and a partial repurchase of the 2023 Notes, and proceeds of $79.9 million from employee stock purchase plan.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under leases for office space. Refer to Note 4 “Leases” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details related to our accounting for leases and related costs. In addition, we hold convertible debt securities. For more information on our convertible senior notes, refer to Note 7 “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of January 31, 2022, our other contractual commitments associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms were payments of $0.2 billion due in the next 12 months and $0.1 billion due thereafter. We expect to fund these obligations with cash flows from operations and cash on our balance sheet.
Indemnification Arrangements
During the ordinary course of business, we may indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse for losses suffered or incurred, our customers, vendors and each of their affiliates for certain intellectual property infringement and other claims by third parties with respect to our offerings, in connection with our commercial license arrangements or related to general business dealings with those parties.
As permitted under Delaware law, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our officers, directors and certain employees, indemnifying them for certain events or occurrences in connection with their service as our officers or directors or those of our direct and indirect subsidiaries.
Claims and reimbursements under indemnification arrangements have not been material to our consolidated financial statements; therefore, there is no accrual of such amounts at January 31, 2022. We are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnifications on our future results of operations.