Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto that are available elsewhere in this Report. The following is a discussion and analysis of SPLP's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors". All monetary amounts used in this discussion are in thousands, except common and preferred units, per common and preferred unit, and per share data.
Business Segments
SPLP operates through the following segments: Diversified Industrial, Energy and Financial Services, which are managed separately and offer different products and services. Corporate and Other consists of several consolidated subsidiaries, including Steel Services, equity method and other investments, and cash and cash equivalents. Its income or loss includes certain unallocated general corporate expenses. For a more complete description of the Company's segments, see Part I, Item 1, "Business - Products and Product Mix" found elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Significant Developments
Following is a summary of significant developments that have impacted the Company in 2021 and early 2022. For additional discussion of these matters, please see the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Report.
Investments
Following is a summary of the recent events involving the Company's investments:
•Steel Connect - As of December 31, 2021, we owned approximately 30.1%, and, when combined with our affiliates, 34.8%, of the outstanding common stock (and assuming conversion of the Steel Connect Convertible Note and shares of preferred stock as of December 31, 2021, 50.0%, and, when combined with our affiliates, approximately 53.4%, of the outstanding shares of Steel Connect's common stock).
◦Non-Binding Expression of Interest: On November 19, 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company sent a letter to Steel Connect setting forth a non-binding expression of interest to acquire all of the outstanding shares of Steel Connect common stock, par value $0.01 per share, not already owned by the Company and its subsidiaries. The letter is only a proposal, which does not constitute an offer or proposal capable of acceptance and may be withdrawn at any time and in any manner. We continue to negotiate the non-binding expression of interest with Steel Connect, such that no decision has yet been made with respect to Steel Connect's response to the expression of interest or any alternatives thereto and we and Steel Connect have not yet reached a definitive offer to purchase. There can be no assurance that any definitive offer will be made, that any agreement will be executed or that the transaction proposed in the letter or any other transaction will be approved or completed. The Company is not obligated to disclose any further developments or updates on the progress of the proposed transaction until either the Company enters into a definitive agreement or determines no such transaction will be approved.
◦Divestiture of IWCO: On February 25, 2022, pursuant to a transaction agreement (the "Transaction Agreement"), Steel Connect transferred all of its interests in one of its two subsidiaries, IWCO Direct Holdings Inc. ("IWCO"), to an entity owned by affiliates of certain lenders under the financing agreement, dated December 15, 2017 (the "Financing Agreement"), of which IWCO was borrower (the "Buyer"). The transfer was part of a negotiated restructuring of IWCO's capital structure and certain financial obligations of IWCO under that loan. In addition, as part of the overall transaction, the Buyer issued a note in the principal amount of $6,945 payable to Steel Connect as consideration for intercompany obligations owed by IWCO to Steel Connect (the "Subordinated Note"). The Subordinated Note is subordinated to the obligations under the Financing Agreement (including any amendments or other modifications thereto) and matures on the date that is six months after the maturity of the Financing Agreement or six months after repayment in full of the obligations under the Financing Agreement. Steel Connect cannot reasonably predict the impact that the disposition of IWCO will have on the market’s long-term perception
of Steel Connect's value or on Steel Connect's overall valuation, and, in turn, the impact that it may have on a possible acquisitive transaction, if any, with Steel Connect.
•Aerojet - As of December 31, 2021, the Company owned 4.9% of Aerojet Rocketdyne Holdings, Inc. ("Aerojet") common stock with a fair value of $184,678. Our Executive Chairman Warren G. Lichtenstein is also a member of Aerojet’s board of directors.
◦Dividend: In March 2021, the Company received a one-time cash dividend from Aerojet of $19,740.
◦Termination of Plan of Merger and Election Contest: On December 20, 2020, Aerojet entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Lockheed Martin Corporation ("Lockheed"), in which Aerojet would be acquired by Lockheed; however, on February 13, 2022, Lockheed delivered notice that it terminated the merger. On January 28, 2022, we (via our indirectly, wholly-owned subsidiary SPH Group Holdings LLC) provided Aerojet with a notice of stockholder nominations for election of a slate of directors at Aerojet’s 2022 annual meeting of stockholders in order to preserve our rights as a stockholder in the event the Lockheed transaction did not close prior to the meeting.
◦Litigation Related to Election Contest: On February 7, 2022, Mr. Lichtenstein and three other members of Aerojet's board (the "Director Plaintiffs") filed suit in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware (the "Court") seeking, among other things, an order preventing the alleged misuse of Aerojet's name and resources in connection with Aerojet's 2022 annual meeting of stockholders. The Director Plaintiffs filed the lawsuit due to disagreements among Aerojet's eight-member Board, which consists of them and four other directors (the "Director Defendants"), over matters relating to our nomination of director candidates for election at Aerojet's 2022 annual meeting of stockholders. On February 11, 2022, the Director Defendants filed suit in their own names and on behalf of Aerojet alleging, among other things, breaches of fiduciary duty by the Director Plaintiffs, aiding and abetting breach of fiduciary by our indirectly, wholly-owned subsidiary SPH Group Holdings LLC, and violations of Aerojet's advance notice bylaw by SPH Group Holdings LLC. For more information, see "Election Contest Litigation" in Note 25 - "Subsequent Events" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
•Aviat - In January and February of 2021, the Company sold its remaining ownership interest in Aviat Network, Inc. for total proceeds of approximately $24,100.
•iGo - In January 2022, the Company acquired the remaining interest in iGo, Inc. ("iGo") that it did not previously own for approximately $8,606. iGo is now a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Debt Refinancing
•New Credit Agreement - On December 29, 2021, the Company, amended and restated in its entirety its prior credit agreement, dated as of November 14, 2017, with an amended and restated credit agreement (the "New Credit Agreement") by and among the Company’s indirect, wholly-owned subsidiaries SPH Group Holdings LLC, Steel Excel Inc. and iGo (collectively, the "Borrowers") and PNC Bank, National Association, in its capacity as administrative agent, the Lenders (as such term is defined in the New Credit Agreement) party thereto, and certain of the Borrowers' affiliates in their capacities as guarantors. The New Credit Agreement, which has a five-year term, provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $600,000, which includes a $50,000 subfacility for swing line loans, a $50,000 sub-facility for standby letters of credit and a currency sublimit (available in euros and pounds sterling) equal to the lesser of $75,000 and the total amount of the Revolving Credit Commitment (as such term is defined in the New Credit Agreement). The New Credit Agreement permits the Borrowers, under certain circumstances, to increase the aggregate principal amount of the Revolving Credit Commitments under the New Credit Agreement by $300,000 plus additional amounts so long as the Leverage Ratio (as such term is defined in the New Credit Agreement) would not exceed 3.50:1. The New Credit Agreement permits the Company to borrow for the dividends on its preferred units, pension contributions, investments, acquisitions and other general corporate expenses. The proceeds of the Revolving Credit Loans under the New Credit Agreement will be used (i) to refinance existing indebtedness, (ii) for the payment of fees and expenses in connection with the refinancing transaction, and (iii) for general corporate purposes, certain permitted investments, working capital, letters of credit, capital expenditures and permitted acquisitions. Based on financial results as of December 31, 2021, the Company's total availability under the New Credit Agreement, which is based upon Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA and certain covenants as described in the New Credit Agreement, was approximately $321,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Divestiture
•Edge Divestiture - On February 1, 2021, the Company completed the sale of its Edge business for a sales price of $16,000. Edge provided roofing edge metal products and was part of the Company's OMG, Inc. ("OMG") business in the Diversified Industrial segment.
Common Unit Repurchase Program
•In November 2021, the Board of Directors of the Company approved the repurchase of up to an additional 1,120,869 of the Company's common units under the Repurchase Program. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company purchased 1,894,297 units for an aggregate price of $45,039 under the Repurchase Program. Since inception of the Repurchase Program until December 31, 2021, the Company has purchased 6,252,245 common units for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $99,384. As of December 31, 2021 there remained 1,387,625 units that may yet be purchased under the Repurchase Program. From January 1, 2022 through March 1, 2022, the Company repurchased 268,623 common units for $10,418.
COVID-19 Impact
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (in particular, the emergence of new variants of the virus across the globe) has caused, and continues to cause, significant disruptions in the U.S. and global economies. For example, national and local governments in the United States and around the world continue to implement measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and its variants, including travel bans, prohibitions on group events and gatherings, shutdowns of certain businesses, quarantines, curfews, and recommendations to practice physical distancing. Such measures have restricted and continue to restrict individuals’ daily activities and curtail or cease many businesses’ normal operations.
As of the date of this filing, and for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not experienced any significant disruptions to its businesses as compared to the prior fiscal year. The Company experienced adverse impacts to its consolidated financial results for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. However, it has since seen improvements with respect to certain components of its financial statements, including as a 16.3% increase in revenue, during the year ended December 31, 2021. Despite indications of economic recovery, the severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business in 2022 and beyond will depend on a number of uncertain factors and trends. Such factors and trends include, but not limited to: the duration and severity of the virus and its current variants; the emergence of new variant strains; the availability and widespread use of vaccines; the impact of the global business and economic environment on liquidity and the availability of capital ;and governmental actions that have been taken, or may be taken in the future, to mitigate adverse economic or other impacts or to mitigate the spread of the virus and its variants. The Company continues to monitor for any developments or updates to COVID-19 guidelines from public health and governmental authorities, as well as the protection of the health and safety of its personnel, and is continuously working to ensure that its health and safety protocols, business continuity plans and crisis management protocols are in place to help mitigate any negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s employees, business or operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We utilize certain non-GAAP financial measurements as defined by the SEC, which include "Adjusted EBITDA." The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss from continuing operations before the effects of income or loss from investments in associated companies and other investments held at fair value, interest expense, taxes, depreciation and amortization, non-cash pension expense or income, and realized and unrealized gains or losses on investments, and excludes certain non-recurring and non-cash items. The Company is presenting this non-GAAP financial measurement because it believes that this measure provides useful information to investors about the Company's business and its financial condition. The Company believes this measure is useful to investors because it is a measure used by the Company's Board of Directors and management to evaluate its ongoing business, including in internal management reporting, budgeting and forecasting processes, in comparing operating results across the business, as an internal profitability measure, as a component in evaluating the ability and the desirability of making capital expenditures and significant acquisitions, and as an element in determining executive compensation.
However, this measure is not a measure of financial performance under U.S. GAAP, and the items excluded from this measure are significant components in understanding and assessing financial performance. Therefore, this non-GAAP financial measurement should not be considered a substitute for net income or loss. Because Adjusted EBITDA is calculated before recurring cash charges, including realized losses on investments, interest expense, and taxes, and is not adjusted for capital expenditures or other recurring cash requirements of the business, it should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to invest in the growth of the business. There are a number of material limitations to the use of Adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool, including the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's tax provision or the cash requirements to pay its taxes;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income or loss from the Company's investments in associated companies and other investments held at fair value;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's interest expense;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash expenses in the period recorded, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the cash requirements for such replacement;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the Company's net realized and unrealized gains and losses on its investments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include non-cash charges for pension expense and equity-based compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include amounts related to noncontrolling interests in consolidated entities;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include certain other non-recurring and non-cash items; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include the Company's discontinued operations.
The following table reconciles net income from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA:
Revenue
Revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $214,260, or 16.3%, as compared to 2020, due to higher sales volume across all segments, primarily due to the economic recovery following impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold in the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $144,230, or 16.8%, as compared to 2020, due to increases in the Diversified Industrial and Energy segment, primarily due to the higher sales volume discussed above.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") in 2021 increased $13,229, or 4.5%, as compared to 2020, primarily due to the impact of higher sales volume as discussed above, partially offset by a gain as a result of a litigation settlement of $8,827 in 2021, as well as a $14,000 environmental reserve charge recorded in 2020 in the Diversified Industrial segment related to a legacy, non-operating site.
Goodwill Impairment Charges
As a result of declines in customer demand and the performance of the performance materials business during 2020, the Company recorded a $1,100 charge in the consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Asset Impairment Charges
As a result of COVID-19 related declines in our youth sports business within the Energy segment, intangible assets of $606, primarily customer relationships, were fully impaired in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $22,250 and $29,514, respectively. The lower interest expense in 2021 was primarily due to lower interest rates and lower average debt levels.
Realized and Unrealized Losses (Gains) on Securities, Net
Realized and unrealized losses on securities, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $24,044, as compared to gains of $25,643 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The changes in realized and unrealized losses and gains on securities, net over the respective periods are primarily due to mark-to-market adjustments on the Company's portfolio of securities, which are required to be recorded in earnings under U.S. GAAP.
All Other (Income) Expense, Net
All other income, net totaled $30,369 for the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily comprised of: (1) a $19,740 one-time dividend from Aerojet; (2) a pre-tax gain of $8,096 on the sale of OMG’s Edge business; and (3) a pre-tax gain of $6,646 on the sale of an idle facility in the Joining Materials business, partially offset by (4) finance interest expense of $7,693. All other expense, net totaled $29,013 for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily comprised of provisions for loan losses and finance interest expense.
Income Taxes
As a limited partnership, we are generally not responsible for federal and state income taxes, and our profits and losses are passed directly to our limited partners for inclusion in their respective income tax returns. The Company's tax provision represents the income tax expense or benefit of its consolidated corporate subsidiaries. For the year ended December 31, 2021, a tax provision of $84,089 was recorded, as compared to $38,136 in 2020. The Company's effective tax rate was 41.9% and 30.4% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The higher effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to an increase in U.S. tax expense related to unrealized gains on investment from related parties, which are eliminated for financial statement purposes.
(Income) Loss of Associated Companies, Net of Taxes
The Company recorded gains from associated companies, net of taxes, of $15,664 in 2021, as compared to losses, net of taxes of $3,786 in 2020. For the details of each of these investments and the related mark-to-market adjustments in both periods, see Note 11 - "Investments" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Report.
Net Gain (Loss) from Discontinued Operations
The Company recorded net gains from discontinued operations, net of taxes, of $138 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net losses from discontinued operations, net of taxes, of $10,199 in 2020, related to the Company's API entities which were part of the Diversified Industrial segment. The Company deconsolidated API on January 31, 2020 as it no longer held a controlling financial interest as of that date (see Note 6 - "Discontinued Operations" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Report).
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $259,833 in 2021, as compared to $213,739 in 2020. Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of sales was 17.0% in 2021, as compared to 16.3% in 2020, primarily due to improved profitability from both Diversified Industrial and Energy segments as a result of higher sales volume, as well as from the Financial Services segment driven by lower financial interest expense and lower provision for loan losses.
Segment Analysis
Diversified Industrial
Net sales in 2021 increased by $148,438, or 14.0%, as compared to 2020. Net sales increased $171,900, primarily due to higher sales volume from the Building Materials and Joining Materials businesses. These increases were partially offset by approximately $23,400 primarily due to lower sales volume from the Electrical Products businesses.
Segment operating income in 2021 increased by $52,480, or 74.1%, as compared to 2020. The increase in operating income was primarily due to: (1) higher sales volume, (2) a $8,096 pre-tax gain on the sale of OMG’s Edge business, (3) lower non-cash pension expenses of $7,604, (4) a $6,646 pre-tax gain on the sale of an idle facility in the Joining Materials business, and (5) an environmental reserve charge of $14,000 related to a legacy, non-operating site in the second quarter of 2020 that did not recur.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 increased by $13,157, or 9.4%, as compared to 2020. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to higher sales volume.
Energy
In 2021, net revenue increased $56,197, or 52.1%, as compared to 2020. The increase in net revenue was primarily due to higher rig hours driven by higher demand from the energy sector due to the rebound of energy prices.
Segment operating income in 2021 was $14,982, as compared to operating loss of $1,887 in 2020. The improvement in operating income was primarily due to higher sales volume.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 increased by $11,774, or 85.1%, as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher sales volume.
Financial Services
Revenue in 2021 increased $9,625, or 6.7%, as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increased interest income on higher PPP, credit risk transfer ("CRT") and held-for-sale ("HFS") balances, partially offset by lower interest income driven by lower held-to-maturity ("HTM") balances and higher non-interest income due to higher volume.
Segment operating income in 2021 increased $19,366, or 32.4%, as compared to 2020. The higher operating income was primarily due to higher revenue discussed above and lower expenses. The provision for loan losses decreased $21,823, finance interest expense decreased $4,040, partially offset by an increase in SG&A for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period last year. The lower provision for loan losses was due to better loan performance than expected and higher than expected loan paydowns. The lower finance interest expense was due to a decrease in balances and interest rates. The higher SG&A was driven by higher personnel expense due to higher bonus accrual as well higher credit performance fee due to higher CRT balances, partially offset by lower servicing fees due to lower HTM loan balances, excluding PPP loans.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 increased $20,095, or 33.2%, as compared to the same period of 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in warrant sales, higher interest income related PPP loans and sale and a lower provision for loan losses, partially offset by a decrease in interest income and fees due to lower origination volume and lower HTM balances.
Net Interest Income, Margin and Interest Rate Spreads
Net interest income is the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and interest incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. By its nature, net interest income is especially vulnerable to changes in the mix and amounts of interest- earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. In addition, changes in the interest rates and yields associated with these assets and liabilities can significantly impact net interest income. The following table summarizes the average balances, the amount of interest earned or incurred and the applicable yields for interest-earning assets and the costs of interest-bearing liabilities that generate net interest income. For purposes of calculating the yields in these schedules, the average loan balances also include the principal amounts of nonaccrual and restructured loans. However, interest received on nonaccrual loans is included in income only to the extent that cash payments have been received and not applied to principal reductions. In addition, interest on restructured loans is generally accrued at reduced rates.
WebBank has several lending arrangements with companies where it originates credit card and other loans for consumers and small businesses. These loans are classified as held for sale and are typically sold after origination.
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on WebBank's net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately, based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
Corporate and Other
Operating income was $21,303 in 2021, as compared to $22,366 in 2020. The fluctuations were primarily due to changes in investment gains and losses from both marketable securities and associated companies. Operating income also included a gain of $8,827 related to the insurance settlement received in connection with the Company’s favorable judgment in the Sciabucucchi v. DeMarco, et al. stockholder class action lawsuit in November 2021. For more information, see the "Litigation Matters" included in Note 20 - "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
For additional information on the Company's investments, see Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and Note 11 - "Investments" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Loan Portfolio
As of December 31, 2021, net loans accounted for 71% of WebBank's total assets, as compared to 93% at the end of 2020. The following table presents WebBank's loans outstanding by type of loan as of December 31, 2021 and the five most recent year-ends.
The following table includes a maturity profile for the loans that were outstanding as of December 31, 2021:
Nonperforming Lending Related Assets
There were no nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Summary of Loan Loss Experience
The methodologies used to estimate the allowance for loan losses ("ALLL") depend upon the impairment status and portfolio segment of the loan. Loan groupings are created for each loan class and are then graded against historical and industry loss rates. After applying historic loss experience, as described above, we review the quantitatively derived level of ALLL for each segment using qualitative criteria. We track various risk factors that influence our judgment regarding the level of the ALLL across the portfolio segments. The following table summarizes activity in WebBank's allowance for loan and lease losses for the periods indicated:
The distribution of WebBank's allowance for losses on loans at the dates indicated is summarized as follows:
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Anticipated Sources and Uses of Cash Flow
SPLP (excluding its operating subsidiaries, the "Holding Company") is a diversified global holding company with assets that principally consist of the stock of its direct subsidiaries, equity method and other investments, and cash and cash equivalents. The Company works with its businesses to enhance their liquidity and operations and to increase long-term value for the Company's unitholders and stakeholders through balance sheet improvements, capital allocation policies, and operational and growth initiatives, which are further described in Part I, Item 1 - "Business - Business Strategy."
Management uses the following strategies to continue to enhance liquidity: (1) continue to implement improvements using the Steel Business System throughout all the Company's operations to increase sales and operating efficiencies, (2) support profitable sales growth both organically and potentially through acquisitions and (3) evaluate from time to time and as appropriate, strategic alternatives with respect to the Company's businesses and/or assets. The Company continues to examine all of its options and strategies, including acquisitions, divestitures and other corporate transactions, to increase cash flows and stakeholder value.
Historically, the Company has financed its operations and met its capital requirements primarily through funds generated from operations, borrowings from lending institutions, sale of investments and sale of facilities or assets that were not fully utilized. The following table summarizes our liquidity:
Debt and Financing Arrangements
The Company's senior credit facility which was amended and restated in its entirety in December 2021 (the “New Credit Agreement”) consists of a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $600,000 (the “Revolving Credit Loans”), which includes a $50,000 subfacility for swing line loans, a $50,000 subfacility for standby letters of credit and a currency sublimit (available in euros and pounds sterling) equal to the lesser of $75,000 and the total amount of the Revolving Credit Commitment. The New Credit Agreement covers substantially all of the Company's subsidiaries, with the exception of WebBank. Availability under the New Credit Agreement is based upon earnings and certain covenants, including a maximum ratio limit on Total Leverage and a minimum ratio limit on Interest Coverage, each as defined in the New Credit Agreement. The New Credit Agreement is subject to certain mandatory prepayment provisions and restrictive and financial covenants, primarily the leverage ratios described above. The Company was in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2021. If the Company does not meet its financial covenants, and if it is unable to secure necessary waivers or other amendments from its lenders on terms acceptable to management, its ability to access available lines of credit could be limited, its debt obligations could be accelerated and liquidity could be adversely affected. The New Credit Agreement will expire on December 29, 2026, and all outstanding amounts will be due and payable. For more information, see Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Significant Developments - Debt Refinancing” of this Report.
The Company believes that it and its operating subsidiaries have access to adequate resources to meet their needs for normal operating costs, capital expenditures, pension payments, debt obligations and working capital for their existing business, as well as to fund its taxes, legal and environmental matters, for at least the next twelve months. These resources include cash and cash equivalents, investments, cash provided by operating activities and unused lines of credit. The Holding Company and its operating businesses' ability to satisfy their debt service obligations, to fund planned capital expenditures and required pension payments, and to make acquisitions or repurchase units under its common unit Repurchase Program will depend upon their future operating performance, which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions in the markets in which they operate, as well as financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond their control. As indicated above, there can be no assurances that the Holding Company and its operating businesses will continue to have access to their lines of credit if their financial performance does not satisfy the financial covenants set forth in their respective financing agreements, which could also result in the acceleration of their debt obligations by their respective lenders, adversely affecting liquidity.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company's working capital was $569,090, as compared to working capital of $286,302 as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in retail depository accounts (current liabilities), which was partially offset by an overall decrease in loans receivable related primarily to consumer loans. As of December 31, 2021, the availability under the New Credit Agreement was approximately $321,000. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, capital expenditures were $52,326 and $23,226, respectively. The Company currently expects full year capital expenditures in the range of $43,000 to $57,000 in 2022. The Company and its subsidiaries have ongoing commitments, including funding of the minimum requirements of its subsidiaries' pension plans. For the year ending December 31, 2022, the minimum required contribution to the Company's pension plans is $12,400. Required future pension contributions are estimated based upon assumptions such as discount rates on future obligations, assumed rates of return on plan assets and legislative changes. Actual future pension costs and required funding obligations will be affected by changes in the factors and assumptions described in the previous sentence, including the impact of declines in pension plan assets and interest rates, as well as other changes such as any plan termination or other acceleration events.
Sources and uses of cash flows from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $77,633, a decrease of $233,602 compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to higher working capital requirements, driven by an increase in loans held for sale of $110,461 due to the timing of loan originations, which can vary significantly from period-to-period since these loans are typically sold after origination, partially offset by higher operating income and certain non-cash items. Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $138 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $311,235. Net income from continuing operations of $83,477 was favorably impacted by certain non-cash items and a decrease of $138,361 in loans held for sale due to a reduction in loan originations at the end of the year of 2020. Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $12,855 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of continuing operations was $1,517,224 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Significant items included a decrease in loan originations, net of collections of $1,029,093, proceeds from the sales of loans of $530,969, proceeds from the sale of the OMG Edge business for $16,000 and proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $6,979, partially offset by purchases of property, plant and equipment of $52,326 and purchases of investments (net of proceeds from maturities and sales of investments) of $13,491.
Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $1,899,041 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant items included an increase in loan originations, net of collections of $1,904,843, purchases of property, plant and equipment of $23,226 and net cash paid for the Metallon, Inc. ("Metallon") acquisition of $3,500, partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of investments (net of purchases) of $29,528 and proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment of $3,000.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $1,404,763 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Significant items included net PPP loan repayments of $1,753,478, term loan repayments of $182,832, purchases of the Company's common units of $45,039, distributions to preferred unitholders of $9,633 and deferred finance charges of $2,712, partially offset by an increase in deposits of $469,228 and net revolver borrowings of $119,703.
Net cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations was $1,574,128 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant items included net proceeds from PPP loan borrowings of $2,090,223, partially offset by a decrease in deposits of $399,058, net revolver repayments of $40,891, redemption of the Company's preferred units of $40,000, purchase of the Company's common units of $20,464, term loan repayments of $14,208 and deferred finance charges of $1,474.
WebBank manages its liquidity to provide adequate funds to meet anticipated financial obligations, such as certificate of deposit maturities and to fund customer credit needs. WebBank had $308,589 and $117,553 in cash and cash equivalents, time deposits placed at other institutions and federal funds sold at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. WebBank had $45,000 and $40,000 in lines of credit from its correspondent banks at December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively. WebBank had $138,141 and $30,590 available from the Federal Reserve discount window at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Therefore, WebBank had a total of $491,730 and $188,143 in cash, lines of credit and access to the Federal Reserve Bank discount window at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which represents approximately 43.4% and 29.4%, respectively, of WebBank's total assets (excluding PPP loans funded through the PPP Liquidity Facility).
Environmental Liabilities
Certain of the Company's facilities are subject to environmental remediation obligations. The Company has estimated its liability to remediate these sites and has recorded liabilities of $25,844 as of December 31, 2021. For further discussion regarding these commitments, among others, see Note 20 - "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
Deposits
Deposits at WebBank at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
The increase in deposits as December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, is due to increase in WebBank's assets, excluding PPP loans. The average original maturity for time deposits at December 31, 2021 was 25 months, as compared to 12 months at December 31, 2020.
The following table details the maturity of time deposits as of December 31, 2021:
Off-Balance Sheet Risk
It is not the Company's usual business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements such as guarantees on loans and financial commitments, indemnification arrangements and retained interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity for securitization purposes. SPLP uses the same credit policy in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
WebBank is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk. In the normal course of business, these financial instruments include commitments to extend credit in the form of loans as part of WebBank's lending arrangements with Marketing Partners. Those instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. The contractual amounts of those instruments reflect the extent of involvement WebBank has in particular classes of financial instruments.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, WebBank's undisbursed commitments under these instruments totaled $218,090 and $170,611, respectively. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a borrower who meets the lending criteria established by WebBank through one of WebBank's lending agreements with its Marketing Partners, provided there is no violation of any condition established in the contract with the counterparty to the lending arrangement. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee, and in some cases are subject to ongoing adjustment by WebBank. Since certain of the commitments are expected to expire without the credit being extended, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. WebBank evaluates each prospective borrower's credit worthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if deemed necessary by WebBank upon extension of credit, is based on management's credit evaluation of the borrower and WebBank's Marketing Partner.
WebBank's exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments. WebBank uses the same credit policy in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. Preparation of these consolidated financial
statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are based on historical experience, expected future cash flows and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K, includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The following is a discussion of the critical accounting policies and methods used by the Company.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net
Goodwill represents the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in a business combination. We review goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter, and test for impairment during the year if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Examples of such events would include pertinent macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance and other factors. An entity can choose between using the Step 0 approach or the Step 1 approach.
For the Step 0 approach, an entity may assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. An entity has an unconditional option to bypass the Step 0 assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing the first step of the goodwill impairment test. An entity may resume performing the Step 0 assessment in any subsequent period. For the Step 1 approach, which is a quantitative approach, the Company will calculate the fair value of a reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. There are several methods that may be used to estimate a reporting unit's fair value, including the income approach, the market approach and/or the cost approach. The amount of impairment, if any, is determined by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount and recognizing an impairment charge based on the amount that the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value. The loss recognized should not exceed the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
2021 Goodwill Impairment Tests
For 2021, the Company utilized a qualitative approach for all of its reporting units, except for the Performance Materials and Electrical Products reporting units within the Diversified Industrial segment. The annual impairment test did not result in an impairment to goodwill for any of the reporting units. Based on its qualitative assessment, the Company does not believe that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any of its reporting units tested under this approach is less than its respective carrying values. The Company performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill associated with its Performance Materials and Electrical Products reporting units due to declines in market conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The assessment was based on a combination of income and market approaches to estimate the fair value of the reporting units, which indicated that the fair values of the reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow analyses included expected future earnings and cash flows, which are based on management's current expectations, as well as the related risk-adjusted discount rate used to estimate fair value. There were no goodwill impairment charges recorded as a result of these assessments. It is possible in future periods that further declines in market conditions, customer demand or other potential changes in operations may increase the risk that these assets are impaired. At December 31, 2021, the goodwill related to the Electrical Products reporting unit is at risk of future impairment if the fair value of this reporting unit, and its associated assets, decrease in value due to further economic downturns, decreased customer demand for Electrical Products' services, or an inability to execute management’s business strategies. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective, and actual results may differ materially from the Company's estimates. If the Company's ongoing cash flow projections are not met or if market factors utilized in the impairment test deteriorate, including an unfavorable change in the terminal growth rate or the weighted-average cost of capital, the Company may have to record impairment charges in future periods. As of December 31, 2021 the Performance Materials reporting unit's fair value exceeded its net book value by greater than 20%. As of December 31, 2021, the Electrical Products reporting unit's fair value exceeded its net book value by 15% and the Electrical Products' reporting unit had goodwill of $46,445.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company changed the date of its annual impairment test of goodwill from October 1 to December 1 to align with the Company’s annual strategic planning process. This change does not represent a material change to our method of applying an accounting principle, and therefore does not delay, accelerate or avoid an impairment charge. The change in annual impairment test date has been prospectively applied beginning December 1, 2021. Based on our assessment as of December 1, 2021, there was no indication of impairment.
2020 Goodwill Impairment Tests
In connection with the Company's 2020 annual goodwill impairment test and as a result of declines in customer demand in the Performance Materials reporting unit, which is included in the Diversified Industrial segment, the Company determined its fair value was less than its carrying value. The Company partially impaired the Performance Materials reporting units' goodwill and recorded a $1,100 charge in Goodwill impairment charges in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Performance Materials reporting unit was determined using a discounted cash flow model (a form of the income approach) with consideration of market comparisons. The discounted cash flow model used the Company's projections, which are subject to various risks and uncertainties associated with its forecasted revenue, expenses and cash flows, as well as the expected impact on its business from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company's significant assumptions in the analysis include, but are not limited to, future cash flow projections, the weighted- average cost of capital, the terminal growth rate and the tax rate. The Company's estimates of future cash flows are based on the current economic environment, recent operating results and planned business strategies. These estimates could be negatively affected by changes in regulations, further economic downturns, decreased customer demand for Performance Materials' products or an inability to execute its business strategies. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective, and actual results may differ materially from the Company's estimates.
Long-Lived Asset Testing
The Company's accounting policy for long-lived assets is to estimate the depreciable lives of property, plant and equipment, and to depreciate such assets over such lives. The Company tests long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets exceed the sum of the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amounts exceeds their fair values. The Company performs such assessments at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities, which is generally at the plant level, operating company level or the reporting unit level, depending on the level of interdependencies in the Company's operations. The Company considers various factors in determining whether an impairment test is necessary, including among other things: a significant or prolonged deterioration in operating results and projected cash flows; significant changes in the extent or manner in which assets are used; technological advances with respect to assets which would potentially render them obsolete; the Company's strategy and capital planning; and the economic climate in the markets it serves. When estimating future cash flows and if necessary, fair value, the Company makes judgments as to the expected utilization of assets and estimated future cash flows related to those assets. The Company considers historical and anticipated future results, general economic and market conditions, the impact of planned business and operational strategies and other information available at the time the estimates are made. The Company believes these estimates are reasonable; however, changes in circumstances or conditions could have a significant impact on its estimates, which might result in material impairment charges in the future.
Pension and Other Post-Retirement Benefit Costs
The Company maintains qualified and non-qualified pension and other post-retirement benefit plans for certain subsidiaries. The Company recorded pension income of $4,105 for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to its significant pension plans, and, as of December 31, 2021, the Company had recorded pension liabilities totaling $82,376. Pension benefits are generally based on years of service and the amount of compensation earned during the participants' employment. However, the qualified pension benefits have been frozen for all participants.
The pension and other post-retirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions, including discount and mortality rates and expected long-term rates of return on plan assets. Material changes in pension and other post-retirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions, changes in the number of plan participants, changes in the level of benefits provided, changes to the level of contributions to these plans and other factors.
Actuarial assumptions for its pension and other post-retirement benefit plans are determined each year to calculate liability information as of year-end, and pension and other post-retirement benefit expense or income for the following year. The discount rate assumption is derived from the rate of return on high-quality bonds.
The various pension plan assets are diversified as to type of assets, investment strategies employed and number of investment managers used. Investments may include equities, fixed income, cash equivalents, convertible securities and private investment funds. Derivatives may be used as part of the investment strategy. The transfer of assets may be directed between investment managers in order to rebalance the portfolio in accordance with asset allocation guidelines established by the
Company. The private investment funds, or the investment funds they are invested in, own marketable and non-marketable securities and other investment instruments. Such investments are valued by the private investment funds, underlying investment managers or the underlying investment funds at fair value, as described in their respective financial statements and offering memorandums. These values are utilized in quantifying the value of the assets of its pension plans, which are then used in the determination of the unfunded pension liabilities on the Company's consolidated balance sheets. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuation of some of the pension plans' investments in private investment funds and the nature of some of the underlying investments held by the investment funds, the recorded value may differ from the value that would have been used had a ready market existed for some of these investments for which market quotations are not readily available. Management uses judgment to make assumptions on which its employee benefit liabilities and expenses are based. The effect of a 1% change in discount rate or expected return on asset assumptions for the pension plans sponsored by the Company's subsidiaries would not have a significant impact on pension cost.
Loan Impairment and Allowance for Loan Losses
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that WebBank will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement, including scheduled interest payments. When a loan has been identified as being impaired, the amount of impairment is measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan's effective interest rate or, when appropriate, the loan's observable fair value or the fair value of the collateral (less any selling costs) if the loan is collateral-dependent. If the measurement of the impaired loan is less than the recorded investment in the loan (including accrued interest, net of deferred loan fees or costs and unamortized premium or discount), an impairment is recognized by creating or adjusting an existing allocation of the ALLL, or by charging down the loan to its value determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The ALLL is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to earnings. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when the uncollectability of a loan or receivable balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The ALLL is evaluated on a regular basis and is based upon a periodic review of the collectability of the amounts due in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower's ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as doubtful, substandard or loss. For such loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers non-classified loans and is based on historical loss experience and is adjusted for qualitative factors to cover uncertainties that could affect the estimate of probable losses. The ALLL is increased by charges to income and decreased by charge-offs (net of recoveries). The periodic evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance is based on WebBank's past loss experience, known and inherent risks in the portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the debtor's ability to repay, the estimated value of any underlying collateral and current economic conditions. Since our loss rates are applied to large pools of loans, even minor changes in the level of estimated losses can significantly affect management's determination of the appropriate ALLL because those changes must be applied across a large portfolio.
Income Taxes
As a limited partnership, we are generally not responsible for federal and state income taxes, and our profits and losses are passed directly to our limited partners for inclusion in their respective income tax returns. Our subsidiaries that are corporate subsidiaries are subject to federal and state income taxes. The table in Note 17 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Report, reconciles a hypothetical calculation of federal income taxes based on the federal statutory rate applied to the income or loss before income taxes and equity method investments. The tax effect of income passed through to common unitholders is subtracted from the hypothetical calculation.
Our subsidiaries that are subject to income taxes use the liability method of accounting for such taxes. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that
includes the enactment date. Our subsidiaries evaluate the recoverability of deferred tax assets and establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
When tax returns are filed, it is highly certain that most positions taken would be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, while others are subject to uncertainty about the merits of the position taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the consolidated financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions. Tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold are measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefits associated with tax positions taken that exceeds the amount measured as described above is provided for and reflected as a liability for unrecognized tax benefits on the consolidated balance sheets, along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination.
Contingencies, Including Legal and Environmental Liabilities
The Company is subject to litigation, proceedings, claims or assessments and various contingent liabilities incidental to its business or assumed in connection with certain business acquisitions. The Company accrues a charge for a loss contingency when it believe it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If the loss is within a range of specified amounts, the most likely amount is accrued, and the Company accrues the minimum amount in the range if no amount within the range represents a better estimate. Generally, the Company records the loss contingency at the amount we expect to pay to resolve the contingency and the amount is generally not discounted to the present value. Amounts recoverable under insurance contracts are recorded as assets when recovery is deemed probable. Contingencies that might result in a gain are not recognized until realizable. Changes to the amount of the estimated loss or resolution of one or more contingencies could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
The Company accrues for losses associated with environmental remediation obligations when such losses are probable and reasonably estimable. Accruals for estimated losses from environmental remediation obligations generally are recognized no later than completion of the remedial feasibility study. Such accruals are adjusted as further information develops or circumstances change. Costs of future expenditures for environmental remediation obligations are not discounted to their present value. Recoveries of environmental remediation costs from other parties are recorded as assets when their receipt is deemed probable. For more information see Note 20 - "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.
New or Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the Company's new or recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Form 10-K.