Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including the risks we discuss in Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Concerns related to the spread of COVID-19 have created global business disruptions as well as disruptions in our operations. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted economic activity and conditions worldwide, including workforces, liquidity, capital markets, consumer behavior, supply chains, and macroeconomic conditions. Despite progress in vaccination efforts, global economic activity remains uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. Further, in the first half of 2021, a new Delta variant of COVID-19 began to spread globally and caused an increase in COVID-19 cases in many places in the United States, and in
November 2021, a new Omicron variant, which appears to be the most transmissible variant to date, was detected, and has since caused an increase in COVID-19 cases in multiple countries, including the United States, and of which the potential severity is currently being evaluated.
Public health officials and medical professionals have warned that COVID-19 cases may continue to spike due to the Delta variant and/or the Omicron variant, particularly if vaccination rates do not quickly increase or if additional, potent disease variants emerge. It is unclear how long the resurgence due to Delta or the resurgence due to Omicron will last, how severe the Delta resurgence or Omicron resurgence will be, and what safety measures governments will impose in response to the Delta resurgence or Omicron resurgence. The impact of the Delta variant and the Omicron variant cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against the Delta variant and the Omicron variant and the response by governmental bodies and regulators. The outbreak has and may continue to affect the Company’s operations and those of third parties on which the Company relies. The degree and duration of COVID-19’s impact on our business, our operations, and the global economy as a whole, are unknown at this time. However, the effects could have a material impact on our results of operations, and we will continue to monitor the situation closely.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact our results of operations, including the long-term nature of the impacts, depends on numerous evolving factors, which are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, including the adoption rate of the COVID-19 vaccines, the emergence and spread of variants (including the Delta variant, a rapidly spreading strain of coronavirus), the scope and the timing to further contain the virus or treat its impact, and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume, among others. For more information related to the impact of COVID-19 on our business, refer to the risk factors included in Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Spectrum”, the “Company”, “we”, “our”, or “us”) is a biopharmaceutical company, with a primary strategy comprised of acquiring, developing, and commercializing novel and targeted oncology therapies. Our in-house development organization includes clinical development, regulatory, quality and data management.
At Spectrum, we thrive on collaboration and cross-functional teamwork. We exist to attack cancer and improve care so people can live longer, more fulfilling lives and have built a team to support innovative oncology drug development. Our business model focuses on building a portfolio of novel and targeted drugs in the field of oncology, through acquisition and partnerships. We bring those drugs through the development process with our partners to make them available to patients. These collaborative efforts will continue to shape the future of our pipeline and our company.
We have two drugs in late-stage development:
•Eflapegrastim, a novel long-acting granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (“G-CSF”) for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia. On August 6, 2021, the Company announced the receipt of a CRL, that cited manufacturing deficiencies related both to the drug substance and drug product manufacturers. The company believes it has completed the remediation of these deficiencies and resubmitted the BLA on March 11, 2022;
•Poziotinib, a novel irreversible tyrosine kinase inhibitor under investigation for NSCLC tumors with various mutations. On December 6, 2021, the Company announced it submitted its NDA for poziotinib to the FDA for use in patients with previously treated locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations. The NDA submission is based on the positive results of Cohort 2 from the ZENITH20 clinical trial, which assessed the safety and efficacy of poziotinib. The product has received Fast Track designation and there is currently no treatment specifically approved by the FDA for this indication. On February 11, 2022, the Company announced that it had received notice that the NDA had been accepted and received a PDUFA action date of November 24, 2022.
See Item 1. Business, for our discussion of:
•Company Overview
•Cancer Background and Market Size
•Product Portfolio
•Manufacturing
•Competition
•Research and Development
Recent Highlights of Our Business, Product Development Initiatives, and Regulatory Approvals
Our product pipeline is summarized below:
Eflapegrastim, a novel long-acting G-CSF:
We submitted our BLA for eflapegrastim to the FDA on October 24, 2019 that is supported by data from two similarly designed Phase 3 clinical trials, ADVANCE and RECOVER, which evaluated the safety and efficacy of eflapegrastim in 643 early-stage breast cancer patients for the treatment of neutropenia due to myelosuppressive chemotherapy. Both studies met the pre-specified endpoint of non-inferiority in duration of severe neutropenia and met all of the secondary endpoints. In addition, the safety profile was similar to pegfilgrastim. On August 6, 2021, we announced the receipt of a CRL based on manufacturing deficiencies identified at both the drug substance and drug product manufacturers. The company believes these manufacturing deficiencies have been remediated and on March 11, 2022, we resubmitted the BLA for eflapegrastim.
A company sponsored clinical trial has been initiated to evaluate the administration of eflapegrastim on the same day as chemotherapy. This Phase 1 clinical trial is a randomized, open label, actively controlled study to evaluate the same-day dosing of eflapegrastim on duration of neutropenia when administered at varying intervals following docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC) chemotherapy in patients with early-stage breast cancer. On March 4, 2021, at the virtual 38th Annual Miami Breast Cancer Conference®, the Company presented positive early data showing rapid absolute neutrophil count (ANC) recovery in the first three patients dosed in the 30-minute arm of the same-day dosing. This arm met the prespecified interim safety evaluation criteria and therefore supported the expansion of this arm to 15 patients. The study design included an interim safety evaluation that was conducted once the first three patients in each arm (30 minutes, 3 hours, or 5 hours) completed Cycle 1. Based on this review, the 30-minute arm expanded to a total of 15 patients, while the 3- and 5-hour dosing arms have been discontinued. In the 30-minute dosing arm, ANC recovery was more rapid compared to the 3- and 5-hour arms. The overall safety profile for the 30-minute arm was similar to what has been seen previously in large randomized studies with G-CSF given 24 hours after chemotherapy.
Poziotinib, a Pan ErbB inhibitor targeting HER2 exon20 mutations:
Poziotinib is a novel, pan-HER inhibitor that irreversibly blocks signaling through the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) family of tyrosine-kinase receptors, including HER1 (erbB1; EGFR), HER2 (erbB2), HER4 (erbB4), and HER receptor mutations. This, in turn, leads to the inhibition of the proliferation of tumor cells that over-express these receptors. Mutations of over-expression/amplification of EGFR family receptors have been associated with a number of different cancers, including NSCLC, breast cancer, and gastric cancer. In March 2015, we entered into a co-development and commercialization agreement with Hanmi for poziotinib worldwide rights, except in Korea and China.
Our clinical development program for poziotinib is focused on previously treated NSCLC, first-line treatment of NSCLC and treatment of other solid tumors with HER2 mutations. NSCLC tumors with HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations are rare and have generally not been responsive to other tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Patients with these mutations have a poor prognosis, and available treatment options are limited. Poziotinib, due to its unique chemical structure and characteristics, is believed to inhibit cell growth of tumors with HER2 exon-20 insertion mutations.
In October 2017, we announced the start of our pivotal ZENITH20 Phase 2 global clinical trial with active sites in the U.S., Canada and Europe. The ZENITH20 trial consists of seven cohorts of NSCLC patients. Cohorts 1, 2, 3 and 4 have completed enrollment while Cohorts 5, 6, and 7 are currently enrolling patients. Cohorts 1 (EGFR) and 2 (HER2) include previously treated NSCLC patients with exon 20 mutations. Cohort 3 (EGFR) and 4 (HER2) include first-line NSCLC patients with exon 20 mutations. Cohorts 1- 4 are each independently powered for a pre-specified statistical hypothesis and the primary endpoint is overall response rate (“ORR”). Cohort 5 includes previously treated or treatment-naïve NSCLC patients with EGFR or HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations and is evaluating different dosing regimens. Cohort 6 includes NSCLC patients with classical EGFR mutations who progressed while on treatment with first-line osimertinib and developed an additional EGFR mutation. Cohort 7 includes NSCLC patients with a variety of less common mutations in EGFR or HER2 exons 18-21 or the extracellular or transmembrane domains.
On December 26, 2019, we announced that the pre-specified primary endpoint was not met in Cohort 1 of the ZENITH20 trial evaluating poziotinib in previously treated NSCLC patients with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations. Cohort 1 enrolled a total of 115 patients who received 16 mg/day of poziotinib. The intent-to-treat analysis showed that 17 patients had a response (by RECIST) and 62 patients had stable disease for a 68.7% disease control rate (“DCR”). The confirmed ORR was 14.8% (95% CI 8.9%-22.6%). The median duration of response was 7.4 months and the progression free survival was 4.2 months. The safety profile was in-line with other second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
On July 27, 2020, we announced that we met the pre-specified primary endpoint for Cohort 2 in the ZENITH20 trial evaluating previously treated NSCLC patients with HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations. Cohort 2 enrolled a total of 90 patients
who received an oral, once daily dose of 16 mg of poziotinib. All the patients had failed at least one line of prior systemic therapy with 60 patients (67%) having failed two or more prior therapies, including chemotherapy and immunotherapy. All responses were read independently and confirmed by a central imaging laboratory using RECIST criteria. The intent-to-treat analysis demonstrated a confirmed ORR of 27.8% (95% CI of 18.9%-38.2%). Based on the pre-specified statistical hypothesis for the primary endpoint, the observed lower bound of 18.9% exceeded the pre-specified lower bound of 17% in this heavily pre-treated population. The safety profile was in-line with the type of adverse events seen with other second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These results were presented at the European Society for Medical Oncology (“ESMO”) Virtual Congress 2020 Science Weekend held in September 2020.
In December 2020, we reported that its pre-specified primary endpoint in Cohort 3 evaluating poziotinib in first-line NSCLC patients with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations was not met. Cohort 3 of the ZENITH20 clinical trial enrolled a total of 79 patients who received an oral once daily dose of 16 mg of poziotinib. The median time of follow up of all patients was 9.2 months with 12 ongoing patients still on treatment. The intent-to-treat analysis showed that 22 patients had a partial response (by RECIST) and 68 patients had stable disease for an 86.1% DCR. 91% of patients experienced tumor reduction with a median reduction of 25.5%. The confirmed ORR was 27.8% (95% CI 18.4-39.1%). Based on the pre-specified statistical hypothesis for the primary endpoint, the observed lower bound of 18.4% did not meet the pre-specified lower bound of >20%. The median duration of response was 6.5 months and the median progression free survival was 7.2 months. The safety profile was similar with the type of adverse events observed with other second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Grade 3 treatment related rash was 33% and diarrhea was 23%. 94% of patients had drug interruptions with 6 patients (8%) permanently discontinuing due to adverse events.
In March 2021, we announced that the FDA granted Fast Track designation for poziotinib based on data from Cohort 2 of ZENITH20, which evaluated previously treated patients with NSCLC with HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations. On December 6, 2021, the Company announced the submission of its NDA for poziotinib to the FDA for use in patients with previously treated locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with HER2 exon 20 insertion mutations. The NDA submission is based on the positive results of Cohort 2 from the ZENITH20 clinical trial, which assessed the safety and efficacy of poziotinib. On February 11, 2022, the Company announced that the file had been accepted and an action date of November 24, 2022 had been set.
In March 2022, the Company presented the results of Cohort 4 at the ESMO TAT meeting. Cohort 4 of the ZENITH20 clinical trial enrolled a total of 70 patients, 48 of whom received an oral once daily dose of 16 mg of poziotinib and 22 of who received an oral twice daily dose of 8 mg of poziotinib. The intent-to-treat analysis demonstrated a confirmed ORR of 41% (95% CI of 30%-54%). Based on the pre-specified statistical hypothesis for the primary endpoint, the observed lower bound of 30% exceeded the pre-specified lower bound of 20%. The median duration of response was 5.7 months and median progression free survival was 5.6 months. The most common treatment related Grade ≥ 3 adverse events were rash (30%), stomatitis (19%), diarrhea (14%), and paronychia (7%). In addition, the incidence of Grade ≥ 3 pneumonitis was low at 3%. The safety profile was consistent with the TKI class.
Components of Operating Results
The below summarizes the nature of our revenue and operating expense line items within our Consolidated Statements of Operations:
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation (including stock-based compensation) and benefits for our sales force and personnel that support our sales and marketing operations, and our general operations such as information technology, executive management, financial accounting, and human resources. It also includes costs attributable to marketing our products to our customers and prospective customers, patent and legal fees, financial statement audit fees, insurance coverage fees, bad debt expense, personnel recruiting fees, and other professional services.
Research and Development
Our research and development activities primarily relate to the clinical development of new drugs and costs associated with at-risk manufacture of drug products prior to FDA approval.
These clinical development expenses specifically consist of (i) compensation (including stock-based compensation) and benefits for research and development and clinical and regulatory personnel, (ii) materials and supplies for each project, (iii) consultants, and (iv) associated regulatory and clinical site expenses.
Our research and development manufacturing expenses are recognized in the period which the activity occurs and includes (i) our technology transfer costs for production, (ii) FDA qualification costs of our contract manufacturers’ sites, and (iii) material and service costs associated with our inventory build in anticipation of FDA approval and subsequent commercial launch.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses remained consistent compared to the prior period. Included in the current period expense is $4.9 million of one-time severance expense associated with the termination of our former chief executive officer in December 2021. This increase in expense was offset by a decrease in the current period compared to the prior period of (i) $3.6 million related to professional services and (ii) $1.2 million related to personnel expenses.
Research and development expenses decreased by $22.1 million in the current period primarily related to a decrease in eflapegrastim expenses of $28.2 million due to the impairment and write-offs in 2020 related to our second source manufacturer. This decrease was partially offset by increases in poziotinib expenses of (i) $4.1 million related to manufacturing activities and (ii) $3.8 million related to the preparation and filing of our NDA.
Total Other Expense
Total other expense increased by $9.1 million primarily due to (i) $12.8 million of decreased market value of our equity holdings in the current period versus the prior period and (ii) $1.2 million of decreased interest income in the current period versus the prior period, offset by $4.7 million of increased realized gains in the current period compared to the prior period from the sale of our equity holdings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our $100.6 million in aggregate cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 combined with $20 million of equity financing received from Hanmi in January 2022 is sufficient to fund our current and planned operations for at least the next twelve months. We may, however, require additional liquidity as we continue to execute our business strategy, and in connection with opportunistic acquisitions or licensing arrangements. We anticipate that to the extent that we require additional liquidity, it will be funded through additional equity or debt financings, or out-licensing arrangements. However, we cannot provide assurance that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on terms favorable to us or our current stockholders, if at all. Additionally, our liquidity and our ability to fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance which is subject to various market and economic factors that are beyond our control.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that provide financing, liquidity, market or credit risk support, or involve derivatives. In addition, we have no arrangements that may expose us to liability that are not expressly reflected in the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and/or notes thereto.
Net Cash Used In Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $119.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $121.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This slight decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily related to changes in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Cash Provided By Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $108.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by investing activities primarily relates to proceeds of $119.8 million from our investments and proceeds of $6.0 million from the sale of our equity holdings. These cash receipts were partially offset by $16.9 million of purchased investments and $0.2 million of equipment purchases.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $53.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $85.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to $52.6 million of proceeds received from common shares sold pursuant to an at-the-market-issuance sales agreement, and $0.7 million of proceeds from employee shares purchased under our employee stock purchase plan.
Sale of Common Stock Under ATM Agreements
On April 5, 2019, we entered into a new collective at-market-issuance (“ATM”) sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and B. Riley FBR, Inc. (the “April 2019 ATM Agreement”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock by any method deemed to be an “at the market” offering (the “ATM Offering”). From April 5, 2019 to March 2, 2020, the ATM Offering was conducted pursuant to a sales agreement prospectus filed with our automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR, filed with the SEC on April 5, 2019, which registered an aggregate
offering price of $150 million under the April 2019 ATM Agreement. From May 8, 2020 to June 30, 2020, the ATM Offering was conducted pursuant to a sales agreement prospectus (the “Initial Sales Agreement Prospectus”) filed with our shelf registration statement on Form S-3, filed with the SEC on March 20, 2020, as amended by Pre-Effective Amendment No. 1 thereto, and declared effective by the SEC on May 8, 2020 (the “Registration Statement”), which registered an aggregate offering price of up to $75 million under the April 2019 ATM Agreement. On July 29, 2020, we terminated the Initial Sales Agreement Prospectus, but left the April 2019 ATM Agreement in full force and effect. On November 6, 2020, we filed a new sales agreement prospectus to the Registration Statement, which registered an aggregate offering price of up to $60 million under the April 2019 ATM Agreement.
On July 13, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC on Form S-3, which was declared effective by the SEC on July 21, 2021 (the “Registration Statement”). The Registration Statement registered an aggregate offering price of up to $300 million of securities that may be issued and sold by us from time to time, including up to an aggregate offering price of $150 million of common stock (which amount is included in the $300 million aggregate offering price set forth in the base prospectus) that may be issued and sold pursuant to the April 2019 ATM Agreement.
We sold and issued common shares under the April 2019 ATM Agreement as follows:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make informed estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These amounts may materially differ from the amounts ultimately realized and reported due to the inherent uncertainty of any estimate or assumption. On an on-going basis, our management evaluates (as applicable) its most critical estimates and assumptions, including those related to: (i) the realization of our tax assets and estimates of our tax liabilities; (ii) the fair value of our investments; (iii) the valuation of our stock options and the periodic expense recognition of stock-based compensation; and (iv) the potential outcome of our ongoing or threatened litigation.
Our accounting policies and estimates that most significantly impact the presented amounts within these Consolidated Financial Statements are further described below:
Property and Equipment, Net
Our property and equipment, net is stated at historical cost, and is depreciated on a straight-line basis over an estimated useful life that corresponds with its designated asset category. We evaluate the recoverability of “long-lived assets” (which includes property and equipment) whenever events or changes in circumstances in our business indicate that the asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount to the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. An impairment loss would be recorded for the excess of net carrying value over the fair value of the asset impaired. The fair value is estimated based on expected discounted future cash flows or other methods such as orderly liquidation value based on assumptions of asset class and observed market data. An orderly liquidation value is the amount that could be realized upon liquidation, given a sufficient amount of time to find a purchaser for a sale of assets in their existing condition and location, as of a specific date, and assuming the sale is to market participants who can utilize such assets in their highest and best use. The orderly liquidation values are applied against the carrying values of the assets and the impairment loss is measured as the difference between the liquidation value and the carrying value of the assets.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that we would no longer proceed with the technology transfer and validation of a second manufacturing source for eflapegrastim and communicated this decision to the second source manufacturer. We had invested significant capital to prepare this facility for production. Given the decision to discontinue this work, we determined that the value of certain eflapegrastim production equipment had a carrying amount in excess of the anticipated recoverable value as there would be no future cash flows from these assets other than through the sale of this equipment. We determined the fair value of these assets under an orderly liquidation value method and recorded an impairment of $19.7 million to our carrying value for this equipment, which was recorded as research and development expense. In connection with this decision, we additionally wrote off $8.5 million in prepaid costs related to future manufacturing activities that would no longer be taking place as research and development expense. During the year ended December 31, 2021, this equipment was surrendered in connection with the termination of our agreement with our second source manufacturer and we recorded incremental research and development expense of $2.9 million. Fair value was based on observable market data (“Level 2”). Due to the specialized nature of this production equipment, adjustments to observable market data were applied (“Level 3”).
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for equity awards granted to our employees and members of our Board of Directors is recognized on a straight-line basis over each award’s vesting period. Recognized compensation expense is net of an estimated forfeiture rate, representing the percentage of awards that are expected to be forfeited prior to vesting, though is ultimately adjusted for actual forfeitures. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options and stock appreciation rights (as of the date of grant) that have service conditions for vesting. We use the Monte Carlo valuation model to value equity awards (as of the date of grant) that have combined market conditions and service conditions for vesting.
The recognition of stock-based compensation expense and the initial calculation of stock option fair value requires uncertain assumptions, including (a) the pre-vesting forfeiture rate of the award, (b) the expected term that the stock option will remain outstanding, (c) our stock price volatility over the expected term (and that of our designated peer group with respect to certain market-based awards), and (d) the prevailing risk-free interest rate for the period matching the expected term.
With regard to (a)-(d) above: we estimate forfeiture rates based on our employees’ overall forfeiture history, which we believe will be representative of future results. We estimate the expected term of stock options granted based on our employees’ historical exercise patterns, which we believe will be representative of their future behavior. We estimate the volatility of our common stock on the date of grant based on the historical volatility of our common stock for a look-back period that corresponds with the expected term. We estimate the risk-free interest rate based upon the U.S. Department of the Treasury yields in effect at award grant, for a period equaling the expected term of the stock option.
Research and Development Costs
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs consist primarily of salaries, benefits, and other staff-related costs including associated stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing costs, costs related to manufacturing preparations, fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf and payments made pursuant to license agreements. Clinical trial and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed. We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of activities and the invoices received from its external service providers. We adjust our accruals as actual costs become known. Where contingent milestone payments are due to third parties under research and development or license agreements, the milestone payment obligations are expensed when the clinical or regulatory milestone results are achieved.