Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a multi-asset, clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on identifying, developing and commercializing treatments involving bacterial infections, including MDR bacterial infections, and rare diseases where there is high unmet medical and patient need. Our most advanced product candidate, tebipenem HBr, is designed to be the first broad-spectrum oral carbapenem-class antibiotic for use to treat certain bacterial infections that cause complicated urinary tract infections (“cUTIs”), including pyelonephritis, caused by certain microorganisms, in adult patients who have limited oral treatment options. Treatment with effective orally administrable antibiotics may prevent hospitalizations for serious infections and enable earlier, more convenient and cost-effective treatment of patients after hospitalization. We are also developing SPR720, a novel oral antibiotic designed for the treatment of a rare, orphan disease caused by non-tuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary infections ("NTM") disease. In addition, we have an IV-administered product candidate, SPR206, being developed to treat MDR Gram-negative infections in the hospital. We believe that our novel product candidates, if successfully developed and approved, would have a meaningful patient impact and significant commercial applications for the treatment of bacterial infections, including MDR infections, in both the community and hospital settings. Since our inception in 2013, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing product and technology rights, building our intellectual property portfolio and conducting research and development activities for our product candidates. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We have experienced net losses and significant cash outflows from cash used in operating activities since our inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $367.5 million, and cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $146.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Based on our current plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with the committed funding from our existing BARDA contract and other non-dilutive funding commitments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2023. The foregoing takes into account our Revenue Interest Agreement entered into on September 29, 2021 and the initial gross proceeds we received thereunder on October 19, 2021 of $50.0 million, and it takes into account the other potential milestone payments thereunder, including the payment of an additional $50.0 million upon FDA approval of tebipenem HBr for a complicated urinary tract infection indication if obtained on or before December 31, 2022. For more information, see Note 10 - Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties to the Financial Statements below. If we excluded the $50.0 million in upfront proceeds from the Revenue Interest Agreement and the $50.0 million milestone payment upon FDA approval of tebipenem HB, based on our current projections our cash runway would extend into the fourth quarter of 2022. This timeline is subject to uncertainty as to the timing of future expenditures. We have developed plans to mitigate this risk, which primarily consist of raising additional capital through some combination of equity or debt financings, potential new collaborations, additional grant funding and/or reducing cash expenditures. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we plan to make reductions in spending. In that event, we may have to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of our planned clinical trials, research stage programs and commercialization activities. The actions necessary to reduce spending under this plan at a level that mitigates the factors described above is not considered probable, as defined in the accounting standards and therefore, the full extent to which management may extend our funds through these actions may not be considered in management’s assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern. As a result, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Further, we expect to incur additional costs associated with our continued operation as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding arrangements, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Recent Developments
Tebipenem HBr: Status of FDA Review of NDA for Tebipenem HBr
On January 3, 2022, we announced that the FDA has granted Priority Review designation and confirmed the acceptance for substantive review of the NDA seeking approval for tebipenem HBr oral tablets for treatment of cUTI, including pyelonephritis, caused by certain microorganisms, in adult patients who have limited oral treatment options. Tebipenem HBr has been granted QIDP, Fast Track, and Priority Review designations for this indication. The FDA has set a Prescription Drug User Fee Act ("PDUFA") target action date of June 27, 2022.
The FDA informed us that, upon further review of the NDA, it has been determined that an Advisory Committee meeting is not needed to discuss the application. In late March 2022, the FDA notified us that, as part of its ongoing review of the NDA for tebipenem HBr, it has identified deficiencies that preclude discussion of labeling and post-marketing requirements/commitments at this time. The FDA stated that the notification does not reflect a final decision on the information under review.
This FDA notification comes at the midpoint of the scheduled six-month NDA review period, which was the goal date that the FDA had originally scheduled to communicate proposed labeling and, if necessary, any post-marketing requirement and/or commitment requests to us. There are three months remaining before the PDUFA goal action date. We intend to work with the FDA to seek to resolve the deficiencies expeditiously. If this can be done to the satisfaction of the FDA, we believe there would be sufficient time to progress to labeling discussions within the existing PDUFA timeframe, given how early in the review period those discussions were originally scheduled to occur. However, we do not yet know the effect of this notification, if any, on our anticipated timelines or on the ultimate approval prospects of tebipenem HBr.
We have a late cycle review meeting scheduled with the FDA and expect to provide an update on or before our next earnings call in May 2022. We continue to prepare for an anticipated commercial launch of tebipenem HBr in the second half of 2022, as we work with the FDA.
The anticipated timing and costs of completing the NDA review for tebipenem HBr and our preparations for an anticipated commercial launch of tebipenem HBr, subject to FDA approval, are important factors in our cash burn, allocation of capital and capital-raising plans, future operational plans and future plans for revenue-generation and, ultimately, profitability.
SPR206: Positive Topline Results from Phase 1 Bronchoalveolar Lavage Clinical Trial
On February 16, 2022, we announced topline findings from our Phase 1 bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) clinical trial of SPR206.
The Phase 1 BAL study evaluated the safety and pharmacokinetics (PK) of SPR206 when administered at 100 mg, three times daily. Results showed that SPR206 was generally well-tolerated with a mean lung epithelial lining fluid (ELF) to plasma concentration ratio of 0.264, with area under the curve (AUC) from 0-8 hours used to estimate the total uptake of SPR206. Importantly, the mean concentration of SPR206 in the lung ELF exceeds the SPR206 minimum inhibitory concentration ("MIC") for targeted gram-negative pathogens for the entirety of the 8-hour dosing period.
The Phase 1 BAL clinical trial was an open-label study designed to enroll 30 healthy volunteers into five cohorts. Subjects received three 100 mg doses of SPR206 infused every eight hours over one day. The objectives of the study were to evaluate the intrapulmonary pharmacokinetics (PK), including ELF and alveolar macrophage (AM) concentrations of SPR206 compared to plasma concentrations to establish dose requirements for clinical efficacy of SPR206 in the setting of hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)/ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP). This study was conducted in collaboration with, and with financial support from, the United States Department of Defense (Award No. W81XWH1910295).
SPR720: FDA Lifts Clinical Trial Hold on SPR720
On January 4, 2022, we announced the FDA lifted the clinical hold on the Phase 2 trial of SPR720. The SPR720 program was placed on a clinical hold by the FDA following a review of data from a NHP toxicology study in which mortalities with inconclusive causality to treatment were observed. The FDA’s decision to lift the hold follows our submission of a comprehensive study report with detailed analyses from the NHP toxicology study. We engaged with the FDA in the first quarter of 2022 to discuss the re-initiation and planned protocol of the SPR720 Phase 2 trial in NTM-PD patients, with an expected study start date commencing in the second half of 2022.
BARDA Option for Tebipenem HBr
On January 19, 2022, we announced BARDA added and exercised a new option on the contract originally awarded to us in 2018. The new option increases the total amount of committed funding by $12.9 million to $46.9 million, increasing the total potential contract value to $59.7 million. As previously announced, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) is providing up to approximately $10.0 million, in addition to the total potential award from BARDA, to cover the cost of the nonclinical biodefense aspects of the collaboration program for tebipenem HBr. The additional $12.9 million option is expected to provide support for a clinical trial and related activities for orally administered tebipenem pivoxil’s use in treating pediatric patients with cUTI, including AP.
Business Update regarding COVID-19
The continued spread of SARS-CoV-2, and the resulting disease COVID-19 and related variants, has resulted in economic uncertainty on a global scale, as well as significant volatility in the financial markets. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented a hybrid working policy for all employees to aid the global containment effort.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Sales Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Grant Revenue
To date, the majority of our revenue has been derived from government awards. We expect that our revenue for the next few years will be derived primarily from payments under our government awards that we have currently entered into and that we may enter into in the future.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue relates to our agreements with Everest and Pfizer.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with contract research organizations ("CROs");
•costs incurred in connection with our government awards;
•the cost of consultants and contract manufacturing organizations ("CMOs") that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies; and
•payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We have recorded research and development expenses conducted by our Australian subsidiary net of a 43.5% research and development tax incentive we expect to receive for qualified expenses from the Australian government.
In June 2019, we entered into a collaboration with Gates MRI, a nonprofit research institution wholly owned by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to develop SPR720 for the treatment of lung infections caused by Mtb. In furtherance of the Gates MRI’s charitable purposes, we also granted the Gates MRI a no cost, exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize SPR720 for the treatment of TB in low- and middle- income countries. Gates MRI will conduct and fund preclinical and clinical studies for the development of SPR720 against TB and fund certain agreed upon collaborative research activities performed by us. Due to our assessment that we do not have a vendor/customer relationship with the Gates MRI, we recognize the funding received under the agreement as a reduction to the research and development expenses as the related expenses are incurred.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, contractors, CMOs and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. License fees and other costs incurred after a product candidate has been designated and that are directly related to the product candidate are included in direct research and development expenses for that program. License fees and other costs incurred prior to designating a product candidate are included in early stage research programs. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our preclinical programs or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority, including on account of the disruptive impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•establishment of arrangements with third-party manufacturers to obtain manufacturing supply;
•obtainment and maintenance of patent, trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity, both in the United States and internationally, including our ability to maintain our license agreement with Meiji with respect to tebipenem HBr;
•protection of our rights in our intellectual property portfolio;
•launch of commercial sales of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•acceptance of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
•competition with other therapies; and
•a continued acceptable safety profile of tebipenem HBr and our other product candidates, if approved.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including share-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the foreseeable future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research, development, and commercialization of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, infrastructure, and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with our continued operation as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income (Expense)
Interest income (expense) consists of interest expense related to the sale of future royalties, interest earned on our cash equivalents, which are primarily invested in money market accounts, as well as interest earned on our investments in marketable securities that we held during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists of insignificant amounts of miscellaneous income, as well as the change in the fair value of our derivative liability, realized and unrealized gains and losses from foreign currency-denominated cash balances, vendor payables and receivables from the Australian research and development tax incentive.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our earned research and development tax credits, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits will not be realized. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $303.7 million and $302.6 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities. The federal NOLs of $73.0 million will expire at various dates from 2033 to 2037 and approximately $230.7 million can be carried forward indefinitely. The state NOLs begin to expire in 2033 and will expire at various dates through 2039. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had foreign net operating loss carryforwards of $4.4 million, which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities and do not expire. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $10.2 million and $2.2 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2033 and 2028, respectively. We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP"). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Funding Received from Government Contracts and Collaborations
Since our inception, we have been able to obtain partial funding for our research and development activities from government contracts, government tax incentives and a collaboration arrangement. The classification within our statement of operations and comprehensive loss of the funding received under these arrangements is subject to management judgment based on the nature of the arrangements we enter into, the source of the funding and whether the funding is considered central to our business operations.
Government Contracts
We generate revenue from government contracts that reimburse us for certain allowable costs for funded projects. For contracts with government agencies, when we have concluded that we are the principal in conducting the research and development expenses and where the funding arrangement is considered central to our ongoing operations, we classify the recognized funding received as revenue. Revenue from government grants is recognized as the qualifying expenses related to the contracts are incurred, provided that there is reasonable assurance of recoverability. Revenue recognized upon incurring qualifying expenses in advance of receipt of funding is recorded as unbilled receivables, a component of prepaid expenses and other current assets, in the consolidated balance sheet.
We recognize funding received from BARDA, the DoD and the NIAID of the NIH, as revenue, rather than as a reduction of research and development expenses, because we are the principal in conducting the research and development activities and these contracts are central to our ongoing operations. We recognize revenue only after the qualifying expenses related to the contracts have been incurred, we are reasonably assured that the expenses will be reimbursed and the revenue is collectible. We record revenue recognized upon incurring qualifying expenses in advance of billing as unbilled revenue, which is included in other receivables in our consolidated balance sheet. The related costs incurred by us are included in research and development expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Collaboration Agreements
For collaboration agreements with a third party, to determine the appropriate statement of operations classification of the recognized funding, we first assess whether the collaboration arrangement is within the scope of the accounting guidance for collaboration arrangements. If it is, we evaluate the collaborative arrangement for proper classification in the statement of operations based on the nature of the underlying activity and we assess the payments to and from the collaborative partner. If the payments to and from the collaborative partner are not within the scope of other authoritative accounting guidance, we base the statement of operations classification for the payments received on a reasonable, rational analogy to authoritative accounting guidance, applied in a consistent manner. Conversely, if the collaboration arrangement is not within the scope of accounting guidance for collaboration arrangements, we assess whether the collaboration arrangement represents a vendor/customer relationship. If the collaborative arrangement does not represent a vendor/customer relationship, we then classify the funding payments received in the statement of operations and comprehensive loss as a reduction of the related expense that is incurred.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with the preclinical development activities;
•CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials;
•CROs in connection with preclinical and clinical studies; and
•investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based awards to employees and directors in the form of stock options and restricted stock units. We measure and recognize compensation expense for our stock-based awards granted to our employees and directors based on the estimated grant date fair value in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. We determine the fair value of restricted stock units based on the fair value of our common stock. We measure all share-based options granted to employees and directors based on the fair value on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and we recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue awards with only service-based vesting conditions and record the expense for these awards using the straight-line method. The Black-Scholes
option-pricing model uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options and performance-based awards, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options and performance-based awards, and our expected dividend yield.
Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties
We treat the liability related to the sale of future royalties as a debt instrument, amortized under the effective interest rate method over the estimated life of the revenue streams. We recognize interest expense thereon using the effective rate, which is based on our current estimates of future revenues over the life of the arrangement. We periodically assess our expected revenues using internal projections, impute interest on the carrying value of the deferred royalty obligation, and record interest expense using the imputed effective interest rate. To the extent our estimates of future revenues are greater or less than previous estimates or the estimated timing of such payments is materially different than previous estimates, we will account for any such changes by adjusting the effective interest rate on a prospective basis, with a corresponding impact to the reclassification of the deferred royalty obligation. The assumptions used in determining the expected repayment term of the deferred royalty obligation and amortization period of the issuance costs requires that we make estimates that could impact the short-term and long-term classification of such costs, as well as the period over which such costs will be amortized.
Results of Operations
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of revenues and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have incurred losses from the inception of our operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue recognized during 2021 and 2020 consisted of the reimbursement of qualifying expenses incurred in connection with our various government awards. The increase in revenue during 2021 was primarily due to an increase of $4.1 million in funding
under our DoD agreement relating to SPR206, an increase of $2.0 million in qualified expenses incurred under our BARDA contract for tebipenem HBr and net immaterial activity under our other government awards.
Collaboration Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021 we recognized $1.8 million in collaboration revenue related to our agreement with Pfizer consisting primarily of the delivery of the license for SPR206 in ex-U.S. and ex-Asia territories and $1.3 million in collaboration revenue related to milestones earned under our agreement with Everest Medicines. During year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $0.3 million of collaboration revenue related to our agreement with Everest Medicines, consisting of the performance of research and development services.
Research and Development Expenses
Direct costs related to our tebipenem HBr program decreased by $13.0 million during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the completion of significant activities and related costs of the Phase 3 clinical trial. We expect to continue to incur direct costs related to tebipenem HBr as we perform ongoing activities to support the further development of tebipenem HBr.
Direct costs related to our SPR720 program decreased by $1.7 million during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to decreased spending related to the clinical hold on our Phase 2a clinical trial, announced in February 2021. In January 2022, we announced the FDA lifted the clinical hold on the Phase 2 trial of SPR720, which is further described elsewhere in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K under the heading “Recent Developments - SPR720: FDA Lifts Clinical Trial Hold on SPR720.” Direct costs related to our SPR720 program during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflect a $1.5 million reduction to expense related to activities funded by Gates MRI, compared to $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Direct costs related to our SPR206 program increased by $4.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to higher preclinical costs incurred and from clinical costs for the Phase 1 BAL and renal impairment trials, which we initiated in June 2021. In early January 2020, we decided to proceed with SPR206 as the lead potentiator product candidate and discontinue development of SPR741. Direct costs related to our SPR741 program were immaterial for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
During 2021 and 2020, research and development expenses conducted by our Australian subsidiary were recorded net of a 43.5% research and development tax incentive for qualified expenses from the Australian government, resulting in a receivable of $0.4 million as of December 31, 2021.
The increase in personnel-related costs of $7.7 million was primarily a result of an increase in research and development headcount of 22 employees during the year ended December 31, 2021. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included share-based compensation expense of $4.2 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
The increase in facility-related and other costs was primarily due to the increased costs of supporting a larger research and development staff.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in personnel-related costs of $11.6 million was primarily a result of an increase in headcount of 34 employees during the year ended December 31, 2021 in our commercial, general and administrative functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included share-based compensation expense of $5.3 million and $2.7 million, respectively.
The increase in professional and consultant fees of $7.7 million was primarily due to increased commercial operation expenses to support the potential commercialization of tebipenem HBr, as well as increased legal expenses and transaction costs.
The increase in facility-related and other costs was primarily due to the increased costs of supporting a larger general and administrative staff.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was $(1.8) million during 2021, compared to $0.8 million during 2020. Total other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 included $1.9 million in interest expense related to the sale of future royalties, a $0.2 million reduction in our derivative liability and net immaterial changes primarily due to fluctuations in unrealized foreign currency gains, offset by interest income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have recognized limited revenue to date from funding arrangements with the DoD, NIAID, CARB-X and BARDA and our license agreements with Everest and Pfizer. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we may not generate revenue from sales of any product candidates. To date, we have funded our operations with payments received under license and collaboration agreements and funding from government contracts, and mostly from the proceeds of multiple common stock offerings. In addition, in September 2021, we entered into a revenue interest financing arrangement as described below, see “Contractual Obligations and Commitments”. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $146.4 million.
On March 11, 2021, we entered into a new sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”) and filed a new universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-254170), pursuant to which we registered for sale up to $300.0 million of any combination of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units from time to time and at prices and on terms that we may determine, including up to $75.0 million of our common stock available for issuance pursuant to the new “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement that we entered into with Cantor. Under the new sales agreement, Cantor may sell shares of our common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market” offering as defined in Rule 415 of the Securities Act, subject to the terms of the new sales agreement. Our universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-254170) became effective on March 29, 2021 and our prior sales agreement with Cantor terminated automatically at such time.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 475,469 shares of our common stock under our “at-the-market” agreements at an average price of approximately $16.98 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $8.1 million prior to deducting sales commissions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in ongoing volatility in financial markets. If our access to capital is restricted or associated borrowing costs increase as a result of developments in financial markets relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $64.3 million, primarily resulting from our net loss of $89.8 million, adjusted for net non-cash items of $12.5 million (primarily stock-based compensation, interest expense associated with the sale of future royalties and depreciation and amortization expense). Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities was $12.9 million and consisted primarily of a $10.6 million net increase in deferred revenue, an increase of $2.1 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, a $2.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a $3.8 million net decrease in receivables related to our tax incentive receivables and government awards and a $0.3 million net increase in other assets.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $85.9 million, primarily resulting from our net loss of $78.3 million, adjusted for net non-cash items of $5.9 million (primarily stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization expense). Net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities was $13.5 million and consisted primarily of a decrease of $12.1 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, a $1.9 million increase in other assets and a $1.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a $2.2 million net decrease in receivables related to our government awards.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and prepaid expenses and other current assets in all periods were generally due to the advancement of our development programs and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.7 million, primarily related to the maturities of marketable securities of $51.5 million, offset by purchases of marketable securities of $43.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.5 million, primarily related to the maturities of marketable securities of $56.4 million, offset by purchases of marketable securities of $45.7 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $84.1 million, consisting primarily of 47.3 million in proceeds from the sale of future royalties, net of transaction costs, $27.5 million in proceeds related to the Pfizer Purchase Agreement, net proceeds of $7.8 million from the sale of common stock under our “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement and proceeds of $1.5 million from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by the payment of offering expenses of approximately $0.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $130.9 million, consisting primarily of proceeds of $116.5 million from the sale of common stock, Series C Preferred Stock and Series D Preferred Stock in our rights offering and underwritten public offering, net proceeds of $13.2 million from the sale of common stock under our “at-the-market” offering program sales agreement and proceeds of $2.2 million from the exercise of employee stock options, offset by the payment of offering expenses of approximately $1.0 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance our clinical programs and prepare for possible commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with our continued operation as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the timing and costs of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials of our other product candidates and potential new product candidates;
•the amount of funding that we receive under government contracts that we have applied for;
•the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•the costs of commercialization activities for tebipenem HBr and other product candidates if we receive marketing approval, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•the receipt of marketing approval and revenue received from any potential commercial sales of tebipenem HBr;
•the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights, including milestone and royalty payments and patent prosecution fees that we are obligated to pay pursuant to our license agreements;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property related claims;
•the costs of operating as a public company; and
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $146.4 million. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update ("ASU, 2014-15"), Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40), we are required to evaluate whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern from the issuance date of our financial statements. Based on our current plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with the committed funding from our existing BARDA contract and other non-dilutive funding commitments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2023. The foregoing takes into account our Revenue Interest Agreement entered into on September 29, 2021 and the initial gross proceeds we received thereunder on October 19, 2021 of $50.0 million, and it takes into account the other potential milestone payments thereunder, including the payment of an additional $50.0 million upon FDA approval of tebipenem HBr for a cUTI indication if obtained on or before December 31, 2022. For more information, see Note 10 - Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties to the Financial Statements below. Excluding the $50.0 million in upfront proceeds from the Revenue Interest Agreement and the $50.0 million milestone payment upon FDA approval of tebipenem HBr, based on our current projections our cash runway would extend into the fourth quarter of 2022.
This timeline is subject to uncertainty as to the timing of future expenditures. We have developed plans to mitigate this risk, which primarily consist of raising additional capital through some combination of equity or debt financings, potential new collaborations, additional grant funding and/or reducing cash expenditures. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we plan to make reductions in spending. In that event, we may have to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of our planned clinical trials, research stage programs and commercial activities. The actions necessary to reduce spending under this plan at a level that mitigates the factors described above is not considered probable, as defined in the accounting standards and therefore, the full extent to which management may extend our funds through these actions may not be considered in management’s assessment of our ability to continue as a going concern. As a result, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including those listed above.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government funding, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in ongoing volatility in financial markets. If our access to capital is restricted or associated borrowing costs increase as a result of developments in financial markets, including relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)Reflects payments due for our lease of office space under an operating lease agreement that expires in 2027.
As further described below, under various licensing and related agreements with third parties, we have agreed to make milestone payments and pay royalties to third parties. We have not included any contingent payment obligations, such as milestones or royalties, in the table above as the amount, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
Under our Revenue Interest Financing Agreement ("Revenue Interest Agreement") with certain entities managed by HealthCare Royalty Management, LLC (“HCR”), we sold to HCR the right to receive certain royalty payments from us for a purchase price of up to $125.0 million. We evaluated the terms of the Revenue Interest Agreement and concluded that the features of the investment amount are similar to those of a debt instrument. We received gross proceeds of $50.0 million from HCR at an initial funding on October 19, 2021 (the “Initial Investment Amount”). As such, we accounted for this transaction as long-term debt as of December 31, 2021. We are entitled to receive an additional $50.0 million upon FDA approval of tebipenem HBr on or before December 31, 2022 (the “Second Investment Amount”), and an additional $25.0 million subject to the mutual agreement of us and HCR and if we meet certain minimum tebipenem HBr product sales thresholds in the United States within 12 months from commercial launch (the “Third Investment Amount,” and together with the Initial Investment Amount and the Second Investment Amount, collectively, the “Investment Amount”).
Under the Revenue Interest Agreement, HCR is entitled to receive tiered royalties on: (i) worldwide net sales of Included Products (as defined below) by us (and excluding sales by licensees), and (ii) any payments received by licensees, in each case of tebipenem HBr, SPR720, SPR206 and any other products marketed by us (the “Included Products”) in amounts ranging from 12% to 1% based on annual net revenues (or 14% to 1.5% if the Third Investment Amount is funded). The applicable royalty rate is subject to a step-down if certain sales milestones are met. When HCR has received aggregate payments equal to 250% of the Investment Amount (the “Hard Cap”), HCR’s right to receive royalties on Net Revenues will terminate. The Hard Cap will be $250 million upon tebipenem HBr approval, or $312.5 million if the Third Investment Amount is funded.
If we have not received FDA approval for tebipenem HBr for a cUTI indication on or prior to December 31, 2022, the Revenue Interest Agreement will terminate and we will pay to HCR an amount equal to the Initial Investment Amount plus interest equal to an annual 13.5% rate of return.
If HCR has not received aggregate payments of at least 60% of the Investment Amount by September 30, 2025 and at least 100% of the Investment Amount by September 30, 2027 (each, a “Minimum Amount”), then we will be obligated to make a cash payment to HCR in an amount sufficient to gross HCR up to the applicable Minimum Amount.
Under our license agreement with Meiji, we are obligated (i) to make future milestone payments of up to $1.0 million upon the achievement of specified clinical and regulatory milestones for tebipenem HBr, (ii) to pay royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a low single-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement and (iii) to pay to Meiji a low double-digit percentage of any sublicense fees received by us up to $7.5 million. During the fourth quarter of 2018 we paid Meiji approximately $1.6 million related to fixed assets which will be used in manufacturing related activities at Meiji. The equipment has been capitalized as property and equipment in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Under an agreement we entered into with PBB, we are obligated to make milestone payments of up to $5.8 million upon the achievement of specified clinical milestones and a payment of £5.0 million ($6.7 million as of December 31, 2021) upon the achievement of a specified commercial milestone for SPR206. In addition, we have agreed to pay to PBB royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a low single-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement.
Under our agreement with Vertex, we are obligated to make future milestone payments of up to $80.2 million upon the achievement of specified clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones and to pay to Vertex tiered royalties, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, of a mid single-digit to low double-digit percentage based on net sales of products licensed under the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid Vertex $0.9 million related to the achievement of regulatory milestones for SPR720.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CMOs and other third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services. These contracts are cancelable by us upon prior notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table of contractual obligations and commitments above.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.