Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This report contains forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained herein, including statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements.
In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terms such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “could,” “intends,” “target,” “projects,” “contemplates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other similar words. These statements are only predictions. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. We discuss many of the risks in greater detail under the heading “Risk Factors.” Also, these forward-looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of the filing of this report. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements after the date of the filing of this report.
Overview
The Company operates with two sales groups, Surge Components (“Surge”) and Challenge Electronics (“Challenge”). Surge is a supplier of electronic products and components. These products include capacitors, which are electrical energy storage devices, and discrete semiconductor components, such as rectifiers, transistors and diodes, which are single function low power semiconductor products that are packaged alone as compared to integrated circuits such as microprocessors. The products sold by Surge are typically utilized in the electronic circuitry of diverse products, including, but not limited to, automobiles, audio products, temperature control products, lighting products, energy related products, computer related products, various types of consumer products, garage door openers, household appliances, power supplies and security equipment. These products are sold to both original equipment manufacturers, commonly referred to as OEMs, who incorporate them into their products, and to distributors of the lines of products we sell, who resell these products within their customer base. These products are manufactured predominantly in Asia by approximately sixteen independent manufacturers. We act as the master distribution agent utilizing independent sales representative organizations in North America to sell and market the products for one such manufacturer pursuant to a written agreement. When we act as a sales agent, our supplier who sold the product to the customer that we introduced to our supplier pays us a commission. The amount of the commission is determined on a sale by sale basis depending on the profit margin of the product. Commission revenue totaled $186,566 and $267,019 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 and November 30, 2020 respectively.
Challenge is engaged in the sale of electronic components. In 1999, Challenge began as a division to sell audible components. We have been able to increase the types of products that we sell because some of our suppliers introduced new products, and we also located other products from new suppliers. Our core products include buzzers, speakers, microphones, resonators, alarms, chimes, filters, and discriminators. We now also work with our suppliers to have our suppliers customize many of the products we sell for many customers through the customers’ own designs and those that we work with our suppliers to have our suppliers redesign for them at our suppliers’ factories. We have an engineer on our staff who works with our suppliers on such redesigns and assists with the introduction of new product lines. We are continually looking to expand the line of products that we sell. We sell these products through independent representatives that earn a commission on the products we sell. We are also working with local, regional, and national distributors to sell these products to local accounts in every state.
The Company has a Hong Kong office to effectively handle the transfer business from United States customers purchasing and manufacturing in Asia after designing the products in the United States. This office has strengthened the Company’s global position, improving our capabilities and service to our customer base.
The world of business continues to change because of “disruptors,” which are significant changes in traditional business practices that did not previously exist. For example, customers continue to centralize purchasing from regional purchasing and are stretching their payment terms. These changes also include customers moving their manufacturing operations from North America to Asia, and the trend of globalization. Some of our customers have been involved in mergers and acquisitions, causing consolidation. This trend makes business more complicated and costly for the Company. The Company must have a presence in Asia to service and further develop the business. For these reasons, we established Surge Ltd., our Hong Kong subsidiary. Currency fluctuations may also have an effect on doing business outside of North America. Customers have moved to reduce their supply chain, which could adversely affect the Company. In some market segments, demand for electronic components have decreased, and in other segments, the demand is still strong. Some technologies have become obsolete, while customers develop new products using different kinds of components. Management expects 2022 to be a year of continued change, in regards to pandemic healing, challenge, in regards to maintaining consistent flow of products during shortages of certain products, and growth as we see our customers return to full production pace. These challenges could affect the Company in negative ways, possibly reducing sales and or profitability. Because of a labor shortage, our customers engineering staff has been challenged, so getting our products approved has been and will continue to be impacted. The cost of raw materials have increased, and due to that fact, factories have increased our costs. Our year to date sales reflect strong growth and the Company has a strong backorder with customers due to the increased demand for products and the fact that customers are placing orders further into 2022 to cover their demand. In order for the Company to continue to grow, we will depend on, among other things, the continued growth of the electronics and semiconductor industries, our ability to withstand intense price competition, our ability to obtain new customers, our ability to retain and attract sales and other key personnel in order to expand our marketing capabilities, our ability to secure adequate sources of products, which are in demand on commercially reasonable terms, our success in executing and managing growth, including monitoring an expanded level of operations and systems, controlling costs, the availability of adequate financing, the continued supply of products from our factories, and our ability to deal successfully, with new and future disruptors. The tariffs continue to impact the Company. At this time there is a shortage of electronics components which could impact the Company’s growth. Due to the radical increase of demand as the pandemic has eased, our lead times have stretched which could impact sales. The general supply chain challenges present both a challenge and opportunity to the Company, now including transportation. The Company is cautiously optimistic about its ability to meet these challenges with continued growth, unless the general economic conditions deteriorate. The combination of new disruptors such as increased costs and longer lead times from factories to the Company could have negative impacts on the business in the future.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized COVID-19 as a pandemic and it continues to impact the global economy. During the pandemic we did everything we could do to keep customers production running and keep operations as smooth and stable as possible, and we will continue to do our best to do so. The Company has experienced order cancellations and order hold notices from customers and we expect this could continue. While the worst effects of the pandemic may be behind us in the United States, the virus situation is still serious globally, and business with customers in different regions is impacted more or less based on the Covid status in that region. Although the Company’s business has improved in the fiscal 2021 and our customers’ outlook for their business is stronger than it was previously, we cannot guarantee that the increase in subsequent quarters will continue as the coronavirus conditions may change. Additionally, the spread of COVID-19 and the related actions implemented by governments of the United States and elsewhere across the globe, may worsen again over time. Thus, the pandemic may have an impact on the Company’s operations, the future effect of which will largely depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The Company continues to monitor its operations and applicable government recommendations and requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounts Receivable
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on the Company’s assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts and an assessment of international, political and economic risk as well as the aging of the accounts receivable. If there is a change in actual defaults from the Company’s historical experience, the Company’s estimates of recoverability of amounts due could be affected and the Company would adjust the allowance accordingly.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the price is fixed and determinable, collectability is reasonably assured and title and risk of loss have been transferred to the customer. This occurs when product is shipped from the Company’s warehouse. For direct shipments from our suppliers to our customer, revenue is recognized when product is shipped from the Company’s supplier. The Company acts as a sales agent for certain customers buying direct from one of its suppliers. The Company reports these commissions as revenues in the period earned.
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and maintains reserves for potential credit losses.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Write-downs of inventories to net realizable value are based on stock rotation, historical sales requirements and obsolescence as well as in the changes in the backlog. Reserves required for obsolescence were not material in any of the periods in the financial statements presented. Reserves related to stock rotation and future sales requirements for specific inventory parts involve subjective estimates to be made by management based on current and expected market conditions. If market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs of inventories could be required. For example, each additional 1% of obsolete inventory would reduce operating income by approximately $56,000.
The Company does not have price protection agreements with any of its vendors and assumes the risk of changes in the prices of its products. The Company does not believe there to be a significant risk with regards to the lack of price protection agreements as many of its inventory items are purchased to fulfill purchase orders received.
Income Taxes
We have made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of a deferred income tax asset to prepare our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. These estimates have a significant impact on our valuation allowance relating to deferred income taxes. Our estimates could materially impact the financial statements.
Results of Operations
Consolidated net sales for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 increased by $8,111,595 or 25.6%, to $39,828,257 as compared to net sales of $31,716,662 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the increase to an increase in business with new customers as well as an increase in business with existing customers. We can also attribute the increase in 2021 to the impact of the coronavirus in Asia in the year ended November 30, 2020 since factories were shut and demand was reduced during that period. Since then, factories in Asia have reopened and demand has increased as customers also order products further in advance due to supply issues. Net sales for the fiscal years ended November 30, 2021 and November 30, 2020 reflect $862,854 and $1,013,042, respectively of tariff costs that the Company was able to pass on to its customers.
Our gross profit for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 increased by $2,131,639 to $10,885,780, or 24.4%, as compared to $8,754,141 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales decreased to 27.3% for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 compared to 27.6% for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The increase can be attributed to the increase in sales volume as well as offset by certain products being sold at a lower profit margin. Our industry will continue to receive pressure from customers for price reductions. Some of them further demand periodic price reductions on a quarterly or semi-annual basis, as opposed to annual fixed pricing. We work with electronic manufacturing service subcontractor customers who manufacture products for other customers who do not have their own manufacturing operations. At times we are not able to recover these price reductions from our suppliers. The Company has agreements with these subcontractor customers to provide periodic cost reductions through rebates in the amount of 5%. These reductions only affect future shipments of our products, and do not affect existing orders. These reductions can have a negative impact on our profit margins since they reduce the amount of commissions we can earn. Even though this rebate can impact the Company’s gross profit margin, these subcontractor customers represent very significant potential growth for the Company, because they can help the Company become an approved supplier at the customers they manufacture for, and they purchase our components for these customers. We believe it would be very difficult for the Company to achieve business at these customers without the help of these subcontractor customers. During Fiscal 2021, the Company was impacted by tariff costs on certain products imported from China, which went into effect as of July 6, 2018. The Company has been able to pass along a portion of these costs to its customers. The Company is also moving some customer deliveries directly to Hong Kong in order to mitigate some of these costs.
Selling and shipping expenses for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $2,586,607, an increase of $166,622, or 6.9%, as compared to $2,419,985 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the increase to increases in selling expenses such as commission expenses, entertainment expenses, freight out and auto expenses, offset by decreases in sales payroll and travel expenses.
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $5,075,806, an increase of $264,110, or 5.5%, as compared to $4,811,696 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The increase is due primarily to increases in salaries and related payroll taxes, rental expenses, professional fees and computer expenses as well as utilities and maintenance expenses and temporary help expenses and settlement expenses, offset by decreases in warehouse expense, health insurance expenses and directors fees.
Depreciation expense for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $70,098, an increase of $32,195, or 84.9%, as compared to $37,903 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The increase is due to the company purchasing new equipment during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021.
Other income for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $450,945, an increase of $428,923 compared to $22,022 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the increase to Company receiving forgiveness for the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the amount of $449,700 during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021.
Interest expense for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $1,166, a decrease of $831, or 41.6% compared to $1,997 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the decrease to the Company not utilizing the line of credit during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021.
Tax expense for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $1,092,287, an increase of $1,104,005 as compared to a tax benefit of $11,718 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The changes result from our net income for such periods and management’s revised estimate of future taxable income and the related impact on the reported deferred tax. The change in the valuation allowance is based on management estimates of future taxable income. The degree of variability inherent in the estimates of future taxable income is significant and subject to change in the near term. The Company reviews its estimates of future taxable income in each reporting period and adjustments to the valuation allowance are reflected in the current operations.
As a result of the foregoing, net income for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 was $2,510,761, compared to a net income of $1,516,300 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of November 30, 2021 we had cash of $6,511,588, and working capital of $12,288,319. We believe that our working capital levels are adequate to meet our operating requirements during the next twelve months. The Company is exploring and evaluating opportunities for growth and expansion using the Company’s cash resources.
During the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021, we had net cash flow provided by operating activities of $2,327,043, as compared to net cash flow provided by operating activities of $1,160,842 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. The increase in cash flow from operating activities resulted from increases in net income, changes in stock compensation expense, deferred taxes, accounts payable, and accrued expenses, as partially offset by an increase in inventory.
We had net cash flow used in investing activities of $(194,909) for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021, as compared to net cash flow used in investing activities of $(19,386) for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the change to the Company purchasing more new equipment during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021.
We had net cash flow used in financing activities of $(8,475) during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021 as compared to $507,168 provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020. We attribute the decrease to proceeds from the exercising of stock options and the funding received from the bank related to the Paycheck Protection Program during the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020.
As a result of the foregoing, the Company had a net increase in cash of $2,123,659 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2021, as compared to a net increase in cash of $1,648,624 for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020.
The table below sets forth our contractual obligations, including long-term debt, operating leases and other long-term obligations, as of November 30, 2020:
Inflation
In the past two fiscal years, inflation has not had a significant impact on our business. However, any significant increase in inflation and interest rates could have a significant effect on the economy in general and, thereby, could affect our future operating results.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements.