ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to SportsTek Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on December 7, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). Our sponsor is JTJT Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on February 16, 2021. On February 19, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 17,250,000 units (including 2,250,000 units issued to the Underwriters pursuant to the exercise in full of the over-allotment option granted to the Underwriters) (“Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $172.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.3 million, inclusive of approximately $6.0 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,950,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant (“Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the warrants included in the Units, the “Warrants”) to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.95 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the Private Placement on February 19, 2021, $172.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we have not completed a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $4.9 million, which included a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7.3 million and a loss from operations of $1.8 million. From inception (December 7, 2020) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $567.
Our business activities from inception (December 7, 2020) through December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our formation and completing our IPO, and since the offering, our activity has been limited to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $0.3 million in its operating bank account and working capital deficiency of approximately $0.2 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $0.2 million in its operating bank account and a working capital deficiency of $0.2 million.
The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31,2021 were satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares, the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $176,000 and funds that were not deposited in the Trust Account from the Private Placement Warrants. The promissory note from the Sponsor was paid in full as of February 22, 2021.
The Company has 24 months from the closing of the IPO (up to February 19, 2023) to complete an initial Business Combination. However, if the Company doesn’t complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will redeem 100% of the outstanding Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the funds held in the Trust Account. Further, the Company has a working capital deficiency at December 31, 2021.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. If we complete a business combination, we may repay the notes out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay the notes, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. On March 16, 2022, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of up to $1,000,000 to the sponsor. The note is non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of a business combination or may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at the option of the sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of March 21, 2022, we had borrowed $163,300 under such promissory note.
If the Company does not consummate an initial business combination by February 19, 2023, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that this mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We evaluated the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (collectively, “Warrants”) in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheets and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statements of Operations in the period of change.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
The Company complies with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1. Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the statements of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A common stock were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 17,250,000 Class A Common Stock sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, all shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Stock
The Company has two classes of shares, Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,575,000 of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since they are not yet exercisable. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common stock is the same as basic net income (loss) per common stock for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.