Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Form 10-K, including “Risk Factors,” and the Financial Statements. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
As used in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation,” except where the context otherwise requires, the term “we,” “us,” “our,” or “the Company,” refers to the business of Specificity, Inc.
Organizational Overview
Specificity, Inc. (“Specificity” or the “Company”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on November 25, 2020, and our fiscal year end is December 31. The Company’s administrative address is 801 West Bay Drive, Suite 206, Largo, Florida 33770. Our telephone number is (813)364-4744.
At our core, we are a digital marketing firm. However, through our diversified holdings, we provide various solutions that combine our marketing expertise to provide support for other segments of our portfolio. Ultimately, Specificity is a tech incubator. We identify technology-based marketing solution entities, take an equity share position in return for utilizing our internal resources to complete the buildout of these technology based solutions. Specificity then uses our marketing prowess to draw clients to these businesses. We have the internal personnel to complete these projects and the marketing capability to deliver lower advertising costs with high conversion campaigns to launch these companies into success.
Currently, our operations are focused on 4 lines of business.
SPECIFICITY is a full-service digital marketing firm that delivers cutting-edge marketing solutions to business to business clients as well as business to consumer clients and currently generates all of our revenue. We’ve gone to painstaking lengths to develop tools that allow us to identify and market to people who are actively in the buying cycle. We take advantage of the real-time messaging opportunities digital marketing offers to give small and medium-sized businesses a fair chance at online traffic.
BULLSEYE will help businesses revolutionize their direct mail marketing initiatives. With Bullseye, by combining our digital approach along with traditional print marketing, clients can send direct mail to targeted people who are visiting the competition and searching for their products online. In short, we will use behavior to identify and market to people who are already in the buying cycle, increasing conversions and driving sales. BULLSEYE has no remaining build-out and awaits capital to support marketing activities.
THRU THE FUNNEL is a sales engagement platform designed to create qualified leads that help client’s sales reps do what they were hired to do: Sell! Our platform targets, engages, illuminates and connects interested prospects with our client’s sales team, all in real time. THRU THE FUNNEL development is 60% complete and awaits capital to support marketing activities.
PICK POCKET is a do-it-yourself digital marketing platform for smaller business owners. We will use behavior-based device ID technology to help clients discover their ideal customers and market directly to their mobile devices. With no contracts, middlemen, or hidden fees, Pick Pocket lets clients control their digital marketing without worrying about agency markups making Fortune 1000 marketing capabilities available to companies with $500 thousand to $5 million in sales. The PICK POCKET build-out is complete and awaits capital to support marketing activities.
BULLSEYE, THRU THE FUNNEL and PICK POCKET illuminate our ability to identify smart technology to undertake and support our incubation model as we build-out new, innovative ideas.
In addition to Device ID extraction and programmatic display, Specificity offers a whole host of marketing services including:
● Email Marketing
● Automated Marketing
● Retargeting Marketing
● Content Marketing
● Social Media Content Creation
● Digital Production Marketing
● Creating Brand Standards
● Logo Creation
● Website Creation
● Brochure Creation
● Print Marketing
● Targeted Print Campaigns
● Google and Bing Display Ads
● Google and Bing Pay per Click Campaigns
● Google Local Service Ads
● Text (SMS) Campaigns
● Search Engine Optimization
● Blog Creation
● Voice Marketing
● Radio Commercial Creation
● Influencer Marketing Collaboration
● Proximity Marketing
Strategic Vision
Specificity, Inc. is a technology company with 2 core missions:
1) First, we endeavor to deliver the latest digital marketing technology to companies of all sizes making them nationally, regionally and locally competitive. In this capacity, we come to the table already vertically integrated and capable of executing any size campaign flawlessly.
2) Secondarily, Specificity is a tech incubator. We identify technology-based marketing solutions, take an equity share position in return for utilizing our internal resources to complete the buildout of technology-based solutions, and then using our marketing prowess to draw clients to these businesses. We have the internal personnel to successfully complete these projects and our marketing capabilities will deliver lower advertising costs to launch new projects making growth faster to attain.
Digital Marketing
As a digital marketing agency, Specificity is an early adopter of innovative digital marketing tools. Our team keeps our clients ahead of the technology curve instead of chasing it. Our ability to identify audiences in granular ways other tech companies have given up on, positions us well to deliver better results at lower costs. By delivering ads to more targeted audiences, our clients enjoy the benefit of focusing 100% of their digital spend on audiences that make sense for their products and services. While the large social media/tech companies are eliminating or limiting access to targeting tools, we continue to add better targeting tools all the time.
As digital marketing continues to evolve, Specificity finds itself with an incredibly unique opportunity. While the large tech companies and social media firms are removing targeting mechanisms from their platforms, businesses are waking up to the fact that more targeted audiences lower their CPA (cost per acquisition) and dramatically improve their ROI. As each day goes by, business owners have learned that the less targeted their campaigns are the more money and time they waste. Reaching the audiences they were easily able to reach just a few years back is made more expensive with the removal of targeting mechanisms. It is all done in the name of political correctness, but it is obvious to most, that their true motivation is to drive ad spend up to drive revenue for themselves.
All of these events put Specificity in a great position to acquire new clients in mass. Our capital raise will in large part be used to grow our sales team in two regions initially and then expand quickly thereafter. The two regions we are starting with are the Tampa and New England markets and will be targeting clients with revenues between$5,000,000 and $25,000,000. The revenue target speaks to both retainer and retention. We know that clients with this type of revenue typically have internal marketing teams that are more suited to understand analytics and can more easily track results. When this is the case, these clients stay longer and are more active in running the campaign making it far easier to produce new creative and get it approved more quickly, a critical component for campaign optimization.
We also know that clients with these revenues spend on average, $5,100 per month. This is important because this retainer level ensures profitability after accounting for sales expense and the overhead required to execute a campaign. While Specificity welcomes smaller businesses as well as larger businesses, targeting these size companies through our sales efforts will ensure both long-term retention and profitability. Both Tampa and the New England region have a plethora of companies that fall into this category. Tampa has 9,991 companies with annual revenue between 5 and 25 million. (insert breakdown provided here for Tampa as well as New England here) The New England market boasts far more in our targeted range.
In addition to being home to many companies we seek to engage, there is another reason these two regions were selected. Kevin Frisbie is an investor in Specificity and possesses a long track record for running highly productive sales teams. He will be recruiting, training and managing the sales team in the New England market and clearly has a vested interest in its’ success. Our CEO, Jason Wood, similarly possesses a long track record for managing sales teams and will be recruiting, training and managing the team in the Tampa market. Between the two of these seasoned pros, growing their respective markets should be accomplished in the timeline provided in the projections.
While we project strong revenue growth in 2021, our other mission is to buildout internal capacity to facilitate growth. A portion of our capital raise will go towards that end. Having a well-trained staff in place will not only allow for the expeditious on-boarding of new clients but will also go a long way in retaining clients we bring on. Strong client retention is foundational to long-term success in our business. We have already automated much of what we do so the length of time required to properly train people is drastically reduced.
Tech Incubator
In the digital marketing space, there are numerous opportunities for project completion. Men and women across the country have great ideas but not the resources to finish their projects. Our model is simple, once we identify these opportunities, we will negotiate an equity share position in return for using our resources to complete the buildout. These resources include our website design team, programmers, graphic designers, digital marketers and management.
Due to the nature of what we do, we welcome these projects with both the ability to help complete them and the ability to market them. We can identify the audience most likely to use them and then aggressively advertise to that audience. Our goal in doing so is to spin them off into their own company and then take our profit when the time is right.
PickPocket
This model is being proven now. Specificity acquired, then completed a digital marketing platform called PickPocket. It offers its users location-based device ID extraction in a self-serve platform wherein users can define the parameters of their own campaign. It aims to compete with the marketing mechanisms in social media companies. Just as they are removing targeting capabilities, PickPocket will hit the market offering very granular targeting. Users on PickPocket are in total control of their campaign and can dictate spend level, locations to target, and the duration of the campaign. Forty-eight hours after the campaign is complete, PickPocket clients get an email containing detailed analytics, including foot traffic attribution reporting. This reporting tells the client how many people physically visited their location out of all the device IDs that were marketed to during the campaign. The report also contains tracking for impressions, clicks, form fills, and ecommerce conversions where appropriate. We have launched PickPocket and will be fully capitalizing the marketing in the coming weeks.
The Investor Center
Another project we have brought in-house is the Investor Center. This is an online portal allowing investors to completely customize their own user experience. They can choose what news feeds to populate on their home screen, which stocks to follow, what industries to track, which OTC companies to follow, which companies seeking private investment to keep track of and much, much more. This service is subscription based.
In addition to providing users with a customized experience, The Investor Center brings together companies seeking investment with brokers, investors and private equity firms. Paid advertising on the platform is available for companies seeking to garner investor attention or for brokers seeking to offer their services to investors. There are many revenue streams available, and our sales team will be run by someone that has spent 30 years in this space, Jim Price.
Currently, we have completed the website buildout with full functionality and will be launching very soon. The future goal for the investor center is to utilize a full stack developer to turn this into a native app for iPhone and Android.
Going Concern
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $2,381,405 and used cash of $1,106,374 in operating activities. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent on its ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet its obligations, which it has not been able to accomplish to date, and/or obtain additional financing from its stockholders and/or other third parties.
In order to further implement its business plan and satisfy its working capital requirements, the Company will need to raise additional capital. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to raise additional equity or debt financing at acceptable terms, if at all.
There is no assurance that the Company will ever be profitable. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Those material accounting estimates that we believe are the most critical to an investor’s understanding of our financial results and condition are discussed immediately below and are particularly important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates.
Use of estimates in the preparation of financial statements
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned, and less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries of which the Company holds a controlling interest. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. Amounts attributable to minority interests in the Company’s less-than-wholly owned subsidiary are presented as non-controlling interest on the accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheets and statements of operations.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Cash and cash equivalents are maintained at financial institutions and, at times, balances may exceed federally insured limits of $250,000 per institution that pays Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) insurance premiums. The Company has never experienced any losses related to these balances.
Cash and cash equivalents
The Company classifies its highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase as cash equivalents. Management determines the appropriate classification of its investments at the time of purchase and reevaluates the designations of each investment as of the balance sheet date for each reporting period. The Company classifies its investments as either short-term or long-term based on each instrument’s underlying contractual maturity date. Investments with maturities of less than 12 months are classified as short-term and those with maturities greater than 12 months are classified as long-term. The cost of investments sold is based upon the specific identification method.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable is recorded net of an allowance for doubtful accounts, if needed. The Company considers any changes to the financial condition of its financial institutions used and any other external market factors that could impact the collectability of its receivables in the determination of its allowance for doubtful accounts. The Company does not expect to have write-offs or adjustments to accounts receivable which could have a material adverse effect on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows as the portion which is deemed uncollectible is already taken into account when the revenue is recognized.
Leases
The Company leases offices used for operations under a non-cancelable agreement. Rent expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22,750. The aggregate future annual minimum rental payments under the lease agreements as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or do not occur. We assess such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to pending legal proceedings that are pending against us or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, we evaluate the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in our consolidated financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss if determinable would be disclosed.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company follows FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”) to measure and disclosure the fair value of its financial instruments. ASC 820 establishes a framework for measuring fair value in U.S. GAAP and expands disclosures about fair value measurements and establishes a fair value hierarchy which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. The three levels of fair value hierarchy defined by ASC 820 are described below:
Level
Quoted market prices available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the reporting date.
Level
Pricing inputs other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1, which are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
Level
Pricing inputs that are generally unobservable inputs and not corroborated by market data.
Financial assets are considered Level 3 when their fair values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies or similar techniques and at least one significant model assumption or input is unobservable.
The fair value hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. If the inputs used to measure the financial assets and liabilities fall within more than one level described above, the categorization is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of the instrument.
The carrying amounts reported in the Company’s financial statements for cash, accounts receivable, prepaids and other current assets, accounts payable, etc approximate their fair value because of the immediate or short-term mature of these financial instruments.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment is recorded at cost. Expenditures for major additions and betterments are capitalized. Maintenance and repairs are charged to operations as incurred. Depreciation of property and equipment is computed by the straight-line method (after taking into account their respective estimated residual values) over the assets estimated useful life of five (5) years. Upon sale or retirement of equipment, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is reflected in the statement of operations.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset or asset group exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group. Long-lived assets to be disposed of by sale are reported at the lower of their carrying amounts or their estimated fair values less costs to sell and are not depreciated. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no asset impairments.
Income taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the fiscal year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the fiscal years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the statement of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company’s income tax returns are based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. In addition, the calculation of the Company’s tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. The Company recognizes liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. While the Company believes it has appropriate support for the positions taken on its tax returns, the Company regularly assesses the potential outcomes of examinations by tax authorities in determining the adequacy of its provision for income taxes. The Company continually assesses the likelihood and amount of potential adjustments and adjusts the income tax provision, income taxes payable and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision become known. As of September 30, the Company does not believe any provisions are required in connection with uncertain tax positions as there are none.
Revenue recognition
The Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, codified as Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which provides a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. The Company adopted ASC 606 upon Inception.
The Company provides online marketing services. The Company’s revenue is generated on services priced at fixed rates. Revenue is recorded as services are performed which typically all occurs within a calendar month.
Per Share Information
Basic net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year. Diluted net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the year, increased by the potentially dilutive common shares that were outstanding during the year. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company does not have any dilutive shares.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company recognizes as compensation expense all share-based payment awards made to employees, directors, and consultants including grants of stock, stock options and warrants, based on estimated fair values. Fair value is generally determined based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant and is recognized over the service period.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, which provided an alternative transition method when initially applying ASU 2016-02. Companies may elect to apply ASU 2016-02 at the beginning of the earliest period presented or recognize a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the period of adoption. The ASU is effective for annual and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021. Management expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on the Company’s future financial statements due to the recognition of right of a right of use asset and liability in connection with the lease disclosed below.
The FASB issues ASUs to amend the authoritative literature in ASC. There have been a number of ASUs to date that amend the original text of ASC. The Company believes those issued to date either (i) provide supplemental guidance, (ii) are technical corrections, (iii) are not applicable to the Company or (iv) are not expected to have a significant impact on the Company.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 as Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues increased by $655,029, from $93,983 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $749,012 in 2021 as a result of a full year of operation in 2021.
Cost of Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenues increased by $356,285 from $16,170 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $372,455 in 2021, as a result of a full year of operation in 2021. Costs of revenues may shift dramatically depending upon how the Company’s comparative revenue profile of the products and services shift in the future.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses increased by $2,554,685, from $153,277 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2,707,962 in 2021 due materially to an increase in sales and marketing, and increase in general and administrative expenses, and an increase in officer compensation. The Company’s Operating Expenses may vary quarter to quarter as a result of changes to sales and marketing costs, general and administrative expenses, and other costs associated with the Company’s new and existing projects as well as other projects that it is currently reviewing.
Other Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Other Expenses increased by $50,000 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $50,000 in 2021 as a result of interest expense. Given the Company’s financing requirements in developing its new business models, the Company’s other (income) expenses may increase over time as the Company explores the use of additional debt financing.
Net Loss
As a result of the above, Net Loss increased by $2,305,941 from $75,464 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2,381,405 in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net Working Capital
We have, since inception, financed operations and capital expenditures through the sale of stock and convertible notes and debt. Our immediate sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and unbilled receivables.
At December 31, 2021, we had a net working capital deficit of approximately $379,819 compared to a net working capital surplus of $237,035 at December 31, 2020. We relied on proceeds from financing activities from the sale of preferred and common stock throughout fiscal year 2021. We relied on proceeds from the sale of common stock, the sale of preferred stock, and accounts payable throughout fiscal 2020.
We must successfully execute our business plan to increase profitability in order to achieve positive cash flows to sustain adequate liquidity without requiring additional funds from external sources to meet minimum operating requirements. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
Generally, the Company has insufficient capital to maintain operations. Cashflows from operations of the Company and all its subsidiary holdings will not sustain the Company’s operations, let alone its filing requirements, unless there is substantial influx of cash flow through either debt and/or equity financing.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities provides an indication of our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from our recurring business activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operations was approximately $1,106,374 driven primarily by current year operating loss, offset primarily by the acquisition of Pick Pocket and subscription payable treated as officer compensation.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operations was approximately $54,194 driven by current year operating loss, offset primarily by stock-based compensation and account payable.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss of $21,142 in cash flows from investing activities, primarily due to the purchase of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had $0 in cash flows from investing activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities provides an indication of our debt financing and proceeds from capital raise transactions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was approximately $1,548,249, primarily due to the proceeds from sale of common stock and proceeds from subscription receivables.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was approximately $271,302, primarily from the proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and the proceeds from the sale of common stock.
In the short term, we must raise additional capital through debt or equity financing to support our business operations and grow our business. Over the long term, we must successfully execute our growth plans to increase profitable revenue and income streams to generate positive cash flows to sustain adequate liquidity without impairing growth initiatives or requiring the infusion of additional funds from external sources to meet minimum operating requirements. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Not required of smaller reporting companies.