Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual business, financial condition and results of operations could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” See also “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
Squarespace is an all-in-one platform with everything to sell anything, providing customers in over 200 countries and territories with all the tools they need to sell physical products, digital content, classes, appointments, reservations and more. Powered by best-in-class design for a consistent brand experience across all touchpoints, our suite of fully integrated products enables anyone to manage their projects and businesses through websites, domains, e-commerce, marketing tools, and scheduling, along with tools for managing a social media presence with Unfold and hospitality services via Tock.
We primarily derive revenue from monthly and annual subscriptions to our presence and commerce solutions. Subscription revenue accounted for 92.1% and 94.3% of our total revenue during the years ended 2021 and 2020, respectively. Payments for our subscription plans are generally collected at the beginning of the subscription period and we generally recognize the associated revenue ratably over the term of the customer contract. Non-subscription revenue primarily consists of commerce transaction fees received through revenue sharing arrangements with payment processors that handle our customers’ commerce transactions, payment processing fees for our hospitality services as well as revenue we generate from third-party services we offer that provide additional functionality to our customers.
We generated revenue of $784.0 million and $621.1 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, and net (loss)/income of $(249.1) million and $30.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We believe we have a stable and predictable business model driven by efficient customer acquisition and the adoption by our customers over time of higher value offerings and add-on subscriptions. Our platform serves all types of customers, from SMBs and independent creators, such as restaurants, photographers, wedding planners, artists, musicians and bloggers, to iconic brands. No individual unique subscription accounted for more than 1% of our total bookings in 2021 and 2020.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has created, and may continue to create, significant uncertainty in macroeconomic conditions. We are not able to estimate the impact that COVID-19 will continue to have on worldwide economic activity or our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, we had not experienced a materially adverse impact from COVID-19. We continue to assess the potential impacts of COVID-19 and the measures taken by governments, businesses and other organizations in response to COVID-19 as information becomes available. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for further information.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Acquisition of new and retention of existing unique subscriptions
The growth of new unique subscriptions to our platform is the primary driver of our revenue growth. The number of unique subscriptions to our platform has grown sequentially across 24 consecutive quarters, rising to 4.1 million unique subscriptions as of December 31, 2021, representing an increase of 11.8% relative to December 31, 2020. In order to continue to grow the number of unique subscriptions, we intend to continue to invest in our marketing efforts, develop new points of entry to our platform and expand internationally. We increased our marketing and sales spend over 30.7% during the year ended December 31, 2021 relative to the year ended December 31, 2020. We view this increased spending as a long-term investment in our business to attract new unique subscriptions.
Expansion of our commerce offerings
We believe that our commerce offerings significantly expand our addressable market. Our comprehensive commerce offerings enable our customers to sell anything online, attracting a differentiated set of commerce-oriented brands to our platform. On March 31, 2021, we acquired Tock, which expanded our commerce offerings by adding a platform for reservations, take-out, delivery and events for the hospitality industry. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our platform
processed approximately $5,781.7 million of gross merchandise value (“GMV”), representing an increase of 48.4% from the same period in 2020. GMV represents the total dollar value of orders processed through our platform in the period, net of refunds and fraudulent orders.
We continue to invest and innovate our commerce offerings to enable customers to build the most impactful online stores, deepen our functionality in physical commerce and establish leadership in commerce services and hospitality services. Our commerce revenue was $229.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing 60.1% growth from the same period in 2020. Ultimately, we believe the adoption of our commerce offerings by new and existing customers will help drive our long-term revenue growth.
Investments in product innovation
We rely on hiring and retaining a talented product development workforce. The success of our customers relies on the innovation tied to this workforce and our ability to remain agile to address customer needs. Our research and product development expenses were $190.4 million in 2021, representing 13.4% growth over 2020.
Foreign currency fluctuations
As of December 31, 2021, we had customers in over 200 countries and territories and our international customers represented approximately 30% of our bookings. As foreign currency exchange rates change, translation of the statements of operations of our international businesses into U.S. dollars may affect year-over-year comparability of our operating results.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We primarily derive revenue from annual and monthly subscriptions. Typically, annual and monthly subscriptions represent 70% and 30% of total subscriptions, respectively. Revenue is also derived from non-subscription services, including fixed percentages or fixed-fees earned on revenue share arrangements with third parties and on sales made through our customers’ sites. In addition, we earn fixed-fees on sales through certain hospitality offerings and payment processing fees for use of our hospitality services. Payments received for subscriptions in advance of fulfillment of our performance obligations are recorded as deferred revenue. Subscription plans automatically renew unless advance notice is provided to us. We primarily recognize subscription revenue ratably on a straight-line basis, net of a reserve for refunds. Transaction fee revenue, payment processing revenue and revenue generated from third parties is recognized at a point in time, when the sale has been completed.
We disaggregated our revenue by product type in accordance with the following definitions:
Presence revenue
Presence revenue primarily consists of fixed-fee subscriptions to our plans that offer core platform functionalities, currently branded “Personal” and “Business” plans in our offerings. Presence revenue also consists of fixed-fee subscriptions related to additional entry points for starting online such as domain managed services and social media stories. Additionally, presence revenue is derived from third-party solutions related to email services and access to third-party content to enhance online presence. For customers in need of a larger scale solution, we have an enterprise offering where revenue is recognized over the life of the contract.
Commerce revenue
Commerce revenue primarily consists of fixed-fee subscriptions to our plans that offer all the features of presence plans as well as additional features that support end to end commerce transactions, currently branded “Basic” and “Advanced” in our plan offerings. Commerce revenue also includes fixed-fee subscriptions to a number of other tools that support running an online business such as marketing, members areas, scheduling and hospitality tools. Non-subscription revenue is derived from fixed-fees earned on revenue share arrangements with commerce partners as well as fixed transaction fees earned on GMV processed through Business plan sites and certain hospitality offerings. Commerce revenue also includes payment processing fees for use of our hospitality services.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of credit card and payment processing fees, domain registration fees, and web hosting costs. Cost of revenue also includes customer support employee-related expenses, amortization and depreciation,
and allocated shared costs. Employee-related expenses consist of salaries, taxes, benefits and stock-based compensation. We expect that cost of revenue may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period to period based on the subscriptions purchased and non-subscription transactions during that particular period.
Operating expenses
Research and product development
Research and product development expenses are primarily employee-related expenses, costs associated with continuously developing new solutions and enhancing and maintaining our technology platform as well as allocated shared costs. These costs are expensed as incurred. Employee-related expenses consist of salaries, taxes, benefits and stock-based compensation. In addition, we capitalize employee-related expenses relating to software development costs incurred in connection with adding functionality to our platform, as well as internal-use projects during the application development stage. These capitalized software development costs are deferred and amortized ratably over three years.
Marketing and sales
Marketing and sales expenses include costs related to advertisements used to drive customer acquisition, employee-related expenses related to our brand, customer acquisition and creative assets, affiliate fees on customer referrals, sales commissions and allocated shared costs. Depending on the nature of the advertising, costs are expensed at the time a commercial initially airs, when a promotion first appears in the media or as incurred. Affiliate fees on customer referrals are deferred and recognized ratably over the expected period of our relationship with the new customer. In addition, we capitalize sales commissions paid to internal sales personnel relating to obtaining customer contracts for hospitality services. These capitalized sales commissions are deferred and amortized ratably over the expected life of the new customer.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses are primarily employee-related expenses associated with supporting business operations as well as expenses required to comply with government regulations in the markets in which we operate. The functional elements included in general and administrative are finance, people, legal, information technology and overall corporate support. Employee-related expenses consist of salaries, taxes, benefits and stock-based compensation.
In conjunction with the listing of our class A common stock (the “Direct Listing”) on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) in May 2021, we incurred certain stock-based compensation expenses associated with the vesting conditions of a grant to our Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of shares of Class B common stock upon consummation of the listing which resulted in a one-time expense of $229.3 million. In addition, we incurred professional fees of $25.3 million associated with the Direct Listing. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a U.S. securities exchange and costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. In addition, as a public company, we expect to incur additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance and investor relations.
Interest expense
Interest expense primarily consists of the interest expense related to our debt facilities as well as the expense on acquisition liabilities. For further discussion on our interest expense related to our debt facilities, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources, Indebtedness.”
Other income/(loss), net
Other income/(loss), net is primarily comprised of net investment income and realized and unrealized foreign currency gains and losses. See “