ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements regarding our business development plans, timing, strategies, expectations, anticipated expenses levels, business prospects and positioning with respect to market, demographic and pricing trends, business outlook, technology spending and various other matters (including contingent liabilities and obligations and changes in accounting policies, standards and interpretations) and express our current intentions, beliefs, expectations, strategies or predictions. These forward-looking statements are based on a number of assumptions and currently available information and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
Executive Overview
Financial results:
● Revenue was $26.7 million, up approximately 312% for year ended December 31, 2021 versus 2020.
● Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $17.0 million as of December 31, 2021.
Reportable Segments
We have a single operating and business segment, Sequire, which is comprised of two reporting units; Sequire and LD Micro. Our Sequire segment includes the licensing of our SaaS based Sequire platform and related services, and our event and conference operations. The segment amounts included in MD&A are presented on a basis consistent with our internal management reporting. All differences between our internal management reporting basis and accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), along with certain corporate-level and other activity, are included in Corporate and Other. Our management, along with our chief executive officer, who acts as our Chief Operating Decision Maker (as such term is defined accounting segment reporting guidance), review financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating performance and do not evaluate using asset information.
Deconsolidation of BIGToken, Inc.
On December 29, 2021, our subsidiary BIGtoken, Inc. (fka Force Protection Video Equipment) completed a merger with BritePool, Inc. (BritePool). As a result of the transaction our ownership interest in BIGToken was reduced from 65.9% to 36.45% of the issued and outstanding common stock. As part of the transaction, we entered into an exchange agreement pursuant to which we converted 135,870,262,448 or approximately 50% of the issued and outstanding shares of BIGToken into non-voting Series D Convertible Preferred Stock (“Series D Stock”). The decrease in our ownership of voting equity resulted in our loss of the ability to exert significant control over BIGToken resulted in us deconsolidating its operation.
We have classified the related assets and liabilities associated with BIGToken’s business as discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheet. The financial results of BIGToken’s business has been presented as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of income for all periods presented through the respective transaction close date. Please see “Note 2 - Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information. As such, the discussion of our results of operations and the related tables, below do not included the operations of BIGToken, as its results of operations have been included in discontinued operations on the consolidated statements of operations.
Business Focus
During 2021, we have focused on: (i) the continued growth of our Sequire platform’s functionality and user base and (ii) the expansion of LD micro events and offerings.
Covid-19
Our business has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in authorities implementing numerous preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders. These measures have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide, which have significantly impacted our business and results of operations. We are unable to predict the impact of the pandemic on user growth and engagement with any certainty, and we expect these trends to continue to be subject to volatility.
More recently, we believe the pandemic has contributed to an acceleration in the shift of commerce from offline to online, as well as increasing consumer demand for purchasing products as opposed to services, and we experienced increasing demand for our products as a result of these trends. The impact of the pandemic on our overall results of operations, remains highly uncertain for the foreseeable future.
We intend to continue to invest in our business based on our company priorities, and we anticipate that additional investments in our network infrastructure, as well as scaling our headcount to support our growth, will continue to drive expense growth in 2022.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Going Concern
Cash on hand and marketable securities at December 31, 2021 was approximately $1.35 million and $15.6 million, respectively. Based upon our cash flow projections taking into account cash, marketable securities and the projected cash flows from operations we believe we have enough liquidity, taking into account the uncertainty related to the ongoing pandemic and general economic uncertainty, to continue to fund operations at their currently level through the remainder of the year.
The Company has incurred significant losses since its inception and has not demonstrated an ability to generate cash from the sales of its services to in excess of operating expenses. In addition, the Company’s operations may require additional financial support or additional financing. These factors create uncertainty or doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes the Company will continue as a going concern and which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Investments
As of December 31, 2021, we had (i) cash of $1.35 million , and (ii) marketable securities of $15.6 million for a total of approximately $17 million compared to $8.90 million as of December 31, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of highly liquid investments such as money market funds and deposits held at major banks. In addition, we had availability of $1,000,000 of unused amounts available under a credit facility as of December 31, 2021. Certain of such unused amounts are subject to satisfying specified conditions prior to draw-down (such as pledging to our lenders sufficient subscriptions and customer contracts).
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Sequire Platform: We recognize revenue from the licensing of our Sequire platform, data, marketing and insight services performed in conjunction with the Sequire platform. We recognize revenue using the percentage of completion method based primarily on time.
Conference Revenue. We recognize revenue from hosting conferences and associated sponsorships. We receive payment from presenting companies and sponsors of the conferences.
was the first full year of operations for our Sequire business. We charge a base monthly license fee for a Sequire subscription, which ranges from $1,000 per month up to $5,000 per month.
During the third quarter of 2020, we acquired LD Micro, Inc. LD Micro’s primary line of business was the hosting of investor related conferences. Historically, LD Micro’s investor conferences have been in-person, however, during the past year we have successfully hosted virtual conferences leveraging Sequire’s platform technology to execute these events.
The following table presents net revenues by type for the periods indicated (in dollars, except percentages):
Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the cost of media from third parties. If the estimated consideration expected to be received under a revenue contract less than the estimated cost to fulfill our obligations under the contract, the Company will record a liability for the estimated cost in excess of estimated consideration in the period this is knowable.
Employee Related Costs. These are the costs we incur to employ our staff.
Platform costs. Consist of the technology and content hosting of our Sequire.
Marketing, data services and sales. These are the costs we incur to market our products, data service fees and third-party selling costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization cost represent an allocation of the costs incurred to acquire the long-lived assets used in our business over their estimated useful lives. Our long-lived assets consist of property and equipment and internally developed software.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of human resources, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead, and other general corporate expense. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars primarily as a result of the increased costs associated with being a stand-alone public company. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue in future periods based on fluctuations in our revenue and the timing of such expense.
2020 was the first full year of operations for our Sequire business. We charge a base monthly license fee for a Sequire subscription, which ranges from $1,000 per month up to $5,000 per month.
During the third quarter of 2020, we acquired LD Micro, Inc. LD Micro’s primary line of business was the hosting of investor related conferences. Historically, LD Micro’s investor conferences have been in-person, however, during the past year we have successfully hosted virtual conferences leveraging Sequire’s platform technology to execute these events.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses for the periods indicated (in dollars, except percentages):
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to approximately $26,707,000 compared to approximately $6,479,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sequire’s continued growth was primarily driven by the growth of the services provided to issuers through the Sequire platform. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company closed sales with total gross contract value of approximating $44,000,000.
In certain circumstances, the Company accepts payment in the form of securities of our publicly held customers. The Company values the securities in accordance with ASC 820, see the Valuation section of our Management Discussion and Analysis section for further discussion.
Sequire Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consisted of the following:
Costs of revenue: Sequire’s operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $6,521,000 and $1,789,000, respectively.
Employee Related Costs. These are the costs we incur to employ our staff. Employee related costs increased to $7,533,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4,683,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily the result of an increase in staffing expenses due to an increase in the number of employees in all departments of the business to support the growth in operations during the year. We expect these expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as revenue increases.
Platform costs. Consist of the technology and content hosting. Platform costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $214,000. For the year ended December 31, 2020 Platform costs were $960,000. These costs decreased from the prior year due to the Company’s elimination of the outsourcing of certain function to support to the Company’s platform. We expect these costs to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Marketing, data services and sales. These are the costs we incur to market our products and third-party services and selling costs. Marketing, data services and sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $6,330,000 and $1,717,000, respectively. We expect these costs to continue to grow in nominal dollars as we continue to grow but expect that they continue to decrease as a percentage of our revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and Amortization cost represent an allocation of the costs incurred to acquire the long-lived assets used in our business over their estimated useful lives. Our long-lived assets primarily consist of internally developed software. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 depreciation and amortization were $842,000 and $772,000, respectively. We expect these expenses to continue to increase as we anticipate further investment in long-lived assets to support our business growth.
Corporate and Other Operating Expenses
Corporate and Other Operating expense consists primarily of human resources, information technology, professional fees, IT and facility overhead, and other general corporate expense. General and Administrative expenses were approximately $5,352,000 and $3,590,000 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in expense for the year is driven by an increase in corporate employee and staffing related expenses to support the growth of the Company.
We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business. However, we also expect our general and administrative expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenues as revenues increase.
Net Loss
The Company’s Net Loss for the year-ended December 31, 2021 was $41,227,000. This represented an increase of $26,522,000 from the prior year. The increase in Net Loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in Net loss from our Discontinued Operations.
Discontinued Operations represent the results from operations of BIGtoken. Upon the deconsolidation of BIGtoken, BIGtoken’s operating results, assets, liabilities and cash flows for all periods presented have been classified as discontinued operations within the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $25,060,000, which represented an increase of $20,419,000 from the year ended December 31,2020. The loss from discontinued operations for the year-ended December 31, 2021 includes a loss of $10,684,000 related to our disposal of BIGtoken.
See “Note 2 - Discontinued Operations” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Loss from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16,167,000, which represented an increase of $6,103,000 from the year ended December 31,2020.
Cash Flows
Cash flows from continuing operating activities
The primary use of operating cash is to pay our media, data and platform vendors, employees and others for a wide range of services. Cash flows used in operating activities increased by $6,163,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by an increase in operating expenses and costs of revenues, partially offset by increases in cash receipts and revenues.
The Company expects to continue to use cash in excess of receipts generated from operations for the foreseeable future due to the substantial portion of the Company’s sales paid for in marketable securities of our customers. The Company classifies sales of marketable securities received from our customers for the payment of our services as investing activities.
Cash flows from continuing investing activities
Our principal recurring investing activities are the funding of our internal software development and the sale of marketable securities. During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $3,998,000 and $6,221,000, respectively. Expenditures for software development were $798,000 and $633,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Deferred payments related to our acquisition of LD Micro during the year December 31, 2021, were $3,004,000. During years ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated $8,666,000 from the sale of marketable securities and purchased $1,450,000 of marketable securities.
Cash flows from continuing financing activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021, we generated net cash from financing activities of $15,443,000. During the years ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $7,862,000.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off balance sheet arrangements
As of the date of this report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
Our primary source of cash is from proceeds received from the sale of marketable securities we receive from our customers as consideration for our services, as well as cash proceeds received directly from customers as consideration.
Our primary use of cash is the payment of our operating costs, which consist primarily of employee-related expenses, such as compensation and benefits, as well as general operating expenses for our SaaS operations, marketing, facilities and overhead costs, and capital expenditures. We also utilize cash for debt service, stock repurchases, dividends on the Preferred Stock, and business acquisitions. Cash generated from operations, along with our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, are our primary sources of operating liquidity, and we believe that our operating liquidity is currently insufficient to support our business operations, including debt service, and capital expenditure requirements.
We believe that our current sources of funds, along with the financing source described below, will provide us with adequate liquidity during the 12-month period following December 31, 2021, including to repay our remaining debt obligations. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, however, the Company’s primary source of capital is the sale of marketable securities received as consideration for the licensing of our Sequire platform and the associated services. The marketable securities the Company receives are primarily issued through an exemption to registration and as a result are restricted from resale into the public market for a period of time. The periods of restriction are generally at least six months, and in some cases up to two years. These restriction periods often change based on circumstances outside of the Company’s control, such as the issuers status with filing of current information. Since a majority of the marketable securities are primarily listed on the OTC Markets, they are more likely to experience such changes in restriction periods. The changes in restriction periods in conjunction with market volatility make it difficult to predict the timing of the associated cash flows from the sales of these marketable securities. Additionally, other factors such as , our subscription growth rate, subscription renewal activity, including the timing and the amount of cash received from customers, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the introduction of new and enhanced products, the continuing market adoption of Sequire.
Financing Arrangements
In May 2020, we entered into an at-the-market Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. for the sale of up to $3,125,000 of shares of our Class A Common Stock. The at-the-market agreement was entered into pursuant to a takedown from our shelf registration statement declared effective on December 11, 2019 (Registration No. 333-235298). During 2021, we sold 53,616 shares under such agreement at an average per share price of $5.47 resulting in gross proceeds of $293,000 and net proceeds of $284,000 after deducting commissions and other costs and expenses associated with such sales. On April 15, 2022 we lost our ability to utilize Form S-3 registration statements for the registration of our securities. Accordingly, we are no longer able to utilize the ATM.
During the three months ended March 31, 2022 the Company entered into a factoring agreement with a financial institution to sell certain accounts receivable and future sales of up to $3 million. The factoring agreement was fully paid off with the proceeds of our revolving credit facility described below. Pursuant to the revolving credit facility, we are precluded from entering into future factoring agreements while loans are outstanding under the credit facility.
We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. Finally, we continually evaluate our cash needs and may decide it is best to raise additional capital or seek alternative financing sources to fund the rapid growth of our business, including through drawdowns on existing debt facilities. Conversely, we may also from time to time determine that it is in our best interests to voluntarily repay certain indebtedness early or repurchase our common stock through our Stock buy-back program.
On August 8, 2022, we entered into a revolving line of credit allowing us to borrow up to $9.45 million in principal. Until such time that the Company becomes current on its reporting obligations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the maximum amount accessible is limited to $5.5 million. The revolving credit line has a two-year term with a variable repayment schedule that is tied to the proceeds the Company generates from the sale of marketable securities from its portfolio. The principal repayment as a percentage of proceeds from marketable securities is 10% for the first three months and increase up to 20% after 12 months. Further, we agreed to pay the lender in the credit facility, an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the net proceeds actually received by us from the sale any securities of a customer that we acquired during the term of the revolving note(s).
As of December 31, 2021, our cash on hand was approximately $1.35 million. We reported a net loss from continuing operations for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We have historically financed our operations primarily from the sale of debt and equity securities. Recently, our operations from Sequire and LD Micro have resulted in increased revenue, but we are still not cash flow positive, and accordingly cannot fund our operations solely from our revenue. Notwithstanding our recent revolving credit facility financing (including the bridge note), for which we have received approximately $5.5 million, partially offset by the required payments we made under outstanding obligations of $3.75 million at closing, we are still unable to meet all of our obligations as they become due. We anticipate that we will need to continue to fund our operations from the sale of debt and equity securities. Additionally, we are delinquent in our SEC reporting obligations and have received notices from Nasdaq that if we are not current with our reporting obligations by October 12, 2022, we will be delisted. Although we have been historically successful in raising capital through the sale of our equity and debt securities, and management believes that such capital sources will be available should they be required, there can be no assurance that financing will be available to us when needed in order to allow us to continue our operations, or if available, on terms acceptable to us. Further, in the event we are delisted from Nasdaq, raising capital through the sale of our equity or debt securities will be more challenging as investors are historically less likely to purchase securities that are not listed on a national exchange.
Capital Allocation Framework
As noted above, after cash utilization required for working capital, capital expenditures, and required debt service, we expect that our primary usage of cash will be for business combinations, repayment of outstanding indebtedness, and/or stock repurchases under repurchase programs that may be in place from time to time (subject to the terms of our 2020 Credit Agreement). For further information regarding our recent stock repurchase program, see above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations of the registrant.
Revenue Recognition
We derive and report our revenue in two categories: (a) recurring revenue, which includes bundled SaaS, unbundled SaaS, and optional managed services, and (b) nonrecurring revenue, which primarily consists of our event revenue. We account for a contract with a customer when approved, the contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. Products sold by us are delivered electronically. We generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers. We generally invoice a customer in advance of delivery, or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. Payments are due as per contract terms and do not contain a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our goods and services, and not to provide financing to or from customers.
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Our revenue recognition policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates. In applying our revenue recognition policy, we must determine which portions of our revenue are recognized at a point in time and which portions must be deferred and recognized over time. We analyze various factors including, but not limited to, the selling price of undelivered services when sold on a stand-alone basis, our pricing policies, the creditworthiness of our customers, and contractual terms and conditions in helping us to make such judgments about revenue recognition. Changes in judgment on any of these factors could materially impact the timing and amount of revenue recognized in a given period.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we identify each performance obligation and evaluate whether the performance obligations are distinct within the context of the contract at contract inception. Performance obligations that are not distinct at contract inception are combined. For bundled SaaS arrangements, we determine whether the services performed during the initial phases of an arrangement, such as setup activities, are distinct. In most cases, we consider our bundled SaaS deliverable to represent a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). We record deferred revenue attributable to certain process transition, setup activities where such activities do not represent separate performance obligations. Implementation, support, and other services are typically considered distinct performance obligations when sold with a software license unless these services are determined to significantly modify the software. The transaction price is generally in the form of a fixed fee at contract inception.
We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while some of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain non-standard terms and conditions and include promises to transfer multiple goods or services. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions including: (1) whether performance obligations are considered distinct and required to be accounted for separately or combined, including allocation of transaction price; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation; (3) combining contracts that may impact the allocation of the transaction price between product and services; and (4) estimating and accounting for variable consideration, including rights of return, rebates, price protection, expected penalties or other price concessions as a reduction of the transaction price.
We then look to how control transfers to the customer in order to determine the timing of revenue recognition. Revenue related to bundled SaaS, professional services and customer education services is typically recognized over time as the services are performed.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development assets, and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition dates, with the remaining unallocated purchase prices recorded as goodwill. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
● future expected cash flows from software license sales, SaaS and support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, and acquired developed technologies;
● expected costs to develop in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed;
● the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
● cost of capital and discount rates; and
● estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which can be an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, on an annual basis as of December 31, or more frequently if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that impairment in the value of goodwill may exist. Subsequent to the divestiture of BIGtoken, Inc. on December 28, 2021, we became a pure-play data/insights company that operates as a single reporting unit.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we may elect to utilize a qualitative assessment to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass a qualitative assessment, or if our qualitative assessment indicates that goodwill impairment is more likely than not, we perform quantitative impairment testing. If our quantitative testing determines that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill impairment is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
When we decide to perform a qualitative assessment, we assess and make judgments regarding a variety of factors which potentially impact the fair value of the reporting unit, including general economic conditions, industry and market-specific conditions, customer behavior, cost factors, our financial performance and trends, our strategies and business plans, capital requirements, management and personnel issues, and our stock price, among others. We then consider the totality of these and other factors, placing more weight on the events and circumstances that are judged to most affect the reporting unit’s fair value or the carrying amount of its net assets, to reach a qualitative conclusion regarding whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount.
When we perform quantitative impairment testing, we utilize one or more of three primary approaches to assess fair value: (a) an income-based approach, using projected discounted cash flows, (b) a market-based approach, using valuation multiples of comparable companies, and (c) a transaction-based approach, using valuation multiples for recent acquisitions of similar businesses made in the marketplace.
Our estimate of fair value of our reporting unit is based on a number of subjective factors, including: (a) appropriate consideration of valuation approaches (income approach, comparable public company approach, and comparable transaction approach), (b) estimates of future growth rates, (c) estimates of our future cost structure, (d) discount rates for our estimated cash flows, (e) selection of peer group companies for the comparable public company and the comparable transaction approaches, (f) required levels of working capital, (g) assumed terminal value, and (h) time horizon of cash flow forecasts.
The determination of reporting units also requires judgment. We assess whether a reporting unit exists within a reportable segment by identifying the unit, determining whether the unit qualifies as a business under GAAP, and assessing the availability and regular review by segment management of discrete financial information for the unit.
We review intangible assets that have finite useful lives and other long-lived assets when an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment. If any indicators are present, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the assets in question to their carrying amounts. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the test for recoverability are less than the long-lived assets carrying amount, we determine the fair value of the long-lived asset and recognize an impairment loss if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value.
For all our goodwill and other intangible asset impairment reviews, the assumptions and estimates used in the process are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions, judgments, and estimates we have used in our assessments are reasonable and appropriate, a material change in any of our assumptions or external factors could lead to future goodwill or other intangible asset impairment charges.
Based upon our December 31, 2021 quantitative goodwill impairment review of our reporting unit, we concluded that the estimated fair value of our reporting units exceeded its carrying value. Our reporting unit carried goodwill of $17.9 million at December 31, 2021.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Awards are generally subject to multi-year vesting periods. We recognize compensation expense for awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which are generally the vesting periods.
Changes in assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based compensation and, consequently, the related expense recognized. The assumptions we use in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Going concern assessment
With the implementation of Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) standard on going concern, Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-15, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital, including available loans or lines of credit, if any, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
Valuation
Definition and Hierarchy
Fair value is defined as the price received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (i.e. the “exit price”) in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
In determining fair value, the Company uses various valuation techniques. A fair value hierarchy for inputs is used in measuring fair value. It maximizes observable inputs and minimizes unobservable inputs. Valuation techniques consistent with the market or income approach are used to measure fair value. The fair value hierarchy is categorized into three levels:
Level 1 - Valuations based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access.
Level 2 - Valuations based on inputs, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, that are observable either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 - Valuations based on inputs that are unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement.
Fair value is a market-based measure that is based on assumptions of prices and inputs considered from the perspective of a market participant on the measurement date. Therefore, even when market assumptions are not readily available, the fund’s own assumptions reflect those that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.
The availability of valuation techniques and observable inputs can vary from investment to investment and are affected by a wide variety of factors. The determination of fair value requires prudent judgment. Due to the inherent uncertainty of valuation, estimated values may be materially different from values were a ready market available. Inputs used to measure fair value may fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In such cases, the fund’s level is based on the lowest significant level input to the fair value measurement.
Valuation Techniques and Inputs
Investments in securities and listed on major securities exchanges are valued at their last reported sales price as of the valuation date.
Many over-the-counter contracts have bid and ask prices that are observable in the marketplace. Bid prices reflect the highest price that the marketplace participants are willing to pay for an asset. Ask prices represent the lowest price that the marketplace participants are willing to accept for an asset. For securities whose inputs are based on bid-ask prices, the Company’s valuation policies do not require that fair value always be a predetermined point in the bid-ask range.
The Company’s policy for securities traded in OTC markets and for listed securities for which no sale was reported on that date are generally valued at their last reported bid price if held long and last reported ask
These securities are categorized in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy to the extent these securities are actively traded. Securities traded on inactive markets or valued by reference to similar instruments are generally categorized in Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Investments in Restricted Securities of Public Companies
Investments in restricted securities of public companies cannot be offered for sale to the public until the company complies with certain statutory requirements. The valuation will not exceed the listed price on any major securities exchange. Investments in restricted securities of public companies are generally categorized in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. However, investments in restricted securities in public companies may be categorized in Level 2 or 3 of the fair value hierarchy depending on the level of observable liquidity. If the restriction on the sale of the restricted securities exceeds 180 days, the Company applies a marketability discount due to the nature of the restriction related to the security.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.
Off balance sheet arrangements
As of the date of this report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.