Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this 2021 Form 10-K. For further discussion regarding operating and financial data for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Stericycle is a global U.S. based business-to-business services company. We provide an array of highly specialized compliance-based solutions that protect people and brands, promote health and well-being, and safeguard the environment. Since our founding in 1989, we have grown from a small start-up in medical waste management into a leader across a range of increasingly complex and highly regulated arenas, serving healthcare organizations and commercial businesses of every size through Regulated Waste and Compliance Services and Secure Information Destruction Services.
Through our family of brands, Stericycle serves customers in the U.S. and 16 other countries worldwide with solutions for Regulated Waste and Compliance Services and Secure Information Destruction Services. To our customers, team members and the communities we serve, Stericycle is a company that protects what matters.
Our service offerings appeal to a wide range of business customers. The majority of our customers are healthcare businesses (hospitals, physician and dental practices, outpatient clinics, long-term care facilities, etc.). We also provide services to retailers, manufacturers, financial services providers, professional services providers, governmental entities and other businesses. While we manage large volumes of waste and other materials, the volume per customer site on average is relatively small.
Highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year include:
•We completed deployment of our ERP system for North America finance and procurement processes and SID business.
•Organic revenues increased 5.4%, driven by RWCS organics revenues which increased 5.6% and SID organic revenues which increased 5.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year.
•We renewed our Credit Agreement, which maintains our Revolving Credit Facility of $1.2 billion and establishes a Term Loan Facility of $200.0 million, with new maturity dates of September 30, 2026.
•We divested our RWCS operations in Japan for proceeds of $11.3 million in the third quarter of 2021 and divested our Environmental Solutions operations in Canada for proceeds of $24.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2021, which are reported in International and North America, respectively.
•We acquired a Midwest-based regulated waste business in the fourth quarter of 2021 for total purchase consideration of $43.4 million.
•We opened three new regulated waste facilities, upgraded five autoclaves in 2021, completed 13 non-autoclave facility modernization projects and completed a comprehensive, long-term facility planning process.
For additional information, see Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 3 - Acquisitions, Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments and Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Other Developments
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 virus outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a global economic impact, including temporary closure of non-essential businesses worldwide and postponement of elective surgeries and preventative care. The Company continues to maintain operations within all business service offerings. We are monitoring future implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, including COVID-19 variants, and continue to take actions to manage spending to align to operational requirements.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 34
PART II
Our COVID-19 pandemic response has included efforts to protect the health and well-being of our workforce and our customers. We worked proactively with the CDC, OSHA, the DOT and regulatory agencies around the world to ensure readiness for proper regulated waste management. Our team demonstrated leadership and commitment to protecting what matters by working with pharmaceutical companies and government agencies to align on standards for secure and compliant COVID-19 vaccination treatment protocols. Additionally, Stericycle supports the front end of vaccination programs through our Communications Solutions service line. We provide scalable patient hotlines, scheduling, and appointment reminders for vaccinations.
We have updated and implemented numerous protocols specifically to reduce risk among our front-line team members, and our strategic sourcing team has worked diligently to take measures to provide our field operations employees with appropriate personal protective equipment. We’ve implemented more rigorous cleaning protocols for all our facilities. Throughout the pandemic, our front-line workers have continued to meet the needs of our customers.
Like many organizations, we too have been impacted by labor shortages and higher absences, particularly among driver and operational team members. To date, we are addressing our internal needs through three main areas: (1) recruitment, (2) market competitive compensation and benefits, and (3) employee engagement and retention. Although we have been able to maintain near our desired staffing levels through these efforts, and that has enabled us to continue to support our customers, labor shortages have not uniformly impacted our businesses. In certain geographies and facilities, we have experienced more acute labor shortages. Those locations have required additional team member overtime and re-allocation of team members to continue to support our customers.
Over several months in the second half of 2021, we had several hundred team members absent from work due to Covid-related illness. Where we were unable to allocate resources to cover absent team member routes, our transactional based revenue was negatively impacted.
During 2021, we have experienced inflationary cost increases in our underlying expenses, including labor and supply-chain and other costs. We are also experiencing delays in completing certain capital projects and have additional challenges due to macroeconomic supply chain disruptions. We continue to demonstrate to our customers the value of the services we provide. One of the strengths of our quality of revenue initiative has been working to create a more flexible pricing model with the necessary levers to adjust to these inflationary cost challenges. We have the following pricing levers: (i) for existing contracts, we have been addressing the standardization of contractual language and building in pricing flexibility, which affords us the opportunity to adjust pricing in several ways at contract anniversary and renewal, (ii) for all new customers and purchasers of our one-time services, we have the ability to adjust our rates at point of sale, and (iii) for many customers we also have the ability to adjust surcharges and fees that provide inflationary cost protection for commodity and other price volatility (e.g. fuel, recycled paper, and environmental surcharges and a new service cost recovery fee).
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 35
PART II
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic across our revenue service categories in 2021 is as follows:
Key Business Priorities
In 2021, our five key business priorities were the following:
•Quality of revenue - We have been executing against our foundational initiatives we launched to drive revenue quality. These included a formal cross-functional deal review committee, realignment of sales incentive plans, re-organization of our commercial leadership team around our service lines, key customer channels, and implementation of global customer pipeline management processes for both Regulated Waste and Compliance Services and Secure Information Destruction. In combination with our quality of revenue initiatives, we continue to develop and deploy innovative solutions to meet unmet customer needs, strengthen customer engagement, and drive long-term organic growth.
•Operational efficiency, modernization and innovation - As we manage through complex times, we remain focused on operational efficiency, modernization, and innovation to control variable and discretionary costs and improve performance and efficiencies in our field operations. In 2021, our Engineering team completed a long-term planning process focused on our global facility network. Our goal is to optimize our facilities with a strategic and standardized operating model. We are analyzing processing capabilities, plant and transportation equipment needs, team member requirements, and potential customer implications or benefits. In 2021, these efforts led to five facilities receiving new and upgraded autoclaves and the opening of three new regulated waste operating facilities.
•ERP implementation - In the third quarter of 2021, we completed deployment of our ERP system for North America’s finance and procurement processes and for North America’s SID business. The ERP start-up challenges and customer disruptions that we experienced in the third quarter have improved as we've continued to fine tune the new technology and processes.
•Debt reduction and leverage improvement - We expect to improve our leverage ratio through continued focus on operating margin expansion, free cash flow generation, and leveraging divestiture proceeds, if applicable. We have reduced total debt to $1,623.7 million at December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our Credit Agreement Defined Debt Leverage Ratio was 3.61 times.
•Portfolio optimization - In the third quarter of 2021 in International we divested our RWCS operations in Japan for proceeds of $11.3 million and in the fourth quarter of 2021 in North America we divested our Environmental Solutions operations in Canada for proceeds of $24.4 million. In the fourth quarter, we completed the acquisition in North America of a Midwest-based regulated waste business for total purchase consideration of $43.4 million.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 36
PART II
Certain Key Priorities and Other Significant Matters
The following table identifies key priorities and other significant matters impacting our business (amounts are stated pre-tax except when noted):
The above priorities and other significant matters include the following types of activities:
(1)Includes employee and contract termination, facility closure and clean-up costs.
(2)Includes dedicated resources, including project related incentive compensation and stock-based compensation.
(3)Includes other costs related to each priority (e.g. software maintenance fees, litigation, settlement and regulatory compliance charges, changes in contingent consideration and environmental provisions).
(4)Includes impairments, accelerated depreciation and/or amortization, gain/loss on disposal and changes in deferred consideration.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 37
PART II
ERP Implementation
For the years presented and for the cumulative period since the inception of the ERP Implementation, we have recognized the following, principally reported in Other Costs:
As we continue to prepare to deploy the North America ERP for our operations, we will incur costs to develop and deploy the system, which includes additional capital expenditures as well as operating expenditures. Upon the substantial implementation of North America's finance and procurement processes and for North America's SID business in the third quarter 2021, certain costs became incremental information technology ongoing costs for running the new system, including maintenance, licensing, and depreciation expenses. Additionally, we will continue to incur costs to maintain the legacy suite of applications that are also used by our international businesses until their system portfolio is modernized or optimized.
Intangible Amortization
See table above of certain key priorities and other significant matters for intangible amortization expense from acquisitions for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
The decrease in amortization expense is a result of the reduction of intangible assets related to divestitures and certain assets reaching their full useful lives. See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
For intangible amortization by segment see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 17 - Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Portfolio Optimization
See table above of key priorities and other significant matters for portfolio optimization (including Divestiture (gains) losses, net) for the years presented, and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss. Professional fees are reported in Other Costs, while the various divestitures are included in the respective segment in the table below.
Divestitures
We evaluate our portfolio of services on an ongoing basis with a country-by-country and service line-by-service line approach to assess long-term potential and identify potential business candidates for divestiture. Our decisions regarding divestitures are based upon the following criteria:
•outlook for long-term market conditions;
•potential impact to complementary services or customer relationships;
•ability to leverage infrastructure and customer base for growth;
•potential for margin improvement;
•current divestiture value versus future divestiture value;
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 38
PART II
•ongoing capital requirements of the business;
•return on invested capital;
•impact on overall leverage, including impact on debt leverage ratio;
•implications for our internal control remediation efforts; and
•implications for our new ERP system implementation.
We recognized the following Divestiture (gains) losses, net in the Consolidated Statements of Loss:
For additional information regarding Divestiture (gains) losses, net, including significant impacts of foreign currency translation adjustments, net, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Acquisition and Integration
A part of our portfolio optimization business priority, we are continuously evaluating the competitive environment and considering opportunistic acquisitions that strengthen our core businesses. Acquisitions, when appropriately valued and constructively integrated, are an efficient way to gain customers, scale treatment operations, and build critical customer density for transportation. We will be focused on smaller accretive tuck-in acquisitions.
Details of the acquisition completed in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 3 - Acquisitions in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operational Optimization
See table above of certain key priorities and other significant matters for operational optimization for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
As we continue to consider each operational optimization activity, the amount, timing and recognition of charges will be affected by the occurrence of commitments and triggering events as defined under U.S. GAAP, among other factors. We may incur more charges, cash expenditures, accelerated depreciation and impairments than estimated and may not realize the expected improvement or cost savings on the planned time frame or at all.
For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Litigation, Settlements and Regulatory Compliance
We operate in highly regulated industries and must address regulatory inquiries or respond to investigations from time to time. We are also involved in a variety of civil litigation from time to time including the items detailed in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 19 - Legal Proceedings, in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our financial results may also include considerations of non-recurring matters including settlements, environmental remediation, and legal related consulting and professional fees.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 39
PART II
See table above of certain key priorities and other significant matters for litigation, settlement and regulatory compliance charges. Among other things, the table reflects consulting and professional fees, contingent liability provisions and settlements, net of insurance recoveries, impacting our business for the periods presented, primarily in Other Costs. The year ended December 31, 2021 reflects an estimated aggregate FCPA settlement accrual of $80.7 million. The table above also reflects how these matters are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
Asset Impairments
Impairment charges comprise the following:
Impairment charges may be recognized in future periods to the extent changes in factors or circumstances occur, including deterioration in the macroeconomic environment or in the equity markets, including the market value of our common shares, deterioration in our performance or our future projections, or changes in our plans for one or more reporting units or specified long-lived assets, among other factors.
For additional information on asset impairments, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments and Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other
See table above of certain key priorities and other significant matters for other charges, primarily consulting and professional fees related to internal control remediation activities, impacting our business for the periods presented, primarily in Other Costs, and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
See table above of certain key priorities and other significant matters for the impact of foreign exchange re-measurement of net monetary assets held in Argentina, which was divested in August of 2020, as a result of its designation as a highly inflationary economy for the years presented and how they are classified in the Consolidated Statements of Loss.
U.S. CARES Act and Other Tax Matters
For further discussion, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
Revenues (including Segment Revenue):
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 40
PART II
(1)Organic growth is a change in revenues which includes SOP (sorted office paper) pricing and volume and excludes the impact of divestitures and foreign exchange.
(2)The comparisons at constant currency rates (foreign exchange) reflect comparative local currency balances at prior period’s foreign exchange rates. We calculated these percentages by taking current period reported Revenues less the respective prior period reported Revenues, divided by the prior period reported Revenues, all at the respective prior period’s foreign exchange rates. This measure provides information on the change in Revenues assuming that foreign currency exchange rates have not changed between the prior and the current period. Management believes the use of this measure aids in the understanding of changes in Revenues without the impact of foreign currency.
(3)For further information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements; Note 2 - Revenues from Contracts with Customers in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)In the first quarter of 2021, we updated our service lines to include Communication Solutions (formerly part of CRS) in RWCS.
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2,646.9 million, a decrease of 1.1% compared to $2,675.5 million in the prior year. The year-over-year decline in revenue was mainly due to divestitures of the Environmental Solutions business in the second quarter of 2020, the Argentina operations in the third quarter of 2020, the Expert Solutions business in the fourth quarter of 2020, the Japan RWCS operations in the third quarter of 2021, and the Canada Environmental Solutions business in the fourth quarter of 2021, which collectively reduced revenue by $204.3 million or 7.7%. Partially offsetting these declines were organic revenue growth of $144.3 million or 5.4%, largely attributable to the quality of revenue initiatives, COVID-related revenues, recovery from COVID-19 pandemic impacts, and higher recycled paper revenues reflecting higher SOP pricing.
North America revenues decreased $52.7 million, or 2.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $2,136.5 million from $2,189.2 million in the prior year. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to divestitures which reduced revenues by $164.6 million or 7.5%. The decline in revenue was partially offset by an increase in organic revenues of $102.5 million or 4.7%, largely attributable to the quality of revenue initiatives, COVID-related revenues, recovery from COVID-19 pandemic impacts, and higher recycled paper revenues reflecting higher SOP pricing. In the third quarter, we experienced typical ERP start-up challenges in North America SID. These challenges were acute in the third quarter and we exited the fourth quarter and the full-year with year-over-year organic growth in North America SID.
International revenues increased $24.1 million, or 5.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $510.4 million from $486.3 million in the prior year. The increase in International revenues was primarily due to organic revenue growth of $41.8 million, or 8.6%, primarily attributable to the recovery from COVID-19 pandemic impacts and the favorable effect of foreign exchange rates of $22.0 million, or 4.6%. These improvements were partially offset by reduced revenues from divestitures of $39.7 million or 8.2%.
Gross Profit
The decrease in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily due to the impact of divestitures, higher labor costs, additional costs incurred for typical start-up challenges associated with the ERP deployment, and supply chain and other inflationary costs. These were partially offset by increased revenues related to quality of revenue initiatives, COVID-related revenues, recovery from COVID-19 pandemic impacts, and
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 41
PART II
higher recycled paper revenues reflecting higher SOP pricing. Further, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred lower charges associated with our certain key priorities and other significant matters discussed above.
SG&A
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, we incurred higher SG&A charges associated with certain key priorities and other significant matters discussed above, primarily due to Litigation, Settlement and Regulatory Compliance matters which included an estimated aggregate FCPA settlement expense. The remaining increases in SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, was mainly due to higher ERP related operating expenditures and depreciation, variable spending expenses associated with organic revenue growth and higher labor costs. These were partially offset by changes in divestitures, net, lower bad debt expense, and lower incentive compensation. Bad debt expense was lower for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year due primarily to a decrease in risk of collectability associated with the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Divestitures (Gains) Losses, Net
For additional information regarding Divestiture (gains) losses, net, including significant impacts of foreign currency translation adjustments, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 4 - Restructuring, Divestitures, and Impairments in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Segment Profitability
The Company uses Adjusted Income from Operations as its measure of segment profitability - see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 17 - Segment Reporting in the Consolidated Financial Statements for an explanation of this measure. Segment profitability and a reconciliation of the total for segment profitability to income (loss) from operations was as follows:
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 42
PART II
nm - percentage change not meaningful
(1) See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 17 - Segment Reporting
Adjusted Income from Operations for North America decreased $18.4 million, or 3.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $587.6 million from $606.0 million in the prior year. Adjusted Income from Operations declined primarily due to typical start-up challenges associated with the ERP deployment, higher supply chain, labor and other inflationary costs, the impact of divestitures and increased selling expenses, partially offset due to increased revenues related to the recovery from COVID-19 impacts, higher recycled paper revenues reflecting higher SOP pricing and lower bad debt expense.
Adjusted Income from Operations for International increased $7.1 million, or 15.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $53.6 million from $46.5 million for the prior year. The increase was primarily driven by higher revenues related to higher waste volumes and the recovery from COVID-19 impacts and favorable foreign exchange rates, partially offset by the impact of divestitures. Our International Adjusted Income from Operations as a percentage of revenues is lower than North America Adjusted Income from Operations as a percentage of revenues because our International RWCS operations have fewer small account customers, which tend to generate higher Adjusted Income from Operations as a percentage of revenues.
Adjusted Loss from Operations for Other Costs increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year as certain costs became incremental information technology ongoing costs for running the new ERP system, including maintenance, licensing, and depreciation expenses. These were partially offset by lower annual incentive compensation related costs, and lower costs associated with divested businesses.
Interest Expense, Net
The change for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was a result of lower weighted average debt balances. For further information see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net is primarily comprised of foreign exchange gains and losses including the re-measurement of net monetary assets held in Argentina, prior to divestiture in August 2020, as a result of its designation as a highly inflationary economy.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
nm - percentage change not meaningful
For further information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 43
PART II
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company believes that it has sufficient liquidity to support its ongoing operations and to invest in future growth to create value for its shareholders. Operating cash flows and the Company’s $1.2 billion Credit Facility are the Company’s primary sources of liquidity and are expected to be used for, among other things, payment of interest and principal on the Company’s long-term debt obligations, capital expenditures necessary to support growth and productivity improvements. To the extent the Company needs to add additional funding options to meet additional liquidity requirements or diversify its funding portfolio, the Company could seek additional financing from alternative sources, including approaching the capital markets.
For further details concerning these matters see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Working Capital
At December 31, 2021, our working capital decreased $11.6 million to a negative working capital of $156.2 million compared to a negative working capital of $144.6 million at December 31, 2020. This change is primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities (including contingent liabilities related to an estimated aggregate FCPA settlement accrual).
Current assets increased $23.0 million in 2021 to $575.5 million from $552.5 million in 2020 primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses.
Current liabilities increased $34.6 million in 2021 to $731.7 million from $697.1 million in 2020, primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities (including contingent liabilities related to an estimated aggregate FCPA settlement accrual), partially offset by a decrease in the current portion of long-term debt.
Cash Flow Summary:
The following table shows cash flow information for the Company by activity:
Operating Cash Flows: Net cash from operating activities decreased $227.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 to $303.1 million from $530.2 million for the prior year. The year-over-year decline of $227.1 million was primarily driven by favorable cash flow from items which was primarily driven by 2020 and 2021 non-recurring differences $216.6 million and net working capital changes of $32.5 million, mainly driven by the timing of North America SID customer collections. These decreases were partially offset by tax refunds of $22.0 million. The non-recurring differences include (i) CARES Act net operating loss carryback refunds of $110.0 million in 2020, (ii) government-related payment deferrals in 2020 associated with pandemic-related relief and subsequent 2021 payments in aggregate of $48.8 million (iii) an annual incentive compensation payout of $38.6 million in 2021 versus a nominal payout in 2020, and (iv) advances received for services agreement related to the divestiture of Domestic Environmental Solutions of $19.2 million.
DSO as of December 31, 2021, as reported was 58 days, compared to DSO of 52 days as of December 31, 2020. When excluding divested revenues as of December 31, 2021 from the trailing twelve-months DSO calculations, DSO was 59 days for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 56 days for the prior year. This difference is primarily due to a delay in the North America SID customer invoicing schedule and subsequent collections due to the ERP deployment as well as increased revenue compared to prior year.
Investing Cash Flows: Net cash from investing activities decreased $471.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 to net cash used of $90.1 million from net cash provided of $381.4 million in the prior year. In the second quarter of 2020, we received $427.7 million from the divestiture of the Domestic Environmental Solutions business. Our cash paid for capital expenditures decreased by $2.6 million to $116.9 million from $119.5 million primarily driven by $31.4 million less in ERP capital expenditures in 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. For year ended December 31, 2021, cash paid for an acquisition was $10.5 million.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 44
PART II
Financing Cash Flows: Net cash used for financing activities decreased $684.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $207.9 million from $892.5 million in the prior year. Our net repayments were $197.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net repayments of $877.4 million in the prior year. The decrease is due primarily to lower divestiture proceeds compared to the prior year.
Contractual Obligations
The Company’s contractual obligations and cash commitments at December 31, 2021 consisted of long term debt, finance and operating lease liabilities, and estimated purchase obligations.
Long term debt: For details regarding long term obligations, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 9 - Debt in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Lease liabilities: For details regarding short and long term finance and operating lease liabilities, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 6 - Leases in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Estimated purchase obligations: The Company’s estimated purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services that are entered into in the ordinary course of business. As of December 31, 2021, the Company's short and long term estimated purchase obligations were $58.7 million and $37.8 million, respectively.
The Company establishes asset retirement obligations for the present value of estimated future costs to retire long-lived assets at the termination or expiration of a lease. Most of these obligations are not expected to be paid until many years in the future and are expected to be funded from general company resources at the time of removal. For further details concerning asset retirement obligations, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Based on the uncertain nature of our liability for unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to make an estimate of the period of potential settlement, if any, with the applicable taxing authorities.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $71.4 million of stand-by letters of credit outstanding against our credit facility, $32.5 million of surety bonds and $24.1 million of bank guarantees. The bank guarantees are issued mostly by our international subsidiaries for various purposes, including leases, seller notes, contracts and permits. The surety bonds are used for performance guarantees. Neither the bank guarantees nor the surety bonds affect our ability to use our various lines of credit.
We anticipate that our operating cash flows, together with additional borrowings available under our Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated future operating expenses, key business priorities, other capital expenditures and debt service obligations as they become due during the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Although management believes that its estimates and assumptions are reasonable, they are based upon information available when they are made and therefore, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our most critical accounting policies are those that may be material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and those policies that have a material impact on the financial condition or operating performance of the Company. Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Polices in the Consolidated Financial Statements provides a detailed description of all of our material accounting policies; however, we have identified the following as our most critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for these good or services. Revenue is recognized net of revenue-based taxes assessed by governmental authorities.
The Company provides RWCS, which provide collection and processing of regulated and specialized waste, including medical, pharmaceutical and hazardous waste, for disposal and compliance programs; SID Services, which provide for the collection of personal and confidential information for secure destruction and recycling of shredded paper; and communication solutions such as appointment reminders, secure messaging, event
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 45
PART II
registration and other communications for hospitals and IDN’s. The associated activities for each of these are a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer over time; therefore, the respective services are treated as a single performance obligation.
We recognize revenue by applying the right to invoice practical expedient as our right to consideration corresponds directly to the value provided to the customer for performance to date. Revenues for our Regulated Waste and Secure Information Destruction Services are recognized upon waste collection. Our compliance services are recognized over the contractual service period. Revenues from communication solutions are recorded as the services are performed.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company reports accounts receivable at their net realizable value, which is management’s best estimate of the cash that will ultimately be received. The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts to reflect the expected uncollectability of accounts receivable based on historical collection data and specific risks identified among uncollected accounts, as well as management’s expectation of future economic conditions. If current or expected future economic trends, events, or changes in circumstances indicate that specific receivable balances may be impaired, further consideration is given to the collectability of those balances and the allowance is adjusted accordingly. The adequacy of allowances for uncollectible accounts is reviewed at least quarterly and adjusted as necessary based on such reviews. Management’s judgment is required to assess the collectability of an account, based on detailed analysis of the aging of the receivables, the creditworthiness of the Company’s customers, historical collection trends, and current and future expected economic trends.
Accounts receivable written off in subsequent periods can differ from the allowance for doubtful accounts provided, but historically our provision has been adequate. Allowance for doubtful accounts was $43.3 million and $56.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Property, Plant and Equipment, Right of Use Assets and Intangible Assets (definite-lives), Net: Long-lived assets are reviewed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Impairment of assets with definite-lives is generally determined by comparing projected undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the asset, or appropriate grouping of assets, to its carrying value. If impairment is identified, a loss is recognized equal to the excess of the asset's net book value over its fair value and the cost basis is adjusted.
Determining the extent of impairment, if any, typically requires various estimates and assumptions including using management's judgment, cash flows directly attributable to the asset, the useful life of the asset and residual value, if any. When necessary, the Company uses internal cash flow estimates, quoted market prices and appraisals as appropriate to determine fair value. Actual results could vary from these estimates. In addition, the remaining useful life of the impaired asset is revised, if necessary.
(For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 5 - Property, Plant and Equipment and Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Intangible Assets (indefinite-lived): Indefinite-lived intangibles consist primarily of permits and tradenames. Indefinite-lived intangibles are assessed for impairment annually, as of October 1, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change and are not subject to amortization but are assessed for impairment in the same manner as goodwill. Indefinite lived intangibles may be assessed using either a qualitative or quantitative approach. The qualitative approach first determines if it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the asset is less than the carrying value. If no such determination is made, then the impairment test is complete. If, however, it is determined that there is a likely impairment, a quantitative assessment is performed. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed our annual impairment test on indefinite-lived intangibles, other than goodwill, using the qualitative approach for certain assets and the quantitative approach for the remaining assets. The calculated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangibles is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance, internal and external processing costs and an appropriate discount rate determined by management.
Future changes in our assumptions or the interrelationship of the assumptions described above may negatively impact future valuations that would require non-cash charges and may have a material effect on our financial condition and operating results.
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 46
PART II
Goodwill: Goodwill is assessed for impairment annually as of October 1 of each year, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that could reduce the value of a reporting unit below its carrying value.
We used a quantitative approach to assess goodwill for impairment. The fair value of each reporting unit is calculated using the income approach (including DCF) and validated using a market approach with the involvement of a third-party valuation specialist. Our reporting units are: Domestic RWCS, Domestic SID, Europe, Asia Pacific, Domestic CRS, Canada and Latin America (note the last three reporting units have accumulated goodwill impairment balances equal to the goodwill gross balance, or net zero goodwill carrying value). The income approach uses expected future cash flows of each reporting unit and discounts those cash flows to present value. Expected future cash flows are calculated using management assumptions of growth rates, including long-term growth rates, capital expenditures and cost efficiencies. Future acquisitions or divestitures are not included in the expected future cash flows. We use a discount rate based on a calculated weighted average cost of capital which is adjusted for each of our reporting units based on size, country and company specific risk premiums. The market approach compares the valuation multiples of similar companies to that of the associated reporting unit. In addition, we analyze differences between the sum of the fair value of the reporting units and our total market capitalization for reasonableness, taking into account certain factors including control premiums.
The fair value is then compared to its carrying value including goodwill. If the fair value is in excess of its carrying value, the related goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value is less than its carrying value, we recognize an impairment charge in the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value but not to exceed the carrying value of any goodwill.
We performed our annual goodwill assessment as of October 1, 2021. As a result of this assessment, no goodwill impairment charges were recognized in 2021. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 7 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
A measure of sensitivity of the amount of goodwill impairment charges to key assumptions is the amount by which each reporting unit's fair value exceeds its respective carrying value. As of the October 1, 2021 assessment, the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by at least 50.0%. We performed sensitivity analysis on our estimated fair values, noting that a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate or a 50 basis point reduction in the long-term growth rate would not result in impairments for any of our reporting units.
Intangible Assets Lives
We have determined that certain of our operating permits and certain tradenames have indefinite lives due to our ability to renew them with minimal additional cost and therefore they are not amortized.
Our finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their useful lives using the straight-line method. Our customer relationships have useful lives from 10 to 25 years based upon the type of customer. We have non-compete covenant intangibles with useful lives of 5 years. We also have tradename intangibles with useful lives from 20 to 40 years.
We evaluate the useful life of our intangible assets annually to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to their remaining useful life and changes are reflected prospectively as the intangible asset is amortized over the revised remaining useful life. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed the annual assessment of the useful life of our finite-lived intangibles. The Company updated the useful life of its customer relationship intangibles as a result of analyzing recent quantitative and qualitative observations in the market and factors impacting our business. The change in estimate will be accounted for prospectively. The weighted average remaining life decreased from approximately 8.2 years to 6.8 years to reflect the new estimated useful lives. We estimate that there will be an approximate increase of 5-10% in annual intangible amortization expense.
Assets and Liabilities Held-for-Sale
We classify Long-lived assets or disposal groups as held-for-sale when management having the appropriate authority, generally our Board of Directors or certain of our Executive Officers, commits to a plan of sale, the disposal group is ready for immediate sale, an active program to locate a buyer has been initiated and the sale is probable and expected to be completed within one year. Once classified as held-for-sale disposal groups are valued at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value less estimated selling costs. Where the disposal group constitutes substantially all, generally more than 90% of the assets and liabilities of our operations in a foreign country, the balance in the cumulative currency translation adjustment associated with that country is included in the carrying value of the disposal group. If the carrying value, including any amount associated with the cumulative
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 47
PART II
currency translation adjustment, exceeds the fair value less estimated selling costs, a held-for-sale impairment charge is recorded to reduce the carrying value.
The estimate for fair value is reviewed at the end of every reporting period that the disposal group is classified as held-for-sale and the carrying value is adjusted whenever the estimated fair value less costs to sell is less than the carrying value.
Contingencies and Litigation
We are subject to various legal proceedings, claims and regulatory matters, the outcomes of which are subject to significant uncertainty. We determine whether to disclose or accrue for loss contingencies based on an assessment of whether the risk of loss is remote, reasonably possible or probable, and whether it can be reasonably estimated. We analyze our litigation and regulatory matters based on available information to assess the potential liabilities. Management’s assessment is developed based on an analysis of possible outcomes under various strategies. We record and disclose loss contingencies pursuant to the applicable accounting guidance for such matters. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 19 - Legal Proceedings in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Income Taxes
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis as well as net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance for any tax benefits for which future realization is uncertain.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, in full or in part, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, and our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying businesses. Actual operating results in future years could differ from our current assumptions, judgments and estimates. However, we believe that it is more likely than not that most of the deferred tax assets recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets will ultimately be realized. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized.
We did not recognize certain tax benefits from uncertain tax positions within the provision for income taxes. We may recognize a tax benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. At December 31, 2021, our estimated gross unrecognized tax benefits were $19.7 million, of which $18.0 million, if recognized, would favorably impact our future earnings. Due to uncertainties in any tax audit outcome, our estimates of the ultimate settlement of our unrecognized tax positions may change and the actual tax benefits may differ significantly from the estimates.
The Tax Act established GILTI provisions that impose a tax on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on intangible assets of foreign corporations. We recognize the taxes on GILTI as a period expense rather than recognizing deferred taxes for basis differences that are expected to affect the amount of GILTI inclusion upon reversal.
For further information see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 10 - Income Taxes in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Insured and Self-Insured Claims
The Company’s insurance for workers’ compensation, auto/fleet, general liability, property and employee-related health care benefits is obtained using high deductible insurance policies, if any, meaning that the Company has retained a significant portion of the risks related to the claims associated with these programs. The estimated
2021 10-K Annual Report Stericycle, Inc. • 48
PART II
exposure for unpaid claims and associated expenses, including incurred but not reported losses, is based on a calculation performed by a third-party actuarial specialist. We use a third party to track and evaluate actual claims experience and supply the data used in the semi-annual actuarial valuation. The actuarial-determined liability is calculated using the Company’s historical claims experience. The accruals for these liabilities could be revised if future occurrences or loss developments significantly differ from the assumptions used. Estimated recoveries associated with insured claims are recognized as assets when the receipt of such amounts is probable. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 we accrued $84.1 million and $78.1 million, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. That cost is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award-the requisite service period, usually the vesting period. Performance based awards are recognized consistent with performance metrics and Accounting Standards Codification Section 718 Compensation - Stock Compensation. No compensation cost is recognized for equity instruments for which employees do not render the requisite service.
We use the Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value of PSU’s once the related performance criteria have been established. The fair value model includes various assumptions, including the expected volatility and expected life of the awards. Given the considerable judgment involved in these assumptions and complex modeling, we typically obtain assistance from third-party valuation specialists. If an equity award is modified after the grant date, we assess the impact of the modification and where necessary record compensation cost calculated as any incremental fair value of the modified award over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification.
For further detail, see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data; Note 14 - Stock Based Compensation in the Consolidated Financial Statements.