Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations together with those financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this filing. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections about us and our industry. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason, even if new information becomes available or other events occur in the future.
Management Overview:
We are a global medical technology company focused on elevating the standard of care by driving the evolution of digital surgery. We have a broad portfolio of spinal hardware implants, including solutions for fusion procedures in the lumbar, thoracic, and cervical spine, motion preservation solutions for the lumbar spine, and a minimally invasive surgical implant system for fusion of the sacroiliac joint. We also have a biomaterials portfolio of advanced and traditional orthobiologics. In addition to our spinal hardware and biomaterials portfolios, on January 14, 2022, we received FDA 510(k) clearance for HOLO Portal™, a surgical guidance system utilizing AR and AI to intraoperatively assist spine surgery. HOLO Portal™ technology combines image-based guidance with AR, automated spine segmentation, and automated surgical planning utilizing proprietary AI software. Intraoperative 3D digital imaging is autonomously processed by the system to create a patient-specific plan that is presented to the surgeon using an AR display. We are developing additional applications utilizing HOLO™ AI technology for use in multiple clinical specialties across the continuum of patient care. We believe HOLO™ AI, our portfolio of neural network technologies, is one of the most advanced artificial intelligence technologies being applied to surgery.
Patented HOLO Portal™ software includes several convolutional neural networks to segment and group patient anatomy based on intraoperative CT scans. This results in a patient-specific 3D model that is automatically labeled with anatomic structures for use during surgery.
HOLO Portal™ software suggests screw trajectories and measures pedicle sizes from the patient-specific 3D model. The system then suggests the appropriate screw size based on a surgeon-defined pedicle fill ratio. The resulting surgical plan is designed to maximize construct stability and eliminate time spent manually planning trajectories and measuring screw sizes.
Once the segmentation and screw plan is generated, HOLO Portal™ software displays the surgical plan intraoperatively through the interactive AR display and provides a 3D guidance overlay on the patient’s anatomy. 3D trajectory and targeting are superimposed on surgical instruments in real time within the surgical field. This innovative design may reduce the surgeon’s cognitive load by providing intuitive guidance that allows the surgeon to keep focus on the surgical field. We believe that HOLO Portal™ technology may help surgeons achieve better surgical outcomes, reduce complications, and improve patient satisfaction.
Our hardware product portfolio of spinal implants and biomaterials products address an estimated $13.6 billion global spine market. We estimate that our current portfolio addresses nearly 87% of all surgeries utilizing spinal hardware implants and approximately 70% of the biomaterials used in spine-related uses. Our portfolio of spinal hardware implants consists of a broad line of solutions for spinal fusion in minimally invasive surgery (“MIS”), deformity, and degenerative procedures; motion preservation solutions indicated for use in one or two-level disease; and an implant system designed to relieve sacroiliac joint pain. Our biomaterials products consist of a broad range of advanced and traditional bone graft substitutes that are designed to improve bone fusion rates following spinal surgery.
We offer a portfolio of products for thoracolumbar procedures, including: the Streamline® TL Spinal Fixation system, for degenerative and complex spine procedures; and the Streamline® MIS Spinal Fixation System, a broad range of implants and instruments used via a percutaneous or mini-open approach. We offer a complementary line of interbody fusion devices, Fortilink®-TS, Fortilink®-L, and Fortilink®-A, in our TETRAfuse® 3D technology, which is 3D printed with nano-rough features that have been shown to allow more bone cells to attach to more of the implant, increasing the potential for fusion. We offer a portfolio of products for cervical procedures, including: the CervAlign® ACP System, a comprehensive anterior cervical plate system; the Fortilink®-C IBF System, a cervical interbody fusion device that utilizes TETRAfuse® 3D technology; and the Streamline® OCT System, a broad range of implants used in the occipito-cervico-thoracic posterior spine. Our motion preservation systems are designed to enable restoration of segmental stability, while preserving motion. These systems include: Coflex® Interlaminar Stabilization device, the only FDA PMA-approved
implant for the treatment of moderate to severe lumbar spinal stenosis in conjunction with decompression; and HPS® 2.0 Universal Fixation System, a pedicle screw system used for posterior stabilization of the thoracolumbar spine that includes a unique dynamic coupler, shown to preserve motion and reduce the mechanical burden on adjacent segments. Our implant system for fusion of the sacroiliac joint, SImmetry® SI Joint Fusion System, is a minimally invasive surgical implant system that has been clinically demonstrated to produce high rates of sacroiliac joint fusion and statistically significant decreases in opioid use, pain, and disability.
Through a series of distribution agreements, our product portfolio of biomaterials consists of a variety of bone graft substitutes including cellular allografts, demineralized bone matrices (“DBMs”) and synthetic bone growth substitutes that have a balance of osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties to enhance bone fusion rates following spinal surgery. We market ViBone® and ViBone® Moldable, two next-generation viable cellular allograft bone matrix products intended to provide surgeons with improved results for bone repair. ViBone® and ViBone® Moldable are processed using a proprietary method optimized to protect and preserve the health of native bone cells to potentially enhance new bone formation and are designed to perform and handle in a manner similar to an autograft. ViBone® and ViBone® Moldable contain cancellous bone particles as well as demineralized cortical bone particles and fibers, delivering osteoinductive, osteoconductive, and osteogenic properties. Our DBM product offering includes BioSet®, BioReady®, and BioAdapt®, a DBM portfolio consisting of putty, putty with chips, strips, and boat configurations for various surgical applications while providing osteoinductive properties to aid in bone fusion. Our synthetic bone growth substitutes include nanOss® and nanOss® 3D Plus, a family of products that provide osteoconductive nano-structured hydroxyapatite (“HA”) and an engineered extracellular matrix bioscaffold collagen carrier that mimics a natural bone growth solution.
We have aligned our core business principles with a focused business strategy of digital health that we believe will advance and scale our business with the ultimate goal of delivering on our promise to provide better patient outcomes. To support this effort, we have assembled a digital health experienced executive leadership team to execute against our growth strategy, which includes leveraging our digital surgery platform to improve patient outcomes and drive adoption of our spinal hardware implants and biomaterials products, developing and commercializing an increased cadence of innovative spinal hardware implants and biomaterials products, validating our innovative products with clinical evidence, growing our international business, and strategically pursuing acquisition, license, and distribution opportunities.
We currently market and sell our products to hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, and healthcare providers in the United States and in more than 50 countries worldwide. Our U.S. sales organization consists of area sales directors and regional product specialists who oversee a network of independent spine and orthobiologics distributors who receive commissions for sales that they generate. Our international sales organization is composed of a sales management team that oversees a network of direct sales representatives, independent spine and orthobiologics distributors, and stocking distributors.
Acquisitions
See Note 7 - Business Combinations and Acquisitions
COVID-19
As discussed in more detail above in Part I, Item 1, “Business” of this Form 10-K, the coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic has adversely affected our business. The consequences of the outbreak and impact on the economy continue to evolve and the full extent of the impact is uncertain as of the date of this filing. The outbreak has already had, and continues to have, a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition and has significantly disrupted our operations.
Supplier Quality Issues
The Company has experienced various quality issues in its global supply chain, during the course of 2021. These quality issues include product delays, quality holds, and recalls. Given the Company’s focus on patient safety, this has resulted in the Company devoting significant time and resources to address these issues and prevent similar ones from occurring in the future. While the Company believes that these quality issues have been addressed there is the potential for such issues to arise in the future. These quality issues have adversely affected the Company’s results of operations for the year(s) ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) often requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect reported amounts. These estimates and judgments are based on historical experience and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Assumptions and judgments based on historical experience may provide reported results which differ from actual results; however, these assumptions and judgments historically have not varied significantly from actual experience and we therefore do not expect them to vary significantly in the future.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. Our estimates or judgments as of March 15, 2022 may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates or judgements made under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies which we believe are “critical,” or require the most use of estimates and judgment, relate to the following items presented in our financial statements: (1) Excess and Obsolete Inventory Valuation; (2) Accounts Receivable Allowances; (3) Long-Lived Assets; (4) Revenue Recognition; (5) Warrant Valuation; (6) Income Taxes; (7) Contingent Consideration Valuation and (8) Non-controlling interest.
Excess and Obsolete Inventory Valuation. Our calculation of the amount of inventory that is excess, obsolete, or will expire prior to sale has two components: 1) a consumption based component that compares historical sales to inventory quantities on hand; and 2) for expiring inventory we assesses the risk related to inventory that is near expiration by analyzing historical expiration trends to project inventory that will expire prior to being sold. Our demand-based consumption model assumes that inventory will be sold on a first-in-first-out basis. Our metal inventory does not expire and can be re-sterilized and sold; however, we assess quantities on hand, historical sales, projected sales, projected consumption, the number of forecasted years, safety stock and those products we have determined to sunset when calculating the estimate.
Accounts Receivable Allowances. We maintain the allowance for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. The allowance represents the current estimate of lifetime expected credit losses over the remaining duration of existing accounts receivable considering current market conditions and supportable forecasts when appropriate. The estimate is a result of our ongoing evaluation of collectability, customer creditworthiness, historical levels of credit losses, and future expectations. Write-off activity and recoveries for the years were not material.
Long-Lived Assets. We periodically review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount to the net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. An impairment loss would be recorded for the excess of net carrying value over the fair value of the asset impaired. The fair value is estimated based on expected discounted future cash flows or other methods such as orderly liquidation value. The results of impairment tests are subject to management’s estimates and assumptions of projected cash flows and operating results. Changes in assumptions or market conditions could result in a change in estimated future cash flows and the likelihood of materially different reported results. Because our forecasted cash flow is negative, long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets subject to amortization were impaired and written down to their estimated fair values in 2021 and 2020.
Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue upon transfer of control of promised products in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for those products. The Company typically transfers control at a point in time upon shipment or delivery of the implants for direct sales, or upon implantation for sales of consigned inventory. The customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits from, the implant at the time the implant is shipped, delivered, or implanted, respectively based on the terms of the contract.
The Company’s performance obligations consist mainly of transferring control of implants identified in the contracts. The Company’s transaction price is generally fixed. Any discounts or rebates are estimated at the inception of the contract and recognized as a reduction of the revenue. Some of the Company’s contracts offer assurance-type warranties in connection with the sale of a product to a customer. Assurance-type warranties provide a customer with assurance that the related product will function as the parties intended because it complies with agreed-upon specifications. Such warranties do not represent a separate performance obligation and are not material to the consolidated financial statements.
Warrant Valuation. The Company accounts for its warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants did not meet the criteria for equity
classification and thus were recorded as liabilities. Since the warrants met the definition of a derivative in accordance with ASC 815, these warrants were measured at fair value at inception and will be remeasured at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” with changes in fair value recognized in earnings in the period of change. The Company determined the fair value of its warrants based on the Black Scholes Option Pricing Model.
Income Taxes. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred income taxes are recorded to reflect the tax consequences on future years for differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each year-end based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts which are more likely than not to be realized.
Contingent Consideration Valuation. We account for the contingent consideration related to the Holo Acquisition as a liability in accordance with the guidance of ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, because the contingent consideration represents a conditional obligation that has a fixed monetary value known at inception and we may settle by issuing a variable number of our equity shares. The liability is recorded at its fair value at inception and shall be marked to market subsequently at the end of each reporting period, with any change recognized in the current earnings.
Noncontrolling Interest. The Company's consolidated noncontrolling interest is comprised of INN. The Company evaluated whether noncontrolling interest is subject to redemption features outside of the Company's control. We classified noncontrolling interest that is currently redeemable for cash or probable of being redeemable for cash in the future in the mezzanine section of the consolidated balance sheet. Currently, the noncontrolling interest is not redeemable. It is only redeemable upon the occurrence of FDA approval and therefore will not be remeasured at each reporting period until approval is obtained.
Accounting Standard Update Considerations
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). The guidance provides simplifications of the accounting for convertible instruments and reduces the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models results in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current U.S. GAAP. The guidance is effective for public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 and it did not have an impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Off Balance-Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth, in both dollars and as a percentage of revenues, the results of our operations for the years indicated:
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenues. Our total revenues decreased $11.2 million, or 11.1%, to $90.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $101.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to continued decreased demand during the year as a result of the reduction in elective surgical procedures, the fact that the Cervalign® plate was not on the market for the majority of the year and continued headwind with CoFlex reimbursement.
Costs of Goods Sold. Costs of goods sold decreased $14.2 million, or 32.3%, to $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decline in cost of goods sold is driven by a decline in sales (as discussed above) and product mix changes within the hardware business. The decline was offset by a $3.0 million charge due to our inability to realize a supplier prepaid royalty, and continued refinement of our excess and obsolete reserve through product rationalization.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased $19.8 million, or 15.9%, to $104.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $124.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in general and administrative costs is driven by reduction in spending through the simplification of the distribution and administrative infrastructure, and reduction in spending.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased $1.9 million, or 16.2%, to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is the result of continued spend on new hardware product development along with continued R&D in the development of our digital health products, including FDA submissions and approvals.
Loss (Gain) on Acquisition Contingency. Gain on acquisition contingency of $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, represented the change in our estimate of obligation for future milestone payments for the Holo Surgical Acquisition. The change from period to period is a result of the change in assumptions that drive the estimate.
Asset Acquisition Expenses. Asset acquisition expenses decreased $22.9 million, or 24.1%, to $72.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $95.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense in 2021 is related to the purchase of 42% equity interest in INN, while the expense in 2020 was related to the purchase price of Holo Surgical.
Asset Impairment and Abandonments - Asset impairment and abandonments expenses decreased $2.6 million or 17.5% to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the decrease in instrument purchases during the course of 2021 off set by the impairment of system implementation costs which are ultimately impaired in the quarter they were purchased.
Transaction and Integration Expenses - Transaction and integration expenses decreased $1.2 million or 24.3% to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was caused by less acquisition activity throughout 2021 and the sale of the OEM business in 2020. Additionally in 2021 there was $2.1 million of expenses incurred related to the June 2021 financing.
Other Operating Income - Net - Other operating income, net was $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, related to the Company's inventory settlement with OEM which occurred in 2021.
Total Net Other Income. Total net other income, which includes interest expense, interest income, foreign exchange loss, and change in fair value of warrant liability, increased to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was caused by a decrease in the fair value of our warrant liability of $14.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, caused by the decline in our stock price over the course of 2021.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision). Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $0.9 million compared to an income tax benefit of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was 0.71% and 1.76% respectively. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily impacted by the non-deductible acquisition expenses and the change in fair value of the warrant liability, mainly offset by a valuation allowance, and the net change in uncertain tax positions. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily impacted by the non-deductible acquisition expenses and tax attributes, mainly offset by a valuation allowance, and the tax benefit recognized as a result of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) enacted by the United States Congress on March 27, 2020.
Discontinued Operations - Net loss from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $3.6 million due to the settlement of the OEM purchase agreement working capital dispute (See Note 5), compared to $160.4 million net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is when we sold the OEM business.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest - Net income from noncontrolling interest as of December 31, 2021, was $41.9 million due to the acquisition of INN and the related expensing of the IPR&D asset as it did not have technological feasibility and not yet approved by the FDA.
2020 Compared to 2019
Revenues. Our total revenues decreased $15.7 million, or 13.3%, to $101.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $117.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to decreased demand during the year as a result of the reduction in elective surgical procedures primarily related to COVID-19 impacting our business.
Costs of Goods Sold. Costs of goods sold increased $11.2 million, or 34.2%, to $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in costs of goods was primarily due to product mix, specifically hardware products.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased $11.0 million, or 8.1%, to $124.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $135.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in general and administrative expenses is primarily the result of $8.3 million of reduced spending on commission and distribution related to the decline in revenue.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased $4.9 million, or 29.0%, to $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in research and development expenses is the result of reduced spending on new product development, specifically external consultant and advisor expenses, due to our focus on the sale of the OEM Businesses during the third quarter of 2020, as well as the furlough of a portion of our research and development team during the second quarter of 2020.
Loss (Gain) on Acquisition Contingency. Loss on acquisition contingency of $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, represented the change in our estimate of obligation for future milestone payments to Holo Surgical for the asset acquisition closed on October 23, 2020, offset by gain on acquisition contingency of $1.1 million due to change of estimate in contingent considerations for Paradigm and Zyga. The gain on acquisition contingency of $76 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, was the result of an adjustment to our estimate of obligation for future milestone payments on the Paradigm and Zyga acquisitions.
Asset Acquisition Expenses. Asset acquisition expenses of $95.0 million were related to the Holo Surgical Acquisition. The total purchase price of Holo Surgical asset of $95 million was allocated to the net assets acquired based on their relative fair value as of the completion of the acquisition, primarily including the IPR&D related to Holo Surgical’s development of the HOLO™ platform and other intangible asset for assembled workforce. The HOLO™ platform has not yet reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future use; thus, the entire purchased IPR&D of $94.5 million was expensed immediately subsequent to the acquisition. Additionally, the intangible asset related to the assembled workforce of $0.5 million was immediately impaired together with other intangible assets in Q4 2020 due to the Company’s negative projected cash flow.
Asset Impairment and Abandonments. Asset impairment and abandonments of $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily the result of the impairment of the property and equipment. Asset impairment and abandonments was $97.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to the impairment of our long-lived and other intangible assets. During 2019, we concluded, through the ASC 350 valuation testing, that factors existed at year-end indicating that long-lived assets in the Spine segment of legacy RTI were indicating impairment. As a result, for the year
ended December 31, 2019, we recorded impairment charges to other intangible assets totaling $85.1 million, to property and equipment, totaling $11.7 million, and to right-of-use assets totaling $0.2 million. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2019, another $0.3 million in other intangible assets were disposed separately from the ASC 350 valuation testing.
Goodwill Impairment. Goodwill impairment was $140.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was recorded in our Spine segment as a result of the change in segment structure. There was no goodwill impairment for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Transaction and Integration Expenses. Transaction and integration expenses of $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of $2.4 million related to the purchase of Paradigm and $1.5 million of expenses associated with the acceleration of stock compensation expense related to the OEM employees, compared to $14.0 million of Paradigm acquisition costs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Total Net Other Income. Total net other income, which includes interest expense, interest income, and foreign exchange loss increased to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $39 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in total net other expense is primarily due to change in the foreign exchange gain and loss.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision). Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $3.5 million compared to an income tax provision of $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was 1.76% and (2.43%) respectively. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily impacted by the non-deductible acquisition expenses, mainly offset by a valuation allowance, and the tax benefit recognized as a result of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily impacted by the gain recognized on acquisition contingency and goodwill impairment, offset by the establishment of a full valuation allowance in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions.
Discontinued Operations. Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $160.4 million, including a gain on sale of the OEM Businesses of $209.8 million, transaction expenses of $23.6 million, and income taxes of $19.5 million. Net income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $37.1 million, net of $11.3 million of income tax benefit.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We utilize certain financial measures that are not calculated based on GAAP. Certain of these financial measures are considered “non-GAAP” financial measures within the meaning of Item 10 of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC. We believe that non-GAAP financial measures provide an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with the GAAP results, provide a more complete understanding of our results of operations and the factors and trends affected our business. These non-GAAP financial measures are also used by our management to evaluate financial results and to plan and forecast future periods. However, non-GAAP financial measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures used by us may differ from the non-GAAP measures used by other companies, including our competitors.
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented on a GAAP basis, we disclose non-GAAP net income applicable to common shares and non-GAAP gross profit adjusted for certain amounts. The calculation of the tax effect on the adjustments between GAAP net loss applicable to common shares and non-GAAP net income applicable to common shares is based upon our estimated annual GAAP tax rate, adjusted to account for items excluded from GAAP net loss applicable to common shares in calculating non-GAAP net income applicable to common shares. Reconciliations of
each of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures are included in the reconciliations below:
The following are explanations of the adjustments that management excluded as part of the non-GAAP measures for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019. Management removes the amount of these costs from our operating results to supplement a comparison to our past operating performance.
2021 Change in fair value of warrant liability - Other income related to the revaluation of our warrant liability, which was issued in June 2021.
2021 Bargain purchase gain - Gain related to our acquisition of Prompt Prototypes, LLC.
2021 Other operating income - Gain related to the Company's inventory settlement with OEM.
2021 Supplier prepayment write-off - Cost related to the write-off of prepaid royalty payments that the Company assessed would not be met in future years.
2021 and 2020 Severance and restructuring costs - 2021 costs relate to the reduction of our organizational structure, primarily driven by simplification of our Marquette, MI location. 2020 costs relate to the reduction of our
organizational structure, primarily driven by simplification of our international operating infrastructure, specifically our distribution model.
2021, 2020, and 2019 Loss /(Gain) on acquisition contingency - The 2021 gain on acquisition contingency relates to an adjustment to our estimate of obligation for future milestone payments on the Holo Surgical Acquisition. The loss on acquisition contingency for 2020 relates to an adjustment to our estimate of the obligation for future milestone payments on the Holo Surgical Acquisition; while the gain on acquisition contingency in 2019 relates to an adjustment to our estimate of the obligation for future milestone payments of the Paradigm and Zyga acquisition.
2021 and 2020 Asset acquisition expenses - The asset acquisition expenses related to the INN acquisition in 2021, and the Holo Surgical Acquisition in 2020 as the purchased IPR&D assets were immediately expensed as they had not yet reached technological feasibility.
2021, 2020, and 2019 Asset impairment and abandonments - These costs relate to asset impairment and abandonment of our property and equipment, lower distributions and ultimate discontinuation of our map3 implant and certain long-term assets at our U.S. facilities.
2019 Goodwill impairment - These costs relate to the goodwill impairment of our former Spine segment.
2021, 2020 and 2019 Inventory purchase price adjustment - These costs relate to the purchase price effects of acquired Paradigm and Zyga, respectively, inventory that was sold during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
2020 and 2019 Inventory write-off - These costs relate to an inventory write-off due to transition from an integrated manufacturing company to a distribution model and Cervalign® product recall in 2020, the rationalization of our international distribution infrastructure and an inventory write-off related to lower distributions and ultimate discontinuation of our map3 implant in 2019.
2021, 2020, and 2019 Transaction and integration expenses - These costs relate to issuance costs for the registered direct offering and professional fees associated with the acquisition of INN, Holo Surgical, Prompt Prototypes, LLC, purchase of Paradigm as well as the disposal of OEM Businesses in 2020.
2020 Restatement and investigation related costs - These costs relate to consulting and legal fees and settlement expenses incurred as a result of the restatement, regulatory, and related activities in 2020.
2020 Tax effect on new tax legislation - This adjustment represents charges relating to the Tax Legislation which was enacted on December 22, 2017.
2021, 2020 and 2019 Tax effect on other adjustments - These adjustment represent the tax effects of the non-gaap measures for the respective years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As the global outbreak of COVID-19 continue to rapidly evolve, it could continue to materially and adversely affect our revenues, financial condition, profitability, and cash flow for an indeterminate period of time.
Financing Activities
On February 15, 2022, we issued and sold in an underwritten public offering 43,478,264 shares of its common stock (or pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock in lieu thereof) and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,608,698 shares of common stock at a combined effective public offering price of $0.46 per share of common stock (or pre-funded warrant) and investor warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,608,698 shares at a strike price of $0.60 and exercisable over the next five years. The Company, also in connection with the offering, issued placement agent warrants to purchase an aggregate of up 2,608,696 shares of common stock at a strike price of $0.575 per share. We received net proceeds of $17.8 million from the offering after deducting investor and other filing fees of $2.2 million.
On June 14, 2021, we issued and sold in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 29,000,000 shares of our common stock and investor warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 29.0 million shares at a strike price of $1.725. The Company, also in connection with the direct offering, issued placement agent warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 1.7 million shares of our common stock at a strike price of $2.15625 per share. We received net proceeds of $45.8 million from the offering after deducting investor fees of $4.2 million.
On February 1, 2021, we closed a public offering and sold a total 28,700,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $1.50 per share, less the underwriter discounts and commissions. We received net proceeds of $40.5 million from the offering after deducting the underwriting discounts and commission of $4.0 million.
Commitments & Contingencies
As noted above, on July 20, 2020, pursuant to the OEM Purchase Agreement by and between the Company and the Buyer, the Company sold the OEM Businesses to Buyer and its affiliates for a purchase price of $440.0 million of cash, subject to certain adjustments. All adjustments have been made and settled as of December 31, 2021.
On March 8, 2019, pursuant to the Master Transaction Agreement, the Company acquired Paradigm in a cash and stock transaction valued at up to $300.0 million, consisting of $150.0 million on March 8, 2019, plus potential future milestone payments. Established in 2005, Paradigm’s primary product is the Coflex® Interlaminar Stabilization device, a differentiated and minimally invasive motion preserving stabilization implant that is FDA premarket approved for the treatment of moderate to severe lumbar spinal stenosis in conjunction with decompression.
Under the terms of the agreement, the Company paid $100.0 million in cash and issued 10,729,614 shares of the Company’s common stock. The shares of Company common stock issued on March 8, 2019, were valued based on the volume weighted average closing trading price for the five trading days prior to the date of execution of the definitive agreement, representing $50.0 million of value. In addition, the Company was required to pay up to an additional $150.0 million in a combination of cash and Company common stock based on a revenue earnout consideration. Subsequently to December 31, 2021, this amount has been reduced to $45 million as certain milestones were not achieved. Further, pursuant to the Master Transaction Agreement, we will be obligated to pay some or all of the milestone payments thereunder that remain unpaid - whether or not we have achieved the milestones - upon a change in control of our company prior to December 31, 2022. Based on a probability weighted model, the Company estimates a contingent liability related to the revenue based earnout of zero.
The following table provides a summary of our operating lease obligations and other significant obligations as of December 31, 2021.
(1)These represent our operating lease commitments including the commitments related to the San Diego Lease.
(2)These amounts consist of contractual obligations for capital expenditures, annual minimums with suppliers, and certain open purchase orders with Aziyo.
(3)These amounts relate to the future milestone payments related to the Holo Surgical acquisition and the forward contracts related to the INN acquisition.
Working capital comparison 2021 Compared to 2020
Our working capital at December 31, 2021 decreased $5.7 million to $51.6 million from $57.4 million at December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the decrease in sales period over period. As of December 31, 2021, we had $51.3 million of cash and cash equivalents. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used approximately $51.8 million of cash in its operations, primarily related to the continued growth within the digital surgery strategy.
At December 31, 2021, we had 77 days of revenues outstanding in trade accounts receivable, a decrease of 21 days compared to December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to improved collection efforts in addition to reduced sales as compared to the prior period.
At December 31, 2021, excluding the purchase accounting step-up of Paradigm inventory, we had 424 days of inventory on hand, an increase of 206 days compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in inventory days is primarily due to the continued purchase of implants during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. We believe that our inventory levels will be adequate to support our on-going operations for the next twelve months.
We had $51.3 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, our foreign subsidiaries held $2.6 million in cash. We intend to indefinitely reinvest the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. If we were to repatriate indefinitely reinvested foreign funds, we would not be subject to additional U.S. federal income tax, however, we would be required to accrue and pay any applicable withholding tax and U.S. state income tax liabilities. We do not believe that this policy of indefinitely reinvesting the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries will have a material adverse effect on the business as a whole.
OEM Transaction
In connection with the Transactions on July 20, 2020, the Company (i) paid in full its $80 million revolving credit facility under that certain Credit Agreement dated as of June 5, 2018, by and among Surgalign Spine Technologies, Inc. (formerly known as RTI Surgical, Inc.), as a borrower, Pioneer Surgical Technology, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary, as a borrower, the other loan parties thereto as guarantors, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender and as administrative agent for the JPM Lenders, as amended (the “2018 Credit Agreement”); (ii) terminated the 2018 Credit Agreement, (iii) paid in full its $100 million term loan and $30 million incremental term loan commitment under that certain Second Lien Credit Agreement, dated as of March 8, 2019, by and among Surgalign Spine Technologies, Inc., as borrower, the lenders party thereto from time to time and Ares Capital Corporation, as administrative agent for the other lenders party thereto, as amended (the “2019 Credit Agreement”); and (iv) terminated the 2019 Credit Agreement. Additionally, the Company redeemed all of the outstanding shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
As discussed in Note 25, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) has an active investigation that remains ongoing. The Company continue to cooperate with the SEC in relation to its investigation. Based on current information available to the Company, the impact associated with SEC investigation cannot be reasonably estimated. Refer to Note 24 for further discussion on the settlement related to the Lowry Action.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. The going concern basis of presentation assumes that we will continue in operation one year after the date these financial statements are issued, and we will be able to realize our assets and discharge our liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $51.3 million and an accumulated deficit of $569.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a loss from continuing operations of $122.9 million and a net loss applicable to Surgalign Holdings, Inc. of $84.7 million. The Company has incurred losses from operations in the previous two fiscal years and did not generate positive cash flows from operations in fiscal year 2021 nor in 2020.
On February 15, 2022, we issued and sold in an underwritten public offering 43,478,264 shares of its common stock (or pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock in lieu thereof) and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,608,698 shares of common stock at a combined effective public offering price of $0.46 per share of common stock (or pre-funded warrant) and investor warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 32,608,698 at a strike price of $0.60 and exercisable over the next five years. The Company, also in connection with the offering, issued placement agent warrants to purchase an aggregate of up 2,608,696 shares of common stock at a strike price of $0.575 per share. We received net proceeds of $17.8 million from the offering after deducting investor and other filing fees of $2.2 million.
On June 14, 2021, we issued and sold in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 29,000,000 shares of our common stock and investor warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 29.0 million shares at a strike price of $1.725. The Company, also in connection with the direct offering, issued placement agent warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 1.7 million shares of our common stock at a strike price of $2.15625 per share. We received net proceeds of $45.8 million from the offering after deducting investor fees of $4.2 million.
On February 1, 2021, we closed a public offering and sold a total 28,700,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $1.50 per share, less the underwriter discounts and commissions. We received net proceeds of $40.5 million from the offering after deducting the underwriting discounts and commission of $4.0 million.
The Company is projecting it will continue to generate significant negative operating cash flows over the next 12-months and beyond. In management's evaluation of the going concern we considered the following i) continued COVID-19 uncertainties; ii) negative cash flows that are projected over the next 12-month period; iii) uncertainty regarding potential settlements related to ongoing litigation and regulatory investigations; and iv) approximately $25.6 million of the total contingent consideration of $51.9 million are expected to become due to the former owners of Holo Surgical if certain milestones are met over the next 12 months which would be paid in cash; v) total payments of $10.3 million at fair value for INN related milestones are expected to be paid in cash when milestones are achieved in the future; and vi) seller notes in the amount of $10.0 million a fair value due to the seller of INN on December 31, 2024; and vii) various supplier minimum purchase agreements. The Company’s operating plan for the next 12-month period also includes continued investments in its product pipeline including both within digital health and hardware and biologics, which will necessitate additional financing. In addition to these efforts the Company will need continued capital and cash flows to fund the future operations through 2022 and beyond. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the United States and worldwide. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s on-going cash requirements through 2022, the Company will be required to scale back operations, reduce research and development expenses, and postpone, as well as suspend capital expenditures, in order to preserve liquidity. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company is able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
In consideration of the inherent risks and uncertainties and the Company’s forecasted negative cash flows as described above, management has concluded that substantial doubt exists with respect to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued. Management continually evaluates plans to raise additional debt and/or equity financing and will attempt to curtail discretionary expenditures in the future, if necessary, however, in consideration of the risks and uncertainties mentioned, such plans cannot be considered probable of occurring at this time.
The recoverability of a major portion of the recorded asset amounts shown in the Company’s accompanying consolidated balance sheets is dependent upon continued operations of the Company, which in turn is dependent upon the Company’s ability to meet its funding requirements on a continuous basis, to maintain existing financing and to succeed in its future operations. The Company’s consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue in existence.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our cost of labor, equipment and processing tools and supplies. We do not believe that the relatively low rates of inflation experienced in the United States since the time we began operations have had any material effect on our business.