Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and other information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the cautionary note regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, you should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Sorrento Therapeutics, Inc. (Nasdaq: SRNE), together with its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our”) is a clinical stage and commercial biopharmaceutical company focused on delivering innovative and clinically meaningful therapies to address unmet medical needs.
At our core, we are antibody-centric and leverage our proprietary G-MAB™ library and targeted delivery modalities to generate the next generation of cancer therapeutics. Our fully human antibodies include PD-1, PD-L1, CD38, CD47, BCMA, CTLA-4, CD123, CD47, LAG3, ROR1, VEGFR2, CCR2 and CD137 and SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies, among others. We also have programs assessing the use of our technologies and products in autoimmune, inflammatory, viral and neurodegenerative diseases.
Our vision is to leverage these antibodies in conjunction with proprietary targeted delivery modalities to generate the next generation of cancer therapeutics. These modalities include proprietary chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy (“CAR-T”), dimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy (“DAR-T™”), antibody drug conjugates (“ADCs”), lymphatic drug targeting (SOFUSA®), as well as bispecific antibody approaches. We acquired SOFUSA, a revolutionary drug delivery technology, in July 2018, which delivers biologics directly into the lymphatic system to potentially achieve improved efficacy and reduce adverse effects compared to standard parenteral immunotherapy. Additionally, our majority-owned subsidiary, Scilex Holding Company (“Scilex Holding”), acquired the assets of Semnur Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Semnur”) in March 2019. Semnur’s SEMDEXATM (“SP-102”) compound has the potential to become the first U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”)-approved epidural steroid product for the treatment of sciatica. In response to the global SARS-CoV-2 (“COVID-19”) pandemic, we are utilizing the Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (“BTK”) inhibitor (Abivertinib, acquired from ACEA Therapeutics, Inc.) to treat the cytokine storm associated with a COVID-19 infection. We are also internally developing and conducting clinical studies for potential coronavirus antiviral therapies and vaccines, including COVI-MSCTM, COVI-AMG™, COVIDROPSTM, and COVISHIELDTM, and diagnostic test solutions, such as COVISTIX™ and COVITRACK™.
With each of our clinical and preclinical programs, we aim to tailor our therapies to treat specific stages in the evolution of a disease, from elimination to equilibrium and escape. In addition, our objective in our immuno-oncology programs is to focus on tumors that are resistant to current treatments and where we can design focused trials based on a genetic signature or biomarker to ensure patients have the best chance of a durable and significant response. We have several immuno-oncology programs that are in or near to entering the clinic. These include cellular therapies, oncolytic viruses (SeprehvecTM) and a palliative care program targeted to treat intractable pain in advanced cancer (resiniferatoxin, or “RTX”). Our cellular therapy programs focus on our allogeneic DAR-T platform for adoptive cellular immunotherapy to treat both solid and liquid tumors.
From the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, our mission has been to leverage our deep expertise in developing targeted antibodies for cancer immunotherapy to create best-in-category treatments and diagnostics to ease suffering and assist in the global response to COVID-19. We have leveraged, and continue to leverage, our G-MAB library and antibody development engineering capabilities to advance promising diagnostics and neutralizing antibody candidates to test for and treat COVID-19 and the immune reactions associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
STI-2020, or plutavimab, is a highly potent neutralizing antibody (“nAb”) to COVID-19 that is currently being developed for intranasal (“IN”) instillation as STI-2099, or COVIDROPS. In preclinical studies, STI-2020/2099 was highly effective against the original Washington strain and early variants of concern (“VoCs”), including the delta VoC. STI-2020, the intravenous (“IV”) formulation and COVIDROPS were both cleared by the FDA for Phase I healthy volunteer studies which were completed and demonstrated that the nAbs were well-tolerated (IV up to 200 mg and intranasal up to 60 mg) without dose limiting toxicity or severe or serious adverse events (“AEs”). Most AEs were mild and unrelated. Phase II studies of COVIDROPS in outpatients with COVID-19 have begun enrollment in Mexico, the United Kingdom and the U.S. The United Kingdom study reached the planned interim analysis threshold in the first half of January 2022. The study in Mexico began pediatric enrollment in early 2022. We are also
developing a broad-spectrum neutralizing antibody, STI-9167 (COVISHIELD), to be formulated both for IV and IN administration. STI-9167 (IV formulation) and STI-9199 (IN formulation using STI-9167 drug substance) have not only been broadly effective in preclinical studies for prior VoCs but are highly potent against the Omicron VoC. A healthy subject study for STI-9167/9199 is expected to begin in the first quarter of 2022 with Phase II studies of COVISHIELD to follow.
We have also developed two promising potential rescue treatments with Abivertinib (STI-5656), an oral next generation dual epidermal growth factor receptor (“EGFR”) (including mutant forms)/BTK inhibitor, or epidermal growth factor receptor/BTK inhibitor to treat hospitalized COVID-19 patients and COVI-MSC™ (samtonadstrocel or STI-8282), human allogeneic adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells for patients suffering from COVID-19-induced acute respiratory distress (“ARD”). Both have been cleared by the FDA and Abivertinib has completed Phase II clinical studies in the U.S. and Brazil of Abivertinib to treat COVID-19-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (“ARDS”). While all patient groups improved with treatment, the U.S. study identified an At-Risk population who were the best responders: those who required oxygen supplementation with non-invasive ventilation or high flow oxygen at baseline. Although the Brazil study did not enroll a population as sick as those in the U.S. study, the results were similarly supportive. In the U.S. study, the At-Risk patients were discharged on average two days sooner from the intensive care unit. In both studies, there was nearly a 50% reduction of death and/or mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation by day 29. This data was used to power a pivotal Phase III Abivertinib study which is expected to begin enrollment in the second quarter of 2022. Two separate Phase II COVI-MSC studies are currently enrolling in Brazil and the U.S. in patients with COVID-19-induced ARDS. We are also working with Brazilian regulators (ANVISA) to conduct a COVID-19 study with COVI-MSCs in pulmonary long-haul patients post-recovery from the acute infection.
In furtherance of our goal to enable early detection and treatment across the entire continuum of COVID-19 solutions, we are further developing a number of highly sensitive and rapid diagnostic tests. COVISTIX™ is a lateral flow antigen test that uses a proprietary platinum-based colloid and antibody combination, resulting in high sensitivity and accuracy. This is a simple and rapid (15-minute) test with a shallow nasal swab and is designed for point-of-care and at-home use. This product has been approved under emergency use authorization for use in Mexico and Brazil as a point-of-care test and has also received its Conformitè Europëenne (“CE”) mark.
We previously have reported early data from Phase I trials of our carcinoembryonic antigen (“CEA”)-directed CAR-T program. We treated five patients with stage 4, unresectable adenocarcinoma (four with pancreatic cancer and one with colorectal cancer) and CEA-positive liver metastases with anti-CEA CAR-T. During 2021, we decided to pivot away from an autologous CAR-T platform to allogeneic DAR-T and successfully submitted an Investigational New Drug application (“IND”) for our CD38 DAR-T candidate for relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (“RRMM”). We anticipate the first patient enrollment in the first quarter of 2022.
With respect to Abivertinib for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), our oral small molecule combined EGFR/BTK inhibitor, a final imaging read of Phase III data is pending with additional follow-up from patients who continued on treatment in the years since the last update presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2019 Annual Meeting. It is anticipated that a pre-new drug application (“NDA”) meeting will be requested to discuss the pathway to a planned NDA filing. Finally, we intend to start studies in castrate resistant prostate cancer with Abivertinib in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2022 and in Brazil in the second quarter of 2022.
With respect to our anti-CD38 ADC program, we began enrolling patients in the first quarter of 2021 in a Phase Ib ascending dose study for systemic Amyloid light-chain (“AL”) amyloidosis. We intend to start a new study to target RRMM in a partnership with Columbia University in the first quarter of 2022 and are planning collaborations with Columbia to target metastatic esophageal and lung cancer and with MD Anderson to treat T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (“T-ALL”).
Additionally, based upon our exclusive licensing arrangement with Mayo Clinic for its antibody-drug-nanoparticle albumin-bound (“ADNAB™”) platform, the next generation in ADC technology, we intend to file several INDs in 2022 to treat various cancer targets. We also have an ongoing partnership with Mayo Clinic, directed to the use of lymphatic delivery using a hollow core microneedle array device manufactured by our SOFUSA unit, to explore whether lymphatic delivery of products traditionally delivered by IV administration can improve the pharmacokinetic profile and efficacy while reducing their AE profile. We also have an active program using the SOFUSA delivery system to treat rheumatoid arthritis patients resistant to etanercept and expect to announce preliminary results from an ongoing study in the first quarter of 2022.
Broadly speaking, we believe we are among the world’s leading cellular therapy companies today due to our investments in technology and infrastructure, which have enabled significant progress in developing our next-generation non-viral, “off-the-shelf” allogeneic DAR-T solutions. DAR-T therapy can become a versatile drug product platform capable of delivering multiple targeted therapeutic approaches.
Outside of immuno-oncology programs, as part of our global aim to provide a wide range of therapeutic products to meet underserved markets, we have made investments in non-opioid pain management. These include RTX, a non-opioid naturally-occurring product that specifically targets transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (“TRPV1”). Depending on the site of injection, RTX can ablate or destroy targeted nerves (e.g., an epidural injection) or temporarily defunctionalize them (peripheral injections such as intra-articular). TRPV1 largely is responsible for the noxious chronic and inflammatory pain signaling that can occur post trauma but leaves other nerve functions intact. RTX has been granted orphan drug status for the treatment of intractable pain with end-stage or advanced cancer and two Phase Ib first-in-human trials (intrathecal and epidural routes) were completed. A Phase Ib trial studying the safety and efficacy of RTX to treat moderate to severe osteoarthritis (“OA”) knee pain was completed in early 2021 with one year follow-up data and preliminary results showed the potential for long-term efficacy with no dose-limiting toxicity. We have received clearance to proceed with Phase II clinical trials of RTX to treat severe cancer pain (epidural) and moderate-to-severe OA of the knee pain (intra-articular). The knee OA study began enrolling in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the epidural cancer pain study is expected to start enrolling in the first quarter of 2022.
Also, in this area, we have developed in-house and acquired proprietary technologies to responsibly develop next generation, branded pharmaceutical products to better manage patients’ medical conditions, maximize the quality of life of patients and assist healthcare providers. The flagship product of our subsidiary, Scilex Pharmaceuticals Inc. (“Scilex Pharma”), ZTlido® (lidocaine topical system 1.8%) (“ZTlido”) is a next-generation lidocaine delivery system which was approved by the FDA for the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia, a severe neuropathic pain condition, in February 2018, and was commercially launched in October 2018. Scilex Pharma has now built a full commercial organization, which includes sales, marketing, market access and medical affairs.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
We are closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we took proactive action from the earliest signs of the outbreak, including implementing social distancing policies at our facilities, facilitating remote working arrangements and imposing employee travel restrictions.
The extent to which COVID-19 may impact our business, clinical trials and sales of ZTlido will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease.
Recent Developments
On February 1, 2022, we completed the acquisition of Virex Health, Inc. (“Virex”) pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Virex Merger Agreement”), dated as of January 14, 2022, among us, Virex, VH Merger Sub I, Inc., our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger Sub”), VH Merger Sub II, LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary (“Merger LLC”), and Fortis Advisors LLC, as representative of the equityholders of Virex (the “Stockholders’ Representative”). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub was merged with and into Virex (the “Initial Merger”), with Virex continuing as the surviving corporation in such merger, and subsequent to the Initial Merger, Virex was merged with and into Merger LLC (the “Subsequent Merger”), with Merger LLC surviving as our wholly owned subsidiary. At the effective time of the Subsequent Merger, the name of Merger LLC as the surviving company in the Subsequent Merger was changed to Virex Health, LLC.
Upon completion of the Initial Merger, the equityholders of Virex (the “Virex Equityholders”) became entitled to receive the following amounts (to be paid in cash and stock as further described below): (i) $12,000,000, as such amount was adjusted to $11,566,275 (and may be further adjusted post-closing) pursuant to the terms of the Virex Merger Agreement for indebtedness, transaction expenses and cash (the “Closing Consideration”) and (ii) subject to achievement of certain regulatory milestones, up to $10,000,000 in additional consideration (the “Milestone Payment” and together with the Closing Consideration, the “Merger Consideration”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Merger Consideration shall be paid as follows: (i) 59% in cash; and (ii) 41% in shares of our common stock. Upon completion of the Initial Merger, the Virex Equityholders became entitled to receive an aggregate of $6,824,126 in cash and an aggregate of 1,281,662 shares of our common stock based on a price per share equal to $3.70 (representing the volume weighted average closing price per share of our common stock for the eleven consecutive trading days ending on the date that was three trading days prior to the closing date). Ten percent of the Closing Consideration was deposited into an escrow account (in the form of cash and stock) as partial security for the indemnification obligations of the Virex Equityholders under the Merger Agreement and $150,000 was set aside for expenses that may be incurred by the Stockholders’ Representative.
At any time shares of our common stock are issued in respect of a Milestone Payment, the number of shares to be issued will be based on a price per share equal to the volume weighted average closing price per share of our common stock for the eleven
consecutive trading days ending on the date that is three trading days prior to the applicable issuance date. The aggregate number of shares of our common stock issuable pursuant to the Virex Merger Agreement as Merger Consideration shall not exceed 19.99% of the total number of shares of our common stock issued and outstanding at the closing date.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of our operating results explains material changes in our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We operate in two operating and reportable segments, Sorrento Therapeutics and Scilex.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues. Revenues were $52.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues in our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased from $13.7 million to $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year and were primarily attributed to higher contract manufacturing service revenues.
Revenues in our Scilex segment increased from $26.3 million to $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year due to increased product sales of ZTlido.
Cost of revenues. Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $13.0 million and $9.9 million, respectively, and relate to product sales, the sale of customized reagents and providing contract manufacturing services. The costs generally include employee-related expenses, including salary and benefits, direct materials and overhead costs including rent, depreciation, utilities, facility maintenance and insurance.
Cost of revenues for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by $1.6 million and was driven by the increase in revenues.
Cost of revenues for our Scilex segment increased by $1.5 million as compared to the prior year and was attributable to higher sales volumes of ZTlido.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $206.9 million and $111.3 million, respectively. Research and development expenses primarily include expenses associated with isolating and advancing human antibody drug candidates derived from our libraries, as well as advancing our RTX, COVID-19, SP-102, Oncolytic Virus, antibody drug conjugate (“ADC”) and oncology programs. Such expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, clinical development expenses, preclinical testing, lab supplies, consulting costs, depreciation and other expenses.
Research and development expenses for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by $96.3 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily driven by higher headcount and increased clinical development costs spent on advancing our various research and development programs.
Research and development expenses for our Scilex segment decreased by $0.8 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily driven by lower clinical development costs.
We expect research and development expenses for both segments to increase as we: (i) advance various product candidates into clinical trials and pursue other development, acquire, develop and manufacture clinical trial materials and increase other regulatory operating activities, (ii) incur incremental expenses associated with our efforts to further advance a number of potential product candidates into preclinical development activities, (iii) continue to identify and advance a number of fully human therapeutic antibody and ADC preclinical product candidates, (iv) incur higher salary, lab supply and infrastructure costs in connection with supporting all of our programs, (v) invest in our joint ventures, collaborations or other third party agreements, and (vi) expand our corporate infrastructure.
Acquired in-process research and development expenses. Acquired in-process research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021was $24.2 million. These expenses related to the Aardvark Asset Purchase Agreement for $5.0 million and the entry into the Mount Sinai License Agreement for $7.5 million during the period as further described in Note 7 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These expenses also related to $10.2 million related to our investment in Deverra Therapeutics, Inc. during the period as further described in Note 5 of the
accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The remainder related to our investments in various licensing arrangements entered into during the period. We recognized $43.0 million of acquired in-process research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, which were primarily related to various licensing arrangements entered into during the year, as well as other investments in new technologies and preclinical programs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $196.9 million and $116.2 million, respectively and consisted primarily of salaries and personnel-related expenses, stock-based compensation expense, professional fees, infrastructure expenses, legal and other general corporate expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment increased by approximately $73.1 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily attributed to higher headcount, professional fees and stock-based compensation expense as compared to the same period of the prior year.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for our Scilex segment increased by approximately $7.6 million as compared to the prior fiscal year and were primarily attributed to higher professional fees.
Loss on derivative liabilities. Loss on derivative liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.3 million compared to a loss of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on contingent consideration. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a loss on contingent consideration and acquisition consideration payable of approximately $9.2 million resulting from the change in fair value of the Earn-Out Consideration associated with the acquisition of ACEA Therapeutics, Inc. (“ACEA”). (See Note 3 and Note 7 of the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not record any loss or gain on contingent consideration.
There was no gain or loss on derivative liabilities for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment during the year ended December 31, 2021. Gain on derivative liabilities for our Sorrento Therapeutics segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $5.8 million and was primarily attributed to the full repayment of the term loans provided by certain funds and accounts managed by Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. (the “Term Loans”) during 2020 as further described in Note 8 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Loss on derivative liabilities for our Scilex segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $0.3 million and was primarily attributed to revised probabilities and revised sales forecasts as further described in Note 3 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Gain on derivative liabilities for our Scilex segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $0.8 million and was primarily attributed to revised probabilities and revised sales forecasts as further described in Note 3 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Loss on Marketable Investments. Loss on marketable investments reflects $39.8 million in unrealized losses related to the change in fair value of our shares of Celularity Inc. and $24.1 million of realized gains from the sale of our shares of ImmunityBio, Inc. during the year ended December 31, 2021. We recorded approximately $0.7 million in realized gains related to other investments during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not have any marketable investments.
Scilex Notes principal increase. Actual cumulative net sales of ZTlido from the issue date of the Scilex Notes through December 31, 2021 did not equal or exceed 95% of a predetermined target sales threshold for such period, which resulted in a $28.0 million increase in the principal amount of the Scilex Notes, effective February 15, 2022. As a result, we recorded the increase of $28.0 million in principal and non-operating expense at December 31, 2021.
Interest expense. Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $10.2 million and $20.2 million, respectively. The decrease resulted primarily from a decrease in interest expense associated with the term loans with Oaktree Capital Management L.P. and affiliates, which were fully repaid in the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income was immaterial for both periods.
Loss on debt extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.7 million and was attributable to the repurchases of the outstanding principal on the Scilex Notes, and was partially offset by short-term debt forgiveness. Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.9 million and was attributed to the repayments of outstanding principal on the Term Loans.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $33.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to deferred tax liabilities recognized from the ACEA acquisition resulting in a release of valuation allowance in 2021 compared to 2020.
Loss on equity method investments. Loss on equity investments for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million compared to a loss on equity investments of $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss was attributed to the recognition of our portion of the net loss or net income from our equity method investments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded an impairment loss of approximately $3.8 million related to an equity method investment for which we determined the investment’s value was no longer supportable. (See Note 5 of the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Net loss. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $429.1 million as compared to a net loss of $314.4 million for 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to the discussion under the heading “Results of Operations- Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019” in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 19, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $36.7 million in cash and cash equivalents attributable in part to proceeds from the following debt and equity financing arrangements:
Debt Financings
ACEA Significant Debt Arrangements
At the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 2, 2021, by and among us, AT Merger Sub, Inc., an exempted company incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands and our now wholly owned subsidiary, ACEA, and Fortis Advisors LLC, as representative of the shareholders of ACEA and as a result thereof, on June 1, 2021, we, as the indirect parent to Hangzhou ACEA Pharmaceutical Research Co., Ltd. (“ACEA Hangzhou”) and Zhejiang ACEA Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (“ACEA Zhejiang”), each of which are indirect subsidiaries of ACEA, succeeded to the financial obligations of ACEA Hangzhou and ACEA Zhejiang, each of whom are parties to agreements with ACEA Bio (Hangzhou) Co., Ltd. (“ACEA Bio”) (an entity unrelated to ACEA Hangzhou and ACEA Zhejiang) as set forth below.
Pursuant to that certain contract, dated as of August 15, 2018, between ACEA Hangzhou and ACEA Bio, ACEA Hangzhou borrowed an aggregate of approximately $29.1 million (184,600,000 RMB) from ACEA Bio in a series of loans thereunder (the “Contract”). Each loan under the Contract is for a period of 10 years and the maturity dates thereof range from August 15, 2023 to August 15, 2028. Each loan is interest free for the first five years, after which time the interest rate is 5.39% per annum.
The outstanding principal amount under the Contract as of December 31, 2021 is $29.1 million. As a part of the preliminary purchase price allocation, we estimated the fair value of the Contract to be approximately $17.1 million.
2018 Oaktree Term Loan Agreement
In November 2018, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with certain funds and accounts managed by Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. (collectively, the “Lenders”) and Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC, as administrative and collateral agent, for an initial term loan of $100.0 million (the “Initial Loan”). In May 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement, under which terms the Lenders agreed to make available to us $20.0 million (collectively, with the Initial Loan, the “Term Loans”). During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $120.0 million of the outstanding principal under the Term Loans plus approximately $9.4 million of related prepayment premium, exit fees and accrued interest thereon.
Scilex Notes
Scilex Pharma entered into purchase agreements (the “2018 Purchase Agreements”) with certain investors (collectively, the “Scilex Note Purchasers”) and us. Pursuant to the 2018 Purchase Agreements, on September 7, 2018, Scilex Pharma issued and sold to
the Scilex Note Purchasers senior secured notes due 2026 in an aggregate principal amount of $224.0 million (the “Scilex Notes”) for an aggregate purchase price of $140.0 million (the “Scilex Notes Offering”). In connection with the Scilex Notes Offering, Scilex Pharma also entered into an Indenture (the “Indenture”) governing the Scilex Notes with U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association, as trustee and collateral agent, and us. Pursuant to the Indenture, we agreed to irrevocably and unconditionally guarantee, on a senior unsecured basis, the punctual performance and payment when due of all obligations of Scilex Pharma under the Indenture.
We identified a number of embedded derivatives that require bifurcation from the Scilex Notes and were separately accounted for in the consolidated financial statements as derivative liabilities. Certain of these embedded features include default interest provisions, contingent rate increases, contingent put options, optional and automatic acceleration provisions and tax indemnification obligations. The fair value of the derivative liabilities associated with the Scilex Notes was estimated using the discounted cash flow method under the income approach combined with a Monte Carlo simulation model. This involves significant Level 3 inputs and assumptions, including a risk adjusted net sales forecast, an effective debt yield, estimated marketing approval probabilities for SP-103 and an estimated probability of an initial public offering by Scilex Holding that satisfies certain valuation thresholds and timing considerations. We re-evaluate this assessment each reporting period.
The 2018 Purchase Agreements and Indenture provide that, upon the occurrence of an event of default, the lenders thereunder may, by written notice to us, declare all of the outstanding principal and interest under the Indenture immediately due and payable. For purposes of the Indenture, an event of default includes, among other things, (i) a failure to pay any amounts when due under the Indenture, (ii) a breach or other failure to comply with the covenants (including financial, notice and reporting covenants) under the Indenture, (iii) a failure to make any payment on, or other event triggering an acceleration under, other material indebtedness of us, and (iv) the occurrence of certain insolvency or bankruptcy events (both voluntary and involuntary) involving us or certain of our subsidiaries. We are subject to certain customary default clauses under the Indenture and are in compliance with the event of default clauses under the Indenture.
On December 14, 2020, we, Scilex Pharma, U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association, as trustee (the “Trustee”) and collateral agent, and the beneficial owners of the Scilex Notes and the Scilex Note Purchasers entered into a Consent Under and Amendment No. 3 to Indenture and Letter of Credit (the “Amendment”), which amended: (i) the Indenture, and (ii) the Letter of Credit.
On December 14, 2020, and in connection with the Amendment, the aggregate $45.0 million in restricted funds held in previously established reserve and collateral accounts were released and Scilex Pharma utilized such funds to repurchase an aggregate of $45.0 million in principal amount of the Scilex Notes. Scilex Pharma also repurchased $20.0 million in principal amount of the Scilex Notes in each of December 2020, February 2021 and April 2021.
Actual cumulative net sales of ZTlido from the issue date of the Scilex Notes through December 31, 2021 did not equal or exceed 95% of a predetermined target sales threshold for such period, which resulted in a $28.0 million increase in the principal amount of the Scilex Notes, effective February 15, 2022. As a result, we recorded the increase of $28.0 million in principal and non-operating expense at December 31, 2021.
Effective February 14, 2022, Scilex Pharma issued a draw notice to us under the Letter of Credit as required under the terms of the Indenture because actual cumulative net sales of ZTlido from the issue date of the Scilex Notes through December 31, 2021 were less than a specified sales threshold for such period, and we paid to Scilex Pharma $35,000,000 in a single lump-sum amount as a subordinated loan. Per the terms of the Amendment, in February 2022, Scilex Pharma repurchased Scilex Notes from the holders thereof on a pro rata basis in an aggregate amount equal to the lesser of $20.0 million at a purchase price in cash equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof.
Bridge Loan Agreement
On February 16, 2022, we entered into a Bridge Loan Agreement between us, as borrower, and B. Riley Commercial Capital, LLC, as lender (the “Lender”), pursuant to which we borrowed $45.0 million from the Lender (the “Bridge Loan”). For services rendered in connection with originating and arranging the Bridge Loan, we agreed to pay to B. Riley Securities, Inc., an affiliate of the Lender, an upfront fee equal to four percent of the principal amount of the Bridge Loan. The Bridge Loan bears no interest and will mature on June 16, 2022. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an “Event of Default” under the Loan Agreement, the Bridge Loan shall bear interest at the rate of 15% per annum.
Marketable Investments
On March 9, 2021, NantKwest, Inc. and ImmunityBio completed their previously announced 100% stock-for-stock merger (the “ImmunityBio Merger”). The combined company operates under the name ImmunityBio, Inc. and its shares of common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on March 10, 2021 under the new ticker, “IBRX”. The former stockholders of ImmunityBio were entitled to receive 0.8190 shares of common stock of the combined company for each outstanding share of ImmunityBio common stock held immediately prior to the ImmunityBio Merger. Prior to the closing of the ImmunityBio Merger, we owned 10,000,000 shares of common stock of ImmunityBio, and we therefore received 8,190,000 shares of common stock of the post-merger company.
Prior to the ImmunityBio Merger, our investment in ImmunityBio was historically included as an equity investment in our consolidated balance sheets and accounted for as an equity security without a readily determinable fair value. As of the completion of the ImmunityBio Merger, we accounted for our investment in ImmunityBio as an equity investment with a readily determinable fair value and reclassified our investment in ImmunityBio to marketable investments within our consolidated balance sheets. The investment in ImmunityBio was classified as a current asset because the investment was liquidated to finance our current operations. In connection with the change in fair value of our investment in ImmunityBio, we recorded a realized gain on marketable investments of $24.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We sold 8,190,000 shares of ImmunityBio common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021 for net proceeds to us of $124.0 million. We had no remaining shares of ImmunityBio common stock as of December 31, 2021.
On July 16, 2021, Celularity Inc. (“Pre-Merger Celularity”), a company of which we held an equity interest, completed its previously announced merger with GX Acquisition Corp. (the “Celularity Merger”). Following the completion of the Celularity Merger, the combined, publicly traded company formerly known as GX Acquisition Corp. was renamed Celularity Inc. (“Celularity”) and its Class A common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market on July 19, 2021 under the ticker “CELU”. In connection with the Celularity Merger, all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock of Pre-Merger Celularity were converted into shares of Pre-Merger Celularity common stock and then each share of Pre-Merger Celularity common stock was converted into the right to receive shares of Class A common stock of the post-merger company. We received 19,922,124 shares of Class A common stock of the post-merger company in the Celularity Merger. We also purchased an aggregate of 500,000 shares of Class A common stock of Celularity for an aggregate purchase price of $5,000,000 in a private placement transaction that closed on July 16, 2021 concurrently with the closing of the Celularity Merger. Our investment in Celularity has historically been accounted for as an equity security without a readily determinable fair value. As of the trading commencement date, we account for our investment in Celularity as an equity security with a readily determinable fair value. As of December 31, 2021, we owned 20,422,124 shares of Class A common stock of Celularity. 19,922,124 shares of the Class A Common Stock of Celularity held by us are subject to transfer restrictions until the earliest to occur of (i) 365 days after July 16, 2021; (ii) the first day after the date on which the closing price of the Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after July 16, 2021; or (iii) the date on which Celularity completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of Celularity’s public shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A Common Stock for cash, securities or other property, subject to certain exceptions.
Equity Financings
At-the-Market Sales Agreement
On April 27, 2020, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, as sales agent (the “Agent”), pursuant to which we could offer and sell through or to the Agent up to $250.0 million in shares of its common stock (the “Shares”). On December 4, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 1 (the “December 2020 Amendment”) to the Sales Agreement, which amended the Sales Agreement to provide that we could offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Agent, up to an additional $450.0 million in shares of our common stock, such that we could offer and sell up to an aggregate of $700.0 million in shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement, as amended by the December 2020 Amendment (the “Original Amended Sales Agreement”).
On December 3, 2021, we amended and restated the Original Amended Sales Agreement to include Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., B. Riley Securities, Inc. and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC as additional sales agents for our “at the market offering” program (the “Amended and Restated Sales Agreement”).
On December 23, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 1 (the “December 2021 Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., B. Riley Securities, Inc. and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (the “Sales Agents”).
The December 2021 Amendment amended the Amended and Restated Sales Agreement to provide that we may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Sales Agents, as sales agents and/or principals, up to an additional $5,000,000,000 in shares of our common stock (the “Additional Shares”), such that we may offer and sell up to an aggregate of $5,442,943,290 in shares of our common stock (the “Offering”) pursuant to the Amended and Restated Sales Agreement, as amended by the December 2021 Amendment (the “Amended Sales Agreement”), inclusive of $442,943,290 in shares sold pursuant to the Original Amended Sales Agreement and the Amended and Restated Sales Agreement through December 22, 2021. Any Additional Shares offered and sold in the Offering will be issued pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR (the “Registration Statement”), which became automatically effective upon filing with the SEC on December 23, 2021. The Additional Shares may be offered only by means of a prospectus forming a part of the Registration Statement.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Amended Sales Agreement, each Sales Agent will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell the shares of our common stock from time to time, based upon our instructions. Under the Amended Sales Agreement, the Sales Agents may sell the shares of our common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
We have no obligation to sell any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Amended Sales Agreement, and may at any time suspend offers under the Amended Sales Agreement. The Offering will terminate upon (i) the election of the Sales Agents upon the occurrence of certain adverse events, (ii) three business days’ advance notice from us to the Sales Agents or a Sales Agent (with respect to itself) to us, or (iii) the sale of all $5,442,943,290.81 of shares of our common stock pursuant thereto.
Under the terms of the Amended Sales Agreement, the Sales Agents will be entitled to a commission at an initial fixed rate of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of shares of our common stock under the Amended Sales Agreement, which percentage may be adjusted (but not above 3.0%) based on the aggregate amount of securities sold by the Sales Agents pursuant to the Amended Sales Agreement.
We currently intend to use any additional net proceeds from the Offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which may include capital expenditures, research and development expenditures, regulatory affairs expenditures, clinical trial expenditures, acquisitions of new technologies and investments, business combinations and the repayment, refinancing, redemption or repurchase of indebtedness or capital stock. We also may use a portion of the net proceeds to repurchase or redeem a portion or all of the Scilex Notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 21,085,014 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Original Amended Sales Agreement and the Amended Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds to us of approximately $175.6 million.
Universal Shelf Registration Statement
On December 23, 2021, we filed an automatic universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “WKSI Shelf Registration Statement”) with the SEC as a well-known seasoned issuer as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act. The WKSI Shelf Registration Statement provides us with the ability to offer an indeterminate amount of securities, including equity and other securities as described in the WKSI Shelf Registration Statement. Pursuant to the WKSI Shelf Registration Statement, we may offer such securities from time to time and through one or more methods of distribution, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. Specific terms and prices will be determined at the time of each offering under a separate prospectus supplement, which will be filed with the SEC at the time of any offering. In connection with the WKSI Shelf Registration Statement, we entered into the Amended Sales Agreement (discussed above) and included in the WKSI Shelf Registration Statement a prospectus covering $5,000,000,000 of shares of our common stock issuable pursuant to the Amended Sales agreement.
Contingent Consideration
We have contingent consideration obligations in connection with certain acquisition and licensing transactions that are contingent upon achieving certain specified milestones or the occurrence of certain events, including those described within the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-K. Upon the achievement of such milestones or the occurrence of such events, we will be obligated to make certain cash or stock payments in accordance with the terms of such acquisition and license agreements.
Use of Cash
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. Net cash used for operating activities was $281.8 million for 2021 as compared to $159.5 million for 2020. Net cash used reflects the cash spent on our research activities and cash spent to support the commercial launch of our products.
We expect to continue to incur substantial and increasing losses and negative net cash flows from operating activities as we seek to expand and support our clinical and preclinical development and research activities, support the commercial launch of our products and fund our joint ventures, collaborations and other third-party agreements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was attributed to proceeds received of $124.8 million from sales of marketable investments. We also spent approximately $35.3 million related to various investments in new technologies and preclinical programs, $0.8 million in connection with the acquisition of ACEA, net of cash acquired, and approximately $8.9 million primarily attributed to expenditures on laboratory equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used by investing activities was $39.9 million. We invested approximately $31.1 million in licensing arrangements, invested approximately $2.3 million in new technologies and preclinical programs and spent approximately $6.5 million on equipment and building improvements.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $181.3 million for 2021 as compared to $174.2 million for 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $201.8 million from equity offerings, proceeds from short-term debt of $49.7 million and proceeds of $15.4 million from common stock issuances and warrant exercises. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repaid $45.9 million in principal amount of the Scilex Notes, of which $32.7 million was attributed to principal included within financing activities and $13.1 million was attributed to principal included in operating activities. We also repaid $53.0 million in other short-term debt. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $317.9 million from equity offerings, proceeds from short-term debt of $18.6 million and proceeds of $98.4 million from common stock issuances and warrant exercises. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid $120.0 million of outstanding principal under the Term Loans, paid $6.3 million of related exit and prepayment fees thereon, made payments of $69.8 million on the Scilex Notes and repaid $9.4 million in short-term debt. We also paid $55.0 million related to the Semnur Share Exchange as further described in Note 7 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Future Liquidity Needs. We have principally financed our operations through underwritten public offerings and private debt and equity financings, as we have not generated any significant product related revenue from our principal operations to date. We will need to raise additional capital before we exhaust our current cash resources in order to continue to fund our research and development, including our plans for clinical and preclinical trials and new product development, as well as to fund operations generally. We will seek to raise additional funds through various potential sources, such as equity and debt financings or through corporate collaboration, grant agreements and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs. These conditions, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. If we issue additional equity securities to raise funds, the ownership percentage of existing stockholders would be reduced. New investors may demand rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of common stock. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. We may also seek collaborators for one or more of our current or future product candidates at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable or on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses into the foreseeable future as we: (i) advance our product pipeline and other product candidates into clinical trials, (ii) continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates in clinical trials, (iii) expand our corporate infrastructure, and (iv) incur our share of joint venture and collaboration costs for our products and technologies.
Uses of Cash. We have and plan to expand our business and intellectual property portfolio through the acquisition of new businesses and technologies as well as entering into licensing arrangements.
Material Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, our material contractual obligations are as follows:
•Short-term operating lease liabilities as disclosed in Note 11 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K;
•Future minimum payments under the Scilex Notes, based on a percentage of projected net sales of ZTlido, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; and
•Approximately $8.8 million of indebtedness in connection with the Scilex Holding accounts receivable revolving loan facility, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•In connection with the acquisition of ACEA as further discussed in Note 7, we recorded short term contingent consideration of $7.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
Our material long-term contractual obligations include:
•Long-term operating lease liabilities as disclosed in Note 11 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K; and
•Future minimum payments under the Scilex Notes, based on a percentage of projected net sales of ZTlido, as disclosed in Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•In connection with the acquisition of ACEA as further discussed in Note 7, we recorded long term contingent consideration of $123.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to aid in understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenues are generated from product revenues, the sale of customized reagents and other materials, contract manufacturing services, grant revenue and other service revenues. We do not have significant costs associated with costs to obtain contracts with our customers. Substantially all of our revenues and accounts receivable result from contracts with customers.
We recognize revenue when control of the products is transferred to the customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from the customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract and the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. We recognize revenue for satisfied performance obligations only when no significant reversals are expected. (See Note 1 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Investments in Other Entities. We hold a portfolio of investments in equity securities. Investments in entities over which we have significant influence but not a controlling interest are accounted for using the equity method, with our share of earnings or losses reported in loss on equity investments. Our other equity investments are carried at cost, less impairment, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for identical or similar investments.
All investments are reviewed on a regular basis for possible impairment. If an investment’s fair value is determined to be less than its net carrying value and the decline is determined to be other-than-temporary, the investment is written down to its fair value. Such an evaluation is judgmental and dependent on specific facts and circumstances. Factors considered in determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in value has occurred include: the magnitude of the impairment and length of time that the estimated market value was below the cost basis; financial condition and business prospects of the investee; our intent and ability to retain the investment for a sufficient period of time to allow for recovery in market value of the investment; issues that raise concerns about the investee’s ability to continue as a going concern; any other information that we may be aware of related to the investment. We do not report the fair value of our equity investments in non-publicly traded companies because it is not readily determinable.
Debt, Including Debt With Detachable Warrants. Debt with detachable warrants is evaluated for the classification of warrants as either equity instruments, derivative liabilities, or liabilities depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. In circumstances in which debt is issued with equity-classified warrants, the proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt are first allocated to the debt and the warrants at their relative estimated fair values. The portion of the proceeds so allocated to the warrants are accounted for as paid-in capital and a debt discount. The remaining proceeds, as further reduced by discounts created by the bifurcation of embedded derivatives and beneficial conversion features, are allocated to the debt. We account for debt as liabilities measured at amortized cost and amortize the resulting debt discount from the allocation of proceeds, to interest expense using the effective interest method over the expected term of the debt instrument. We consider whether there are any embedded features in debt instruments that require bifurcation and separate accounting as derivative financial instruments pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. Embedded features that require bifurcation are initially and subsequently measured at fair value. See Note 3 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion on the derivative liabilities associated with embedded features in our debt instruments.
If the amount allocated to the convertible debt results in an effective per share conversion price less than the fair value of our common stock on the commitment date, the intrinsic value of this beneficial conversion feature is recorded as a discount to the convertible debt with a corresponding increase to additional paid in capital. The beneficial conversion feature discount is equal to the difference between the effective conversion price and the fair value of our common stock at the commitment date, unless limited by the remaining proceeds allocated to the debt.
We may enter financing arrangements, the terms of which involve significant assumptions and estimates, including future net product sales, in determining interest expense, amortization period of the debt discount, as well as the classification between current and long-term portions. In estimating future net product sales, we assess prevailing market conditions using various external market data against our anticipated sales and planned commercial activities. Consequently, we impute interest on the carrying value of the debt and record interest expense using an imputed effective interest rate. We reassess the expected payments each reporting period and account for any changes through an adjustment to the effective interest rate on a prospective basis, with a corresponding impact to the classification of our current and long-term portions.
Intangible assets. In order to estimate the fair value of our identifiable intangible assets and other long-lived assets, we primarily use an income approach, using the present value of estimated future cash flows from those assets. The key assumptions that we use in our discounted cash flow model are the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the asset over an extended period of time and a rate of return that considers the relative risk of achieving the cash flows, the time value of money, and other factors that a willing market participant would consider. Significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of future cash flows and the relative risk of achieving those cash flows.
Contingent consideration. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities assumed in business combinations is recorded as part of the purchase price consideration of the acquisition and is determined using a discounted cash flow model or Monte Carlo simulation model. The significant inputs of such models are not observable in the market, such as certain financial metric growth rates, volatility rates, projections associated with applicable milestones, discount rates and the related probabilities and payment structure in the contingent consideration arrangement. Fair value adjustments to contingent consideration liabilities are recorded through operating expenses in the consolidated statement of operations. Contingent consideration arrangements assumed by an asset acquisition will be measured and accrued when such contingency is resolved.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.