ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION AND OVERVIEW
Startek is a leading global provider of technology-enabled customer experience (CX) solutions. The Company provides omnichannel CX, digital transformation, and technology services to some of the world’s leading brands. Startek is committed to impacting clients’ business outcomes by focusing on enhancing CX and digital enablement across all touch points and channels. Startek has more than 45,000 employees located across 45 delivery campuses in 13 countries. The Company services over 200 clients across a range of industries such as banking and financial services, insurance, technology, telecoms, healthcare, travel and hospitality, consumer goods, retail and energy and utilities.
Startek manages over half a billion customer moments of truth each year for the world’s leading brands. We help these brands increase their revenues by enabling better experiences for their customers across multiple channels. As a leading provider of technology-enabled business process management solutions for major global brands-we drive business value through omnichannel CX, digital transformation and technology services.
SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS
Cyber Security Incident
On June 30, 2021, we suffered an attempted encryption attack. While the attackers or the threat actors failed to shut down company operations, they encrypted some of our operating systems and application servers. We took immediate steps to remedy the situation and, based on the numerous steps undertaken, we believe that the incident is contained and we have eradicated any remnants of the attack. This incident resulted in temporary disruption to our business that was caused by the threat actors encrypting some of our systems and our precautionary actions to move certain of our systems offline. The impact of this incident on our clients was varied and was dependent on the region of our service delivery. Many of our clients faced no disruptions as the network and systems in those regions weren’t compromised, however, in some regions our customers faced disruptions especially where we support work from home operations. In addition, within the impacted clients, many maintained connectivity with our network, allowing us to continue to provide service. However, some clients chose to temporarily suspend our access to their networks as a measure of abundant caution.
Since the incident, we have (a) restored the security of our systems and networks, (b) significantly enhanced the continuous monitoring of our entire information security environment, (c) implemented various enhancements to our network and processes to prevent the recurrence of such incidents, (d) made all required notifications to applicable governmental and regulatory agencies as well as individuals, and, (e) have implemented measures recommended by leading external forensics and cybersecurity experts to thwart such incidents in the future.
The incident had some impact on our revenues and operating income during the year though the impact was not significant. A large part of the costs related directly to the incident has been recovered from our insurance policies. We have taken certain steps to remedy the situation and plan to make incremental investments to enhance the overall security of our information technology environment.
Coronavirus
The global outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. government in March 2020. The pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets resulted in significant travel restrictions, mandated facility closures, and led to shelter-in-place and social distancing orders in numerous jurisdictions around the world. Certain of our customer engagement centers have been impacted by local government actions restricting facility access or are operating at lower capacity utilization levels. During the year, governments began easing COVID-19 restrictions, which contributed to a resurgence of COVID-19 cases and the spread of COVID-19 variants. The availability of vaccines (and vaccine boosters) continues to increase around the world, albeit with slower than anticipated rollouts and challenges in certain countries. In response to COVID-19, we have prioritized our employees' safety and wellbeing, business continuity for our clients, and supporting the efforts of governments around the world to contain the spread of the virus. In light of our commitment to helping our clients navigate unprecedented business challenges while protecting the safety of our employees, we have taken numerous steps and will continue to take further actions to address the COVID-19 pandemic. We have taken additional measures to ensure the safety of our employees in India who were facing a strong wave of the pandemic. We continue to work closely with our clients to support them as they implemented their contingency plans, helping them access our services and solutions remotely. In discussion with our clients, we continue to maintain many of our employees on a work at home model. The extent of the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our operations within the expected parameters, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the various governments to prevent disease spread, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Share Repurchase
During the year, the Company undertook share repurchases under a previously announced and approved Repurchase Plan. During the year, the Company repurchased an aggregate of 412,769 shares of our common stock under our repurchase plan at an average cost of $4.61 per share. The Company believes its liquidity position is strong and shall continue with share repurchases in the near future.
Private Offer
On December 20, 2021, CSP Management Limited (“CSP”), an affiliate of our majority shareholder, submitted a preliminary, non-binding proposal to acquire all of our outstanding shares of common stock that are not already beneficially owned by CSP for $5.40 in cash per share (the “Proposed Transaction”). The board of directors of Startek has formed a special committee of independent directors that is authorized, among other things, to evaluate the non-binding proposal. The principal terms and conditions of the Proposed Transaction will be set forth in definitive agreements to be negotiated by the special committee with CSP. There can be no assurance that any definitive offer will be made or accepted, that any agreement will be executed or that any transaction will be consummated.
Key Matters Pertaining to Subsidiaries
Debt Refinancing
On February 18, 2021, CSP Alpha Holdings Pte. Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company entered into a new facility agreement that provided for a $165 million term loan facility and a $20 million revolving credit facility, in each case with a maturity date 60 months after the date of first utilization of the term loan facility. Amortization of the term loan starts from a date falling in November 2022, i.e., 21 months from the first utilization date of the loan. The term loan facility and the revolving loan facility each bear interest at a rate per annum equal to a LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin of between 3.75% and 4.50%, depending on an adjusted leverage ratio. The Facilities Agreement also contains financial covenants, including cash flow cover, adjusted leverage, and limitations on capital expenditures.
On February 22, 2021, the Company used proceeds from the above facilities agreement to prepay and terminate the existing credit facility made available to it under that certain Amended and Restated Senior Term and Revolving Facilities Agreement, dated October 27, 2017.
Strategic Investment
On February 25, 2021, the Company announced a $25 million strategic minority investment in CSS Corp. (“CSS”), a new-age IT services and technology support solutions company that harnesses the power of AI, automation, analytics, cloud, and digital to address customer needs. Through this investment, Startek acquired an indirect beneficial interest in CSS of approximately 26%, with Capital Square Partners (“CSP” or “CSP Fund”), a Singapore-based Private Equity Fund Manager, and the Company’s majority shareholder, acquiring the majority controlling stake.
The Company and CSP Alpha Holdings Pte. Ltd., a subsidiary of the Company, participated in this transaction by (i) contributing $25 million to acquire approximately 62.5%* in CSS Corp LP, and (ii) paying $5 million to CSP Management Limited to acquire certain call options. These call options to acquire a controlling stake in CSS are only exercisable by the Company during the period from August 19, 2022, to April 19, 2023, without any obligation and are currently considered to be not substantive.
*Subsequently reduced to 61.35%
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021, AND 2020
Revenue
Our gross revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by 9.6% to $703,546 as compared to $641,844 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
Our net revenues adjusted for warrant contra revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was higher at $703,633 compared to $640,222 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The breakdown of our net revenues from various industry verticals for years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 is as follows:
Telecom vertical continues to be the largest vertical with 32% contribution to revenue. Year ended December 31, 2021, saw an increase in absolute revenue in this vertical driven by a large win in an existing client in South Africa and an increase in revenues with our largest telecom client in the USA.
E-commerce and Consumer vertical saw a decline in revenue in 2021 due to volume reduction in a large U.S.-based e-commerce client. This was partially offset by a substantial ramp in other e-commerce and food delivery platform in India. Operations in brick-and-mortar retail and auto clients recovered in 2021 from pandemic-led declines in 2020.
Travel and hospitality vertical continues to face challenges due to the uncertainty created by the new waves of the Pandemic.
Healthcare and Education vertical saw a 32% increase in revenue led by the vaccination program in the second quarter. Financial and Business services vertical saw a sharp recovery to pre-pandemic levels.
The breakdown of our net revenues from various segments for years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 is as follows:
Revenue in the Americas declined slightly due to softness in travel and hospitality vertical that was partly offset by the one time revenue in the healthcare vertical related to the covid vaccination program.
Revenue growth in 2021 in India and Sri Lanka was driven by increased volumes and new business wins across the board as these geographies started opening up after strict lockdowns imposed in 2020. The Company grew with clients in the ecommerce, food delivery platform and business services verticals.
Revenue in Malaysia remain flat year on year due to movement of some lines of business with an existing client to India.
Our operation in the Middle East delivered strong revenue growth at the back of wining new logos in the government sector. The concentration on a select clients in this regions has been on a declining trend as we broad base our client portfolio in the region.
Revenue in Argentina was lower due to movement in foreign currency. However, the Argentine Peso was less volatile in 2021 relative to previous years.
Our revenue in the Rest of World was higher in 2021 driven by higher volume in South Africa led by the long term contract renewal with a telecom client where we won 100% of their wallet displacing competition.
Cost of Services and Gross Profit
Overall, cost of services as a percentage of revenue marginally decreased to 86.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 86.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Employee expenses, rent costs, and depreciation and amortization are the most significant costs for the Company, representing 75.8%, 4.8%, and 4.2% of total cost of services, respectively. The breakdown of cost of services is listed in the table below:
Employee expenses: Our business heavily relies on our employees to provide professional services to our clients. Thus, our most significant costs are payments made to agents, supervisors, and trainers who are directly involved in delivering services to the clients.
Employee expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 65.3% for the current year as compared to 64.9% for the previous year. The increase in percentage in the current year is reflective of higher onshore revenue in the current year relative to the previous year. This was led by the vaccination program in U.S. in the second quarter of the current year.
Rent expense: Rent expense as a percentage of revenue decreased to 4.1% for the current year as compared to 4.9% for the previous year. This is due to a higher revenue base in the current year that was delivered from the existing sites and from home.
Depreciation and amortization: Depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue for the current year was marginally lower at 3.6% as compared to 3.9% for the previous year.
Other expense includes technology, utility, travel, and outsourcing costs. As a percentage of revenue, these costs marginally increased from 12.7% to 13.1%. The increase was driven by recruitment costs to hire temporary employees to fulfill the vaccination program this year. There was a marginal increase in insurance costs as well. These increases in costs were partially offset by the decrease in utilities and maintenance costs since a large proportion of employees continued to work from home during the current year.
As a result, gross profit as a percentage of revenue for the current year marginally increased to 13.9% as compared to 13.6% for the previous year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) as a percentage of revenue decreased from 9.3% in the previous year to 7.8% in the current year. The decrease was driven by a higher revenue base and lower communication and maintenance expenses.
Impairment Losses and Restructuring Charges, Net
Impairment losses and restructuring costs, net totaled $8,226 for the current year as compared to $37,799 for the previous year. The expense for the current year primarily relates to right-of-use assets impairment charge of $4,514 and restructuring expenses of $3,712. As of December 31, 2021, based on the qualitative and quantitative assessment, we concluded that there is no impairment of goodwill. The Company recognized an impairment charge of $4,514 on right-of-use assets related to operating leases in a few geographies. Given the increasing adoption of the work from home delivery model, we are continuously evaluating our brick-and-mortar infrastructure with a view of rationalizing excess capacity. The Company does not plan to use such sites for 'on premise' operations and as per the existing contractual terms of the lease agreement the Company does not have the right to stop making lease payments for the remaining lease terms or to sublease such premises. The remaining lease term for such sites as on December 31, 2021 ranges from 12-24 months.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net totaled $19,173 for the current year as compared to $13,376 for the previous year. Higher interest expense during the current year is due to the upfront cost of debt refinancing concluded in February 2021.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense for the current period was $11,866 compared to $7,760 for the previous period. The movement in the implied effective tax rate was primarily due to shifts in earnings among the various jurisdictions in which we operate coupled with utilization of net operating losses for entities having taxable profit and valuation allowance as per the requirement of ASC 740. The tax expense during the current fiscal year includes a one-time foreign tax credit write off of $1,935 and creation of a valuation allowance of $798 in Argentina. Further, the movement of funds between various geographies primarily to service our debt facilities also attracts withholding taxes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operating activities, working capital facilities, and term debt. We have historically utilized these resources to finance our operations and make capital expenditures associated with capacity expansion, upgrades of information technologies and service offerings, and business acquisitions. We have historically drawn working capital facilities due to timing of collection from few customers. We have also entered into factoring agreements with financial institutions to sell certain of our accounts receivables under a non-recourse agreements. The Company expects to meet all its debt obligations in a timely manner.
During the current fiscal year, the Company entered a new secured $185 million senior debt facilities, comprising a $165 million term loan and a $20 million revolving credit facility. Under the new senior debt, borrowings will bear a tiered interest rate, which is based on the Company’s consolidated net leverage ratio and is initially set at LIBOR plus 450 basis points. The term loan will have a moratorium on principal repayment for 21 months and quarterly repayments thereafter, beginning November 2022. The loan is subject to certain standardized financial covenants. The Company fully repaid the amounts due under the old senior facilities from the proceeds of the new senior debt facility.
The Term loan is subject to certain covenants, whereby the Company is required to meet certain financial ratios and obligations on a quarterly basis. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants.
Cash and cash equivalents
As of December 31, 2021, cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash held by the Company and all its foreign subsidiaries increased by $4,837 to $55,396 as compared to $50,559 as of December 31, 2020. The restricted cash balance as of December 31, 2021, stood at $7,456 as compared to $6,052 as of December 31, 2020. The restricted cash pertains to debt service reserve account (DSRA) that we have to maintain in accordance with the Senior Term Agreement and also for certain term deposits that need to be maintained in accordance with some of our lease and client agreements.
Cash flows from operating activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 we reported net cash flows generated from operating activities of $29,128 and $66,053 respectively. The $36,925 decrease in net cash flows from operating activities was due to a net decrease of $51,419 in cash flows from assets and liabilities, a $28,876 decrease in non-cash reconciling items such as goodwill impairment, impairment of right-of-use assets, deferred tax expense, depreciation and amortization and warrant contra revenue, and a increase of $43,370 in net income. The cash flow from operations were higher in the fiscal 2020 due to the receivable factoring agreements entered into by the Company.
Cash flows used in investing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 we reported net cash used in investing activities of $45,466 and $17,019 respectively. Increase in cash used in investing activities is mainly due to investment made in CSS Corp.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 we reported net cash flows generated/(used) in financing activities of $22,073 and $(31,207), respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our net borrowings increased by $25,269 mainly because the Company entered into a new secured senior debt facility and payment of loan processing fees. The Company fully repaid the amounts due under the old senior facilities from the proceeds of the new debt facility. The Company repurchased common stock worth $1,912 during the current fiscal year.
Other factors impacting liquidity
Our business currently has a high concentration in a few principal clients. The loss of a principal client and/or changes in timing or termination of a principal client's product launches or service offerings could have a material adverse effect on our business, liquidity, operating results, or financial condition. These client relationships are further discussed in Item 1A, "Risk Factors". To limit our credit risk, management from time to time will perform credit evaluations of our clients. Management does not believe substantial credit risk existed as of December 31, 2021.
To meet short-term cash needs, we borrow cash from our working capital facilities. These borrowings are typically outstanding for a short period of time before they are repaid. However, our debt balance can fluctuate significantly during any given quarter as part of our ordinary course of business. While we have been successful in bringing our debt levels (net of cash and cash equivalents) down by a considerable amount over the past few quarters, our debt balance at the end of any given period is not necessarily indicative of the debt balance at any other time during that period.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Apart from certain non-recourse receivables factoring as mentioned in the Note 9. "Debt" to our notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, we have no other material off-balance sheet transactions, unconditional purchase obligations or similar instruments, and we are not a guarantor of any other entities’ debt or other financial obligations.
Debt instruments and related covenants
For more information, refer to Note 9, "Debt," to our notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
VARIABILITY OF OPERATING RESULTS
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience some quarterly variations in revenue and operating results due to a variety of factors, many of which are outside our control, including: (i) timing and amount of costs incurred to expand capacity in order to provide for volume growth from existing and future clients; (ii) changes in the volume of services provided to principal clients; (iii) expiration or termination of client projects or contracts; (iv) timing of existing and future client product launches or service offerings; (v) seasonal nature of certain clients’ businesses; and (vi) variability in demand for our services by our clients depending on demand for their products or services and/or depending on our performance.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with US-GAAP, management must undertake decisions that impact the reported amounts and related disclosures. Such decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and assumptions upon which accounting estimates are based. Management applies its best judgment based on its understanding and analysis of the relevant circumstances to reach these decisions. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Accordingly, actual results may vary significantly from the estimates we have applied.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We have identified one main performance obligation for which we invoice our customers, which is to stand ready to provide care services for our customers’ clients. A stand-ready obligation is a promise that a customer will have access to services as and when the customer decides to use them. Ours is considered a stand-ready obligation because the delivery of the underlying service (that is, receiving customer contact and performing the associated care services) is outside of our control or the control of our customer.
As our customers receive and consume the benefit of our services as they are performed and we have the contractual right to invoice for services performed to date, we have concluded that our performance obligation is satisfied over time. Accordingly, we recognize revenue for our services in the month they are performed.
We are generally entitled to invoice for our services on a monthly basis. We invoice according to the hourly and/or per transaction rates stated in each contract for the various activities we perform. Some contracts include opportunities to earn bonuses or include parameters under which we will incur penalties related to performance in any given month. Bonus or penalty amounts are based on the current month’s performance. Formulas are included in the contracts for calculation of any bonus or penalty. There is no other performance in future periods that will impact the bonus or penalty calculation in the current period. We estimate the amount of the bonus or penalty using the “most likely amount” method and we apply this method consistently. The bonus or penalty calculated is generally approved by the client prior to billing (and revenue being recognized).
Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing. If we receive payment in respect of services prior to the delivery of services, we recognize the payment as an advance from the customer, and it is classified as contract liability. When the related services are performed, the advance is transferred to revenue to the extent the services are rendered.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the cost of acquired businesses in excess of the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible net assets purchased. Goodwill is tested for impairment at least on an annual basis on December 31, or as circumstances warrant based on several factors, including operating results, business plans and future cash flows. We perform an assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than it’s carrying amount. Based on our assessment of events or circumstances, we perform a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment if it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than it’s carrying amount. Based on the results of our assessments of qualitative factors, we determined that the fair values of all our reporting units are higher than their respective carrying amounts as of December 31, 2021.