Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following management’s discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) in conjunction with the information set forth within the financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
As discussed elsewhere in this Report, Sensus achieved profitability for the first time in 2021 and seeks to maintain profitability by, among other things, reducing operational expenses where necessary in order to continue to invest in marketing initiatives to promote the Company’s products. However, Sensus faces a number of uncertainties in 2022 that could impact our ability to achieve this goal. These include the ongoing coronavirus epidemic and international trade issues. Either of these matters could adversely affect the Company’s ability to do business in a number of countries and geographic regions, including China.
Impact of COVID-19
The outbreak of COVID-19, which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, has materially and adversely impacted the U.S. and global economies, as well as the Company, its employees and, operations, and customer demand. Although we have been able to continue to operate and service customers throughout the pandemic, it significantly impacted the Company’s sales throughout 2020, as social distancing forced physicians to temporarily close their practices. In 2021, as the markets started to open, the Company was able to increase sales significantly. However, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the possible emergence of new variants, could further impact the Company’s operations and the operations of the Company’s customers, suppliers and vendors as a result of ongoing quarantines, facility closures, and travel and logistics restrictions. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments. The Company cannot reasonably estimate the impact at this time. (See Note 1, Business Overview, of the consolidated financial statements).
Components of our results of operations
Sensus manages our business globally within one reportable segment, which is consistent with how management views the business, prioritizes investment and resource allocation decisions, and assesses operating performance.
Results of Operations
Compared with 2020
Revenues of $27.0 million in 2021 increased $17.5 million, or 182%, from $9.6 million in 2020, primarily reflecting the increase in the number of units sold as the market started to open. During 2020, due to COVID-19, the Company was unable to sell effectively to its markets due to travel restrictions and other factors. The Company believes these factors are gradually subsiding as the healthcare industry has developed and continues to develop effective vaccines and other treatments for COVID-19, and as local, state, and federal governments have eased distancing and other restrictions. Additionally, the overall embrace of technology that enables the global business community to communicate effectively without the need for close proximity is expected to help the Company continue to reach its potential clients for 2022.
Cost of sales of $10.1 million in 2021 increased by $5.7 million, or 132%, from $4.3 million in 2020, reflecting the increased number of units sold.
Gross profit increased $11.8 million, or 223.6%, from 2020, primarily driven by the increase in units sold. Maintaining this level in 2022 in gross profit or gross margin, as a percentage of revenue, is largely dependent upon the status of the COVID-19 pandemic and the market’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling and marketing expenses decreased $0.5 million, or 0.9%, from 2020, primarily attributable reduced spending on marketing activities and headcount.
General and Administrative expenses increased $0.6 million, or 15.0%, from 2020, due primarily to increases in insurance expense and professional fees.
Research and development expenses decreased $0.7 million or 17.4.%, from 2020, reflecting lower spending as the SculpturaTM project entered production phase.
Other income (expense), net of $1.4 million in 2020 is primarily attributable to the forgiveness of $757,782 of our loan under the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (See “Financial Condition” below and Note 5, Debt, of the consolidated financial statements) and a bargain purchase gain $588,011 which was recorded as a result of acquisitions (See Note 2, Acquisitions, to the consolidated financial statements).
Financial Condition
The Company’s cash, cash equivalent and investment balance decreased to $14.5 million at December 31, 2021 from $14.9 at December 31, 2020, primarily due to cash used in operating activities.
There were no borrowings under the revolving line of credit at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the Company continued to take proactive steps during 2021 to manage costs and preserve liquidity. These steps included maintaining borrowing availability as a precautionary measure to preserve financial flexibility in view of the uncertainty in global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, in 2020, we obtained a loan of $1,022,785 under the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program enabled by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act of 2020 which was used for employee compensation and facilities costs. The loan matures in April 2022 and accrues interest at 1% per annum. The principal of the loan is subject to forgiveness if used for the limited purposes specified in the CARES Act. The Company applied for forgiveness and has been notified that $757,782 of the principal of the loan has been forgiven, leaving a balance of $51,021 to be paid by April 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
In general terms, liquidity is a measurement of the Company’s ability to meet its cash needs. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, a significant source of funding has been cash flows from investing and financing activities. The Company believes that proceeds from maturing investments, borrowing capacity, and access to capital resources are sufficient to meet operating capital and funding requirements for the next 12 months from the date of this annual report. The Company’s liquidity position and capital requirements may be impacted by a number of factors, including the following:
● ability to generate and increase revenue;
● fluctuations in gross margins, operating expenses and net results; and
● fluctuations in working capital.
The Company’s primary short-term capital needs, which are subject to change, include expenditures related to:
● expansion of sales and marketing activities; and
● expansion of research and development activities.
Sensus’s management regularly evaluates cash requirements for current operations, commitments, capital requirements and business development transactions, and may seek to raise additional funds for these purposes in the future.
Cash flows
The following table provides a summary of the Company’s cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of net income of $4.1 million partially offset by an increase in net operating assets of $6.1 million and non-cash charges of $1.7 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily related to an increase in sales, resulting in an increase in accounts receivable and accounts payable and accrued expenses, offset by a decrease in inventory and a decrease in deferred revenue and product warranty. Non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization, stock base compensation and product warranty charges. Net cash used in operating activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of a net loss of $6.8 million partially offset by an increase in net operating assets of $5.6 million and non-cash charges of $0.8 million. The increase in net operating assets was primarily related to a decrease in sales and resulting in a decrease in accounts receivable, offset by an increase in inventory and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses. Non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization, partially offset by the gain on bargain purchase in 2020.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to proceeds from sale of equipment, partially offset by acquisition of property and equipment. Net cash provided by investing activities was $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to matured investments of $7.4 million, partially offset by $0.4 million of acquisition of property and equipment during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, mostly from the balance of the loan under the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, mostly from the balance of the loan of $0.2 under the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program.
Indebtedness
Please see Note 5, Debt, to the consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Please see Note 7, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the reporting periods. Management has identified certain accounting policies as critical to understanding the financial condition and results of operations. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see the notes to the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.