Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, some of the information contained in the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the ‘‘Risk Factors’’ section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 22, 2020 as a Delaware corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. While we may pursue a business combination target in any business or industry, we have focused, and intend to continue to focus, our search for a target business operating in the D2C brands, D2C services and mobile and social entertainment sectors.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and those in connection with our search for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We have incurred, and expect to conintue to incur, increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the period from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and for the period from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 we had a net income (loss) of $158,775 and $(5,000), respectively. Our income for the period from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021 consisted of unrealized gains on marketable securities held in the trust account and a reduction of the warrant liabilities, and our loss for the period from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 consisted of formation expenses.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $346,319 and $20,000 cash, respectively, and a working capital deficit of $924,523 and $163,912, respectively. Until the consummation of the IPO, our only sources of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the sponsor and loans from our sponsor. The Company’s business plan is dependent on the completion of a business combination, and the Company’s cash and working capital as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 are not sufficient to complete its planned activities for a reasonable period of time. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
On October 29, 2020, the sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the IPO pursuant to a promissory note (the “Promissory Note”). The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the completion of the IPO. The outstanding balance under the Promissory Note of $300,000 remained outstanding at the closing of the IPO on January 28, 2021. On February 2, 2021, the Company repaid the Promissory Note in full.
On January 28, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 31,050,000 Units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 4,050,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $310,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,473,333 private placement warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant generating gross proceeds of $8,210,000.
A total of $310,500,000, comprised of the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, was placed in the trust account. We incurred $17,495,500 in transaction costs, including $6,210,000 of underwriting fees, $10,867,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $418,000 of other offering costs.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding.
Management has determined that the Company’s cash flow deficit suggests a need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we have not completed our initial business combination within the required time period because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than described below.
We have an agreement to pay the sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on February 1, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriter of the IPO is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $10,867,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the public warrants and the private placement warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815 under which the public warrants and the private placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Under ASC Subtopic 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815-40”) the public warrants and the private placement warrants are not indexed to our common stock in the manner contemplated by ASC 815-40 because the holder of the instrument is not an input into the pricing of a fixed-for-fixed option on equity shares. Accordingly, we classify the public warrants and the private placement warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the public warrants and the private placement warrants to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The public warrants and the private placement warrants are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock are classified as Shareholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value at the end of each reporting period and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the initial public offering the Company recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common stock
Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period in compliance with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The remeasurement associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common stock as the redemption value approximates fair value. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and the private placement of 5,473,333 private warrants in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common stock is the same as basic net income (loss) per common stock for the periods presented.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of net income (loss) per Class A common stock subject to possible redemption and non-redeemable Class B common stock and allocates the net income (loss) into the two classes of shares in calculating net income (loss) per common stock, basic and diluted. For redeemable Class A common stock, net income (loss) per common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding. For non-redeemable Class B common stock, net income (loss) per share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of shares of nonredeemable Class B common stock outstanding for the period. Non-redeemable Class B common stock include the founder shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the trust account.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also
simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.