ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
STRATA Skin Sciences, Inc. is a medical technology company in dermatology dedicated to developing, commercializing and marketing innovative products for the treatment of dermatologic conditions. Its products include the XTRAC® and now Pharos® excimer lasers and VTRAC® lamp systems utilized in the treatment of psoriasis, vitiligo and various other skin conditions.
The XTRAC ultraviolet light excimer laser system is utilized to treat psoriasis, vitiligo and other skin diseases. The XTRAC excimer laser system received clearance from the United States Food and Drug Administration in 2000 and has since become a widely recognized treatment among dermatologists. The system delivers targeted 308nm ultraviolet light to affected areas of skin, leading to psoriasis clearing and vitiligo repigmentation, following a series of treatments. As of December 31, 2021, there were 890 XTRAC systems placed in dermatologists’ offices in the United States under our dermatology recurring procedures model, an increase from 832 at the end of December 31, 2020. Under the dermatology recurring procedures model, the XTRAC system is placed in a physician’s office and fees are charged on a per procedure basis or a fee is charged on a periodic basis not to exceed an agreed upon number of procedures. The XTRAC system’s use for psoriasis is covered by nearly all major insurance companies, including Medicare. The VTRAC Excimer Lamp system, offered internationally in addition to the XTRAC, provides targeted therapeutic efficacy demonstrated by excimer technology with the simplicity of design and reliability of a lamp system. We believe there are approximately 7.5 million people in the United States and up to 125 million people worldwide suffering from psoriasis, and 1% to 2% of the world’s population suffers from vitiligo.
In September 2020, we signed a direct distribution agreement with our Japanese distributor for a combination of direct dermatology procedures equipment sales and recurring revenue for the country of Japan. In February 2021, we signed an agreement with our Chinese distributor for a combination of direct dermatology procedures equipment sales and recurring revenues for the country of China.
The Pharos excimer laser system holds FDA clearance to treat chronic skin diseases, including psoriasis, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis and leukoderma.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In late 2019, there was an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) which became a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, constrained work force participation and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. In addition, the pandemic led to the suspension of elective procedures in the U.S. and to the temporary closure of many physician practices which are our primary customers. While most offices have reopened, some physician practices closed and never reopened, and the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its variants on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our business strategies and initiatives in the expected time frames, will depend on future developments, including the duration and ongoing spread of the COVID-19 outbreak and its variants, continued or renewed restrictions on business operations and transport, any governmental and societal responses thereto, including legislative or regulatory as well as the percentage of the populace vaccinated and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines and the continued impact on worldwide economic and geopolitical conditions, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Domestically, as the procedures in which our devices are used are elective in nature; and as social distancing, travel restrictions, quarantines and other restrictions became prevalent in the United States, this had a negative impact on our recurring revenue model and its financial position and cash flow. The virus has disrupted the supply chains world-wide that we depend upon to provide a steady source of components to manufacture and repair our devices.
To mitigate the impact of COVID-19, we have taken a variety of measures to ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure by implementing business continuity plans to promote the safety and security of our employees, while complying with various government mandates, including work-from-home arrangements and social-distancing initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19 and complying with federal and local regulations at our facilities. The Company implemented a policy whereby all Company employees are required to be vaccinated or complete weekly COVID-19 testing. In addition, we created and executed programs utilizing our direct to consumer advertising and call center to contact patients and partner clinics to restart our partners’ businesses.
In the event our own employees are impacted through direct or ancillary contact with a person who has the virus, we may need to devise other methods of transacting business in our offices by working from home and or potentially ceasing operations for a period of time. Supply chain disruptions which began during the pandemic have continued and may continue for the foreseeable future. While the Company’s operations have not been materially impacted by the general trends in supply chain problems, the Company continues to monitor and assess potential risks.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our results of operations and financial performance through fiscal 2021, and we expect it will continue to have a negative impact on revenues, earnings and cash flows until such time as the pandemic ends or the country adjusts to its ramifications. Some physician offices continue to experience staffing issues, and we believe these shortages of trained personnel have negatively impacted our business. Accordingly, current results and financial conditions discussed herein may not be indicative of future operating results and trends.
Key Technologies
•
XTRAC® Excimer Laser. XTRAC received FDA clearance in 2000 and has since become a widely recognized treatment among dermatologists for psoriasis and other skin diseases. The XTRAC System delivers ultra-narrowband ultraviolet B (“UVB”) light to affected areas of skin. Following a series of treatments typically performed twice weekly, psoriasis remission can be achieved, and vitiligo patches can be re-pigmented. XTRAC is endorsed by the National Psoriasis Foundation, and its use for psoriasis is covered by nearly all major insurance companies, including Medicare. We estimate that more than half of all major insurance companies now offer reimbursement for vitiligo as well, a figure that is increasing.
•
In the third quarter of 2018, we announced the FDA granted clearance for our Multi Micro Dose (MMD) tip for our XTRAC excimer laser. The MMD Tip accessory is indicated for use in conjunction with the XTRAC laser system to filter the Narrow Band UVB (“NB-UVB”) light at delivery in order to calculate and individualize the maximum non-blistering dose for a particular patient.
•
In January 2020, we announced the FDA granted clearance of our XTRAC Momentum Excimer Laser Platform.
•
VTRAC® Lamp. VTRAC received FDA clearance in 2005 and provides targeted therapeutic efficacy demonstrated by excimer technology with the simplicity of design and reliability of a lamp system.
Recent Developments
Asset Acquisitions
In August 2021 and January 2022, we acquired certain assets and certain liabilities related to the Pharos U.S. dermatology business of Ra Medical Systems, Inc. (“Ra Medical”) and TheraClear Devices from Theravant Corporation, respectively. The Pharos asset acquisition provides us with the opportunity to market our full business solutions to Ra Medical’s existing customer base of 400 dermatology practices and increase our recurring revenue base. The Pharos transaction also provides a highly synergistic path to gain additional placements for our XTRAC excimer laser system. The TheraClear asset acquisition will allow us to further develop, commercialize and market the TheraClear Devices that are used for acne treatment, as well as advance the TheraClear technology into multiple other devices that can be used to treat a range of additional indications.
We made upfront cash payments of $3.7 million and $0.5 million in connection with the Pharos and TheraClear asset acquisitions, respectively. In addition, Theravant Corporation received 358,367 shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of $0.5 million and is eligible to receive up to $3.0 million in future earnout payments upon the achievement of certain annual net revenue milestones, up to $20.0 million in future royalty payments based upon gross profit from future domestic sales, 25% of gross profit from international sales over the subsequent four-year period, and up to $1.0 million in future milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development and related net revenue targets.
MidCap Financing
In September 2021, we entered into an $8.0 million secured borrowing facility with MidCap Financial Trust, or MidCap. The facility bears interest at LIBOR plus 7.50%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.50%, and matures on September 1, 2026. We are obligated to make interest-only payments through September 2024. From October 2024 to maturity, we will make payments of principal and interest in 24 equal installments. The loan is senior to all other indebtedness and is secured by substantially all of our assets. We are subject to customary affirmative and negative covenants including a financial covenant based on minimum revenue thresholds. Upon an event of default, including a covenant violation, all principal and interest are due on demand.
Proceeds from our MidCap facility were used to repay, in their entirety, the outstanding principal and interest associated with our Economic Injury Disaster Loan. In September 2021, we also repaid our note payable with the proceeds from the pledged time deposit held by the lender.
Equity Distribution Agreement
In October 2021, we entered into an equity distribution agreement under which we may sell up to $11.0 million of our shares of common stock in registered “at-the-market” offerings. The shares will be offered at prevailing market prices, and we will pay commissions of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares sold through our agent, which may act as an agent and/or principal. We have no obligation to sell any shares under this agreement and may, at any time, suspend solicitations under this agreement. No shares of our common stock have been sold under this distribution agreement during fiscal 2021.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
To date, we have generated revenues primarily from the placement of our lasers in physicians’ offices and the related sales and rentals and the recurring revenues from our sale of treatment sessions.
Dermatology Recurring Procedures Segment: we have primarily two types of arrangements for our phototherapy treatment equipment as follows: (i) we place our lasers in a physician’s office at no charge to the physician, and generally charge the physician a fee for an agreed upon number of treatments; or (ii) we place our lasers in a physician’s office and charge the physician a fixed fee for a specified period of time not to exceed an agreed upon number of treatments; if that number is exceeded additional fees will have to be paid.
Dermatology Procedures Equipment Segment: we sell our products internationally through distributors and domestically, directly to a physician. We also derive revenues from service and repair extended warranty contracts with our existing customers.
We refer you to the section titled “-Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates-Revenue Recognition” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding how we account for revenues.
Sales in the United States represented 77% of our total revenues for each of the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, and have been generated by our direct sales force. Outside the United States, our sales are made through third-party distributors. International revenues were 23% for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We expect that both our United States and international revenues will increase in the near term as we continue to expand our product offerings and increase the related patient utilization in the United States, as well as grow our presence in Asia.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues primarily consists of the costs of components and the manufacture of our XTRAC and VTRAC systems. Cost of revenues also includes costs related to personnel, depreciation, warranty, shipping, and our operations and field service departments.
Our gross profit is calculated by subtracting our cost of revenues from our revenues. We calculate our gross margin as our gross profit divided by our revenues. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily product sales mix, pricing manufacturing costs. Our gross margins on revenues from sales of dermatology procedures equipment are lower than our gross margins on revenues from sales of dermatology recurring procedures and, as a result, the sales mix between dermatology recurring procedures and dermatology procedures equipment can affect the gross margin in any reporting period.
Engineering and Product Development
Engineering and product development expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries and related benefits for employees in engineering, product development, regulatory and quality assurance functions. We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our engineering and product development programs.
We plan to incur engineering and product development expenses for the near future as we expect to continue our development that focuses on the application of our XTRAC system for the treatment of inflammatory skin disorders. As a result, we expect our engineering and product development expenses to remain similar to our fiscal year 2021 expenses.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist of market research and commercial activities related to the sale of our dermatology recurring procedures and dermatology procedures equipment sales, and salaries and related benefits and sales commissions for employees focused on these efforts. Other significant sales and marketing costs include conferences and trade shows, promotional and marketing activities, including direct and online marketing to the consumer and dermatologists, practice support programs, travel and training expenses.
We anticipate that our selling and marketing expenses will increase as we continue to execute on our growth initiatives and expand our business in the United States.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries and related benefits, share-based compensation and travel expenses, for employees in executive, finance, information technology, legal and human resource functions. General and administrative expenses also include the cost of insurance, outside legal fees, accounting and other consulting services, audit fees from our independent registered public accounting firm, board of directors’ fees and other administrative costs, such as corporate facility costs, including rent, utilities, depreciation and maintenance not otherwise included in cost of revenues.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase modestly in fiscal year 2022.
Gain of Forgiveness of Debt
In fiscal 2021, we recognized a gain on forgiveness of debt associated with our Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of cash interest payable under our debt facilities and non-cash interest attributable to the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our indebtedness.
Interest Income
Interest income is earned on our cash and cash equivalent account balances.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state NOL carryforwards of $204.3 million and $60.7 million, respectively. The net operating loss carryforwards generated prior to 2018 begin expiring in 2022 for federal and 2030 for state income tax purposes. Federal and many state net operating losses generated in 2018 and into the future now have an indefinite life.
In general, under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, a corporation that undergoes an “ownership change” is subject to limitations on its ability to utilize its NOLs to offset future taxable income. We have not completed a study to assess whether an ownership change has occurred in the past. Our existing NOLs may be subject to limitations arising from previous ownership changes, and if we undergo an ownership change, our ability to utilize NOLs could be further limited by Section 382 of the Code. Future changes in our stock ownership, some of which are outside of our control, could result in an ownership change under Section 382 of the Code. Our NOLs are also subject to international regulations, which could restrict our ability to utilize our NOLs. Furthermore, our ability to utilize NOLs of companies that we may acquire in the future may be subject to limitations. There is also a risk that due to regulatory changes, such as suspensions on the use of NOLs, or other unforeseen reasons, our existing NOLs could expire or otherwise be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues by Geography
The following tables present revenues by geography for the periods presented below:
Revenues by Product Type
The following tables present revenues by segment for the periods presented below:
Dermatology Recurring Procedures
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our results for 2021 and 2020, and we expect it will have a negative impact on revenue for as long as the pandemic continues. Recognized treatment revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, was $22.5 million, which we estimate is approximately 321,000 treatments with prices between $65 and $95 per treatment compared to recognized treatment revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $17.4 million, which is approximately 249,000 treatments with prices between $65 and $95 per treatment.
Increases in procedures are dependent upon building market acceptance through marketing programs with our physician partners and their patients to show that the XTRAC procedures will be of clinical benefit and will be generally reimbursed by insurers. We believe that several factors have an impact on the prescribed use of XTRAC treatments for psoriasis and vitiligo patients. Specifically, we believe that there is a lack of awareness of the positive effects of XTRAC treatments among both sufferers and providers; and the treatment regimen, which can sometimes require up to 12 or more treatments, has limited XTRAC use to certain patient populations. Therefore, our strategy is to continue to execute a direct-to-patient program for XTRAC advertising in the United States, targeting psoriasis and vitiligo patients through a variety of media and through our use of social media such as Facebook and Twitter. We monitor the results of our advertising expenditures in this area to reach the more than 10 million patients in the United States we believe are afflicted with these diseases. During 2020, we reduced our direct to consumer advertising spend, however, as the country began to adapt to COVID-19 and vaccines became available during 2021, we increased spending in the direct-to-patient programs to drive patients to our partner clinics to increase recurring revenue and increase spend in marketing activities as well. The increase in spending on these programs usually precedes the recurring revenue in our past experience as there is a lag between our advertising and patients then receiving treatment, which we estimate to be three to nine months. Subject to governmental responses to variants of COVID-19, we may curtail spending again in certain areas or redirect spending to less impacted areas. Revenues from Dermatology Recurring Procedures are recognized as revenue over the estimated usage period of the agreed upon number of treatments, as the treatments are being used. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we deferred net revenues of $1.9 million and $1.8 million, respectively, which will be recognized as revenue over the remaining usage period for domestic placements. Lower deferred revenue from the fourth quarter 2020 negatively impacted the first half of 2021 as compared to the first half of 2020 when higher deferred revenue favorably impacted that period.
We have recently signed direct distribution contracts with our international distributors for a combination of direct dermatology procedures equipment sales and recurring revenue. If the recurring model is accepted in these countries and the business model can be executed by these distributors, these agreements are expected to increase recurring revenue over time, but will have an initial impact of reducing sales of dermatology procedures equipment.
Dermatology Procedures Equipment
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on our results for 2021 and 2020, and we expect it will have a negative impact on its revenue for as long as the pandemic continues. For the year ended December 31, 2021, dermatology procedures equipment revenues were $7.5 million. Internationally, we sold 38 systems (30 XTRAC and 8 VTRAC).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, dermatology procedures equipment revenues were $5.7 million. Internationally, we sold 36 systems (14 XTRAC and 22 VTRAC). Domestically, we sold 2 XTRAC systems for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
The following tables present changes in our gross margin, by segment, for the periods presented below:
Dermatology Recurring Procedures
The primary reasons for the increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 were the result of higher sales, partially offset by higher depreciation expenses in 2021 and an unfavorable impact of deferred revenue in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Dermatology Procedures Equipment
The primary reasons for the increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 were higher equipment sales and deferred revenue assumed in the Pharos acquisition.
Engineering and Product Development
For the year ended December 31, 2021, engineering and product development expenses were $1.4 million as compared to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Engineering and product development costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 were higher primarily as a result of consulting costs associated with certain development projects.
Selling and Marketing
As of December 31, 2021, our sales and marketing personnel consisted of 63 full-time positions, inclusive of a vice president of sales and a vice president of marketing, direct sales organization as well as an in-house call center staffed with patient advocates and a reimbursement group that provides necessary insurance information to our physician partners and their patients.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, sales and marketing expenses were $13.1 million as compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were higher, as compared to the same period in 2020, as we made investments in sales and marketing and direct to consumer advertising, while in 2020 we managed our costs due to the downturn in business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, with lower tradeshow costs, compensation costs, commissions, travel and direct-to-consumer advertising costs.
General and Administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased to $9.7 million from $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses were higher for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase is primarily due to higher compensation, severance and recruiting expenses as a result of the CEO transition in the first quarter of 2021, in addition to an increase in XTRAC usage that has led to an increase in sales tax expense.
Gain on Forgiveness of Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received notification our PPP loan had been forgiven and we recorded a gain on forgiveness of debt of $2.0 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily attributable to our debt obligations.
Interest Income
Interest income relates to the interest we receive on our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash held with financial institutions.
Income Tax Expense
We recognized an income tax expense of $34 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, all of which were comprised primarily of changes in deferred tax liability related to goodwill.
Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA
We have determined to supplement our consolidated financial statements, prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), presented elsewhere within this report, with certain non-GAAP measures of financial performance. These non-GAAP measures include non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA, “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization.”
This non-GAAP disclosure has limitations as an analytical tool, should not be viewed as a substitute for Net Earnings (Loss) determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under U.S. GAAP, nor is it necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other companies. We consider these non-GAAP measures in addition to our results prepared under current accounting standards, but they are not a substitute for, nor superior to, U.S. GAAP measures. These non-GAAP measures are provided to enhance readers’ overall understanding of our current financial performance and to provide further information for comparative purposes. This supplemental presentation should not be construed as an inference that the Company’s future results will be unaffected by similar adjustments to Net Earnings (Loss) determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Specifically, we believe the non-GAAP measures provide useful information to management and investors by isolating certain expenses, gains and losses that may not be indicative of our core operating results and business outlook. In addition, we believe non-GAAP measures enhance the comparability of results against prior periods.
Reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure of all non-GAAP measures included in this report is as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In September 2021, we entered into an $8.0 million secured borrowing facility with MidCap Financial Trust, or MidCap. The facility bears interest at LIBOR plus 7.50% with a LIBOR floor of 0.50%, and matures on September 1, 2026. We are obligated to make interest-only payments through September 2024. From October 2024 to Maturity, we will make principal payments in 24 equal installments. The loan is senior to all other indebtedness and is secured by substantially all of our assets. We are subject to customary affirmative and negative covenants including a financial covenant based on minimum revenue thresholds. Upon an event of default, including a covenant violation, all principal and interest are due on demand.
Proceeds from our MidCap facility were used to repay, in their entirety, the outstanding principal and interest associated with our Economic Injury Disaster Loan. In September 2021, we also repaid our note payable with the proceeds from the pledged time deposit held by the lender.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $12.6 million and an accumulated deficit of $221.7 million. We received cash flows from operating activities of $1.5 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have historically incurred operating losses, and we anticipate that our operating losses will continue in the near term as we seek to expand our sales and marketing initiatives to support our growth in existing and new markets, invest funds in additional engineering and product development activities and utilize cash for other corporate purposes. Our primary sources of capital have been from borrowings under our debt facilities and sales of our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had $8.0 million of borrowings outstanding under our debt facility with MidCap, which has a final maturity in September 2026.
In October 2021, we entered into an equity distribution agreement under which we may sell up to $11.0 million of our shares of common stock in registered “at-the-market” offerings. The shares will be offered at prevailing market prices, and we will pay commissions of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of shares sold through our agent, which may act as an agent and/or principal. We have no obligation to sell any shares under this agreement and may, at any time, suspend solicitations under this agreement. No shares of our common stock have been sold under this distribution agreement during fiscal 2021.
We cannot predict our revenues and expenses in the short term as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental responses. Based on our current business plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 and anticipated revenues from sales of our products will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements for at least 12 months from the date of issuance of the Annual Report. However, if these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional debt or equity securities or enter into a new credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, our stockholders would experience dilution and any new equity securities could have rights, preferences and privileges superior to those of holders of our common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. We cannot be assured that additional equity, equity-linked or debt financing will be available on terms favorable to us or our stockholders, or at all. It is also possible that we may allocate significant amounts of capital towards products or technologies for which market demand is lower than expected and, as a result, abandon such efforts. If we are unable to maintain our current financing or obtain adequate additional financing when we require it, or if we obtain financing on terms which are not favorable to us, or if we expend capital on products or technologies that are unsuccessful, our ability to continue to support our business growth and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited, or we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash provided by operating activities was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash provided by operating activities of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was the result of a decrease in deferred taxes of $0.2 million and a decrease in the source of cash from net assets of $0.3 million primarily attributable to COVID-19 and its impact on billings and delayed vendor payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in investing activities was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in investing activities of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is the result of the asset purchase of Ra Medical ($3.5 million) and higher costs of lasers placed into service in 2021 versus 2020 ($1.5 million).
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds of $8.0 million from our senior term facility with MidCap, offset by debt repayments of $7.8 million associated with our note payable and EIDL Loan. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $2.5 million in proceeds from borrowings under our PPP Loan and EIDL Loan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Reflects obligations related to our leased executive offices in Horsham, PA and our leased manufacturing and warehouse space in Carlsbad, CA.
Impact of Inflation
We have not operated in a highly inflationary period, and we do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our revenues or expenses. If we enter an inflationary period, it could have a material impact on our expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP, and the rules and regulations of the SEC requires us to make estimates and assumptions, based on judgments considered reasonable, which affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Although we believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable when made, they are based upon information available to us at the time they are made. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and, if necessary, make adjustments. Due to the risks and uncertainties involved in our business and evolving market conditions and given the subjective element of the estimates and assumptions made, actual results may differ from estimated results.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting policies that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult and subjective judgments. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our audited financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We have primarily two types of arrangements for our phototherapy treatment equipment from which we earn revenues from dermatology recurring procedures: (i) we place our lasers in a physician’s office at no charge to the physician, and generally charge the physician a fee for an agreed upon number of treatments; or (ii) we place our lasers in a physician’s office and charge the physician a fixed fee for a specified period of time not to exceed an agreed upon number of treatments; if that number is exceeded additional fees will have to be paid. Revenues attributable to these types of arrangements are accounted for under the guidance applicable to leases. These arrangements are similar to operating leases since we provide the customers limited arrangement rights to use the treatment equipment, the treatment equipment resides in the physician’s office and we may exercise the right to remove the equipment upon notice, under certain circumstances, while the physician controls the utility and output of such equipment during the term of the arrangement as it pertains to the use of access codes to treat the patients. For the first type of arrangement, sales of access codes are considered variable treatment code payments and are recognized as revenue over the estimated usage period of the agreed upon number of treatments. For the second type of arrangement, customers purchase access codes and revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis as the lasers are being used over the term specified in the agreement. Variable treatment code payments that will be paid only if the customer exceeds the agreed upon number of treatments are recognized only when such treatments are being exceeded and used.
We recognize revenue from dermatology procedures equipment sales when control of the promised good or service is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those good or services. Accordingly, we determine revenue recognition by applying the following steps:
•
identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•
identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
determination of the transaction price;
•
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
recognition of revenues when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied, which is generally the point in time when the product is shipped or control is transferred for our dermatology procedures equipment sales. We sell to physicians in the United States and to third-party distributors outside the United States and do not provide return rights. Sales to distributors outside the United States are made in U.S. dollars. In addition, we provide a one to two-year warranty for systems sold in the United States. Terms of the of the product warranty differ amongst our third-party distributors outside the United States but are generally two years. These assurance-type warranties are not considered a separate performance obligation. We provide for the estimated cost to repair or replace products under any warranty at the time of sale. We also earn revenue from customers from services outside of their warranty term or annual service contracts. Revenue from these service-type warranties is recognized as the services are provided.
Asset Acquisitions
Accounting for transactions as asset acquisitions is significantly different than business combinations. Goodwill is only recognized in business combination transactions. The fair value of contingent consideration is recognized in business combination transactions and may be recognized in asset acquisitions if payment is probable and the amount can be estimated. As a result, it is important to determine whether a business or an asset or a group of assets is acquired. A business is defined in ASC 805, Business Combinations, as an integrated set of inputs and processes that are capable of generating outputs that have the ability to provide a return to its investors or owners. Typical inputs include long-lived assets (including intangible assets or rights to use long-lived assets), intellectual property and the ability to obtain access to required resources. Typical processes include strategic, operational and resource management processes that are typically documented or evident through an organized workforce.
When substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets, the acquired set is not a business. We considered all of the above factors when determining whether a business was acquired. In evaluating our acquisition of Pharos in 2021, we concluded that the fair value of consideration given to Ra Medical was concentrated in the acquired customer list intangible. As such, we accounted for the transaction as an asset acquisition. The fair value was allocated to the acquired intangible and is being amortized over its estimated useful life.
Goodwill and Intangible Impairments
As of December 31, 2021, we had $8.8 million of goodwill related to the acquisitions of XTRAC and VTRAC businesses in fiscal 2015. We evaluate the carrying value of goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year and whenever circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units to which the goodwill relates requires management to make estimates and assumptions. We organized our business into two operating segments, which also serve as our goodwill reporting units and are defined as Dermatology Recurring Procedures and Dermatology Procedures Equipment. Our analysis employed the use of both a market and income approach, with the market approach given a 25% weighting and the income approach given a 75% weighting. Significant assumptions used in the income approach include growth and discount rates, profit margins and our weighted average cost of capital. We used historical performance and management estimates of future performance to determine profit margins and growth rates. Discount rates selected for each reporting unit varied. Our weighted average cost of capital included a review and assessment of market and capital structure assumptions. For both reporting units the fair value was in excess of the carrying value. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. Changes in our actual results and/or estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
All of our intangibles are definite lived assets, with amortization recorded over the estimated useful life on a straight-line basis. As of December 31, 2021 we had $10.1 million of intangible assets. The definite lived assets are tested for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset group may not be recoverable. Our intangible assets are grouped into five categories: core technology, product technology, customer relationships, trade names and Pharos customer lists. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to the undiscounted cash flows attributable to the asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value of the asset group.
Considerable management judgment is necessary to assess recoverable amounts of intangible assets and measure fair value of the intangible assets that were impaired as such measurements involve estimation of future revenues, royalty rates, profit margins and other cash flows. Changes in our actual results and/or estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
Sales and Use Taxes
We record state sales tax collected and remitted for our customers on dermatology procedures equipment sales on a net basis, excluded from revenue. Our sales tax expense that is not presently being collected and remitted for the recurring revenue business is recorded in general and administrative expenses within the consolidated statements of operations.
We believe that our state sales and use tax accruals have been properly recognized such that, if our arrangements with customers are deemed more likely than not that we would not be exempt from sales tax in a particular state, the basis for measurement of the state sales and use tax is calculated in accordance with ASC 405, Liabilities, as a transaction tax. If and when we are successful in defending ourselves or in settling the sales tax obligation for a lesser amount, the reversal of this liability is to be recorded in the period the settlement is reached. However, the precise scope, timing and time period at issue, as well as the final outcome of any audit and actual settlement, remains uncertain.
In the ordinary course of business, we are, from time to time, subject to audits performed by state taxing authorities. These actions and proceedings are generally based on the position that the arrangements into which we have entered are subject to sales and use tax rather than exempt from tax under applicable law. Several states have assessed us an aggregate of $2.4 million including penalties and interest for the period from March 2014 through April 2020. We received notification that an administrative state judge issued an opinion finding in our favor that the sale of XTRAC treatment codes was not taxable as sales tax with respect to that state’s first assessment. This ruling covers $1.5 million of the total $2.4 million of assessments. The jurisdiction filed an appeal of the administrative law judge’s finding and, following the submission of legal briefs by both sides and oral argument held in January 2022, the appeal is still in process.
We are also in another jurisdiction’s administrative process of appeal with respect to the remaining $0.9 million of assessments, and the timing of the process has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. If there is a determination that the true object of our recurring revenue model is not exempt from sales taxes and is not a prescription medicine, or we do not have other defenses where we prevail, we may be subject to sales taxes in those particular states for previous years and in the future, plus potential interest and penalties.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.