Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This annual report on Form 10-K and other reports filed by SilverSun Technologies, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, SWK Technologies, Inc., Secure Cloud Services, Inc., and Critical Cyber Defense Corp. (together the “Company”, “we”, “our”, and “us”) from time to time with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company’s management as well as estimates and assumptions made by Company’s management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. When used in the filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company’s management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks contained in the “Risk Factors” section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K, relating to the Company’s industry, the Company’s operations and results of operations, and any businesses that the Company may acquire. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, the Company cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, the Company does not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our consolidated financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Overview
SilverSun Technologies, Inc. is engaged in providing transformational business management applications and technologies and professional consulting services to small and medium size companies, primarily in the manufacturing, distribution and service industries.
We are executing a multi-pronged business strategy centered on recurring revenue, customer retention and on rapidly increasing the size of our installed customer base. The growth of our customer base is accomplished via our traditional marketing programs and acquisitions. After a customer is secured, our strategy is to up-sell and cross-sell, providing the customer with advanced technologies and third-party add-ons that help them digitally transform their business. These add-on products could include application hosting, cybersecurity, warehouse management, human capital management, payment automation, sales tax compliance or any number of other products or services that we represent. Many of these incremental products and services are billed on a subscription basis, often paying monthly for the service, which increases our monthly recurring revenue (“MRR”). This strategy increases the average revenue per customer, which facilitates our continued growth, and reduces our cost of customer acquisition, which enhances our profitability profile.
Our core strength is rooted in our ability to discover and identify the driving forces of change that are affecting - or will affect - businesses in a wide range of industries. We invest valuable time and resources to fully understand how technology is transforming the business management landscape and what current or emerging innovations are deserving of a clients’ attention. By leveraging this knowledge and foresight, our growing list of clients are empowered with the means to more effectively manage their businesses; to capitalize on real-time insight drawn from their data resources; and to materially profit from enhanced operational functionality, process flexibility and expedited process execution.
We are a business application, technology and consulting company providing strategies and solutions to meet our clients’ information, technology and business management needs. Our services and technologies enable customers to manage, protect and monetize their enterprise assets whether on-premise or in the cloud. As a value-added reseller of business application software, we offer solutions for accounting and business management, financial reporting, Enterprise Resource Planning (“ERP”), Human Capital Management (“HCM”), Warehouse Management Systems (“WMS”), Customer Relationship Management (“CRM”), and Business Intelligence(“BI”).
Additionally, we have our own development staff building software solutions for various ERP enhancements. Our value-added services focus on consulting and professional services, specialized programming, training, and technical support. We have a dedicated Information Technology (“IT”) network services practice that provides managed services, Infrastructure-as-a-Service, cybersecurity, application hosting, disaster recovery, business continuity, cloud and other services. Our customers are nationwide, with concentrations in the New York/New Jersey metropolitan area, Arizona, Southern California, North Carolina, Washington, Oregon and Illinois.
As Microsoft Certified Systems Engineers and Microsoft Certified Professionals, our staff offers a host of mission critical services, including cybersecurity, business continuity, disaster recovery, application hosting, remote network monitoring, server implementation, support and assistance, and technical design of network infrastructure, among other services. We compete with numerous large and small companies in this market sector, both nationally and locally.
Distinguished as one of the largest Acumatica and Sage Software practices in North America, we resell enterprise resource planning software published by both Acumatica and Sage, which addresses the financial accounting requirements of small- and medium-size businesses focused on manufacturing and distribution. We also offer services related to these sales, including design, installation, implementation, support and training. These product sales are primarily packaged software programs installed on a user workstation, on a local area network server, or in a hosted environment. The programs perform and support a wide variety of functions related to accounting, including financial reporting, accounts payable, accounts receivable and inventory management.
We employ consultants and host formal, topic-specific, training classes, both remotely and on-site at our clients’ facilities. Our consultants must pass annual subject matter examinations required by the software publisher to retain their product-based teaching certifications. We also provide end-user technical support services through our support/help desk, which is available during normal business hours, Monday through Friday. Our team of qualified product and technology consultants assist customers that contact us with questions about product features, functions, usability issues and configurations. The support/help desk offers services in a variety of ways, including prepaid services, time and materials billed as utilized and annual support contracts. Our customers can communicate with our support/help desk through email, chat, telephone and fax channels.
Led by specialized project managers, we provide professional services ranging from software customization to data migration to small- and medium-size business consulting.
We also are resellers of the WMS software published by Korber, which develops warehouse management software for middle market distributors. The primary purpose of a WMS is to control the movement and storage of materials within an operation and process the associated transactions. Directed picking, directed replenishment, and directed put-away are the key to WMS. The detailed setup and processing within a WMS can vary significantly from one software vendor to another. However, the basic WMS will use a combination of item, location, quantity, unit of measure and order information to determine where to stock, where to pick, and in what sequence to perform these operations. The Accellos WMS software improves accuracy and efficiency, streamlines materials handling, meets retail compliance requirements, and refines inventory control. Accellos also works as part of a complete operational solution by integrating seamlessly with RF hardware, accounting software, shipping systems and warehouse automation equipment. We market the Accellos solution to our existing and new medium-sized business clients.
Investing in the acquisition of other companies and proprietary business management solutions has been an important growth strategy for our Company, allowing us to rapidly expand into new geographic markets and create new and exciting profit centers. To date, we have completed a series of strategic ventures that have served to fundamentally strengthen our Company’s operating platform and materially expand our footprint to nearly every U.S. state. More specifically, over the past fifteen years, we have outright acquired select assets of or entered into revenue sharing agreements with Business Tech Solutions Group, Inc.; Wolen Katz Associates; AMP-BEST Consulting, Inc.; IncorTech; Micro-Point, Inc.; HighTower, Inc.; Point Solutions, LLC; SGEN, LLC., ESC, Inc., 2000 SOFT, Inc., Productive Tech Inc., The Macabe Associates, Oates & Co; Pinsight Technology, Inc.; Info Sys Management, Inc., Nellnube, Inc., Partners in Technology Inc., Prairie Technology Solutions Group, Inc., Computer Management Services, LLC, Business Software Solutions, PeopleSense, Inc., and more recently Dynamic Tech Services, Inc. and NEO3, LLC.
Additionally, it is our intention to continue to increase our business by seeking additional opportunities through potential acquisitions, revenue sharing arrangements, partnerships or investments. Such acquisitions, revenue sharing arrangements, partnerships or investments may consume cash reserves or require additional cash or equity. Our working capital and additional funding requirements will depend upon numerous factors, including: (i) strategic acquisitions or investments; (ii) an increase to current company personnel; (iii) the level of resources that we devote to sales and marketing capabilities; (iv) technological advances; and (v) the activities of competitors.
During 2021 the Company continued to expand its customer base and growth trend which we believe will provide a basis for future growth.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $480,974 (1.2%) to $41,701,380 as compared to $41,220,406 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Software sales increased by $201,807 (2.6%) to $7,863,387 in 2021 from $7,661,580 in 2020. The increase is attributable to an increase in sales of cloud-based ERP software and increased sales of third-party solutions which add functionality to customer’s existing systems.
Service revenue increased by $279,167 (0.8%) to $33,837,993 in 2021 from $33,558,826 in 2020. This increase is mainly attributed to increases in managed services and application hosting as we continue to focus in this area due to the needs of our customers’ digital transformation and the further requirement of customers to have the ability within their organizations to work remotely, particularly during the Covid pandemic.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $629,077 (3.8%) to $17,208,058 as compared to $16,578,981 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in overall gross profit for this period is attributable to the increase in revenues and the sale of higher margin products and services. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the overall gross profit percentage was 41.3% as compared to 40.2 % for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The gross profit attributed to software sales increased $235,310 (7.7%) to $3,288,001 for 2021 from $3,052,691 in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the gross profit percentage for software was 41.8% as compared to 39.8 % for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is due mostly to the increased sale of higher margin products. While revenues may decrease because of the shift to a subscription business model, our margins will, for the most part, not significantly change. The mix of products being sold by the Company changes from time to time which causes the overall gross margin percentage to vary.
The gross profit attributed to services increased $393,767 (2.9%) to $13,920,057 for 2021 from $13,526,290 in 2020. This increase is attributed to revenue increases in managed services and application hosting, which provide for higher profit margins, and increases in commission and maintenance revenue for the period offset partially by costs associated with the learning curve related to the training of new employees, who were hired to accommodate our growth. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the gross profit percentage for services was 41.1% as compared to 40.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses decreased $646,003 (8.8%) to $6,719,909 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $7,365,912 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to lower travel and entertainment expense and reduced attendance at conferences and trade shows and lower marketing expenses. In addition, we experienced a slight reduction in payroll related expenses because of departmental changes for various employees, thereby reducing salary and benefit expense.
General and administrative expenses increased $1,128,701 (13.6%) to $9,402,259 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $8,273,558 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase primarily a result of increases in payroll and payroll related expenses related to both additional personnel and departmental changes for various employees, which increased salary and benefit expense.
Share-based compensation increased $431,116 to $441,310 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $10,194 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to the issuance of stock options at the end of March 2021 and in October 2021.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $875,566 as compared to $705,932 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $169,634 (24%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to the additional amortization of intangible assets related to the new acquisitions.
(Loss) Income from Operations
As a result of the above, the Company had a loss from operations of $230,986 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to income from operations of $223,385 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2021 other income was $274,557 as compared to other expense of $347 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year ended December 31, 2021 includes the gain on the sale of a product line in the amount of $250,000 as well as a gain of a bargain purchase from an acquisition in the amount of $71,359.
(Loss) Income Before Taxes
As a result of the above, the Company generated income before taxes of $43,571 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to income before taxes in the amount of $223,038 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a tax provision of $178,005 as compared to a tax provision in the amount of $47,391 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the non-cash share-based compensation due to the issuance of stock options which are not tax deductible in the current year. State provision requirements were calculated based on the estimated tax rate. The Federal effective rate is higher than the statutory rate primarily due to the non-cash share-based compensation due to the issuance of stock options which are not tax deductible.
Net (Loss) Income
As a result of the above, the Company generated a net loss of $134,434 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a net income of $175,647 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The negative impact of Covid-19 on the economy continues to create uncertainty for the Company in the coming months and quarters. While our Company has not been significantly impacted because of this uncertainty, the negative impact on our business, in the future, is impossible to determine at this point, although it is likely that we could suffer negative consequences as many companies go out of business or decrease their technology spending.
The Company currently has no line of credit or other credit facility with any lender.
As such, we need to rely on our own limited resources to weather the anticipated economic downturn. Our competitors, almost all of whom are privately held, were able to avail themselves of the PPP program, making it more difficult for the Company to compete in the marketplace while we could not. Management will continue to monitor developments, explore various cost-cutting measures, and explore other sources of funding, but there is no guarantee we will be successful in doing so.
We are currently seeking additional operating income opportunities through potential acquisitions or investments. Such acquisitions or investments may consume cash reserves or require additional cash or equity. Our working capital and additional funding requirements will depend upon numerous factors, including: (i) strategic acquisitions or investments; (ii) an increase in current company personnel; (iii) the level of resources that we devote to sales and marketing capabilities; (iv) technological advances; and (v) the activities of competitors.
In February 2021, ISM converted the outstanding balance of the loan in the amount of $479,112 into 119,004 shares of the Company’s common stock.
In February 2021, Nellnube converted the outstanding balance of the loan in the amount of $191,645 into 47,602 shares of the Company’s common stock.
In February 2021, the Company received net proceeds of $3,382,352, excluding legal expenses, from the sale of 393,300 of common stock under its Registration Statement on Form S-3 and the previously disclosed At Market Issuance Sales Agreement.
In April 2021, the Company entered into the 2021 At Market Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co. (the “Sales Agent”) under which the Company may issue and sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $3,308,842 from time to time through the Sales Agent. Sales of the Company’s common stock through the Sales Agent, if any, will be made by any method that is deemed an “at the market” offering as defined by the SEC. The Company will pay to the Sales Agent a commission rate equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of any shares of common stock sold through the Sales Agent under the 2021 At Market Agreement.
In June 2021, 65,452 shares of Common Stock were issued and sold generating $722,116 under The At Market Agreement, excluding legal expenses. In July 2021, an additional 9,548 shares of Common Stock were issued and sold generating $76,436, net of legal expenses.
On June 21, 2021, the Company announced the payment of a $0.60 special cash dividend per share of Common Stock to shareholders of record July 9, 2021. The dividend was paid on July 16, 2021 in the amount of $3,081,706.
In addition to developing new products, obtaining new customers and increasing sales to existing customers, management plans to increase its business and profitability by entering into collaboration agreements, buying assets, and acquiring companies in the business software and information technology consulting and other markets with solid revenue streams and established customer bases that generate positive cash flow.
On April 1, 2021, the Company acquired certain assets of CT-Solution, Inc. (“CTS”) pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement. In consideration for the acquired assets, the Company issued a promissory note to CTS in the principal aggregate amount of $130,000 (the CTS Note”). The CTS Note is due in 36 months from the closing date and bears interest at a rate of two (2%) percent per annum. Monthly payments including interest are $3,724.
On May 1, 2021, SWK acquired certain assets of PeopleSense, Inc. (“PSI”) pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement for cash of $145,703, customer deposits related to prepaid time from clients in the amount of $99,938, and the issuance of a promissory note in the aggregate principal amount of $450,000 (the “PSI Note”). The PSI Note is due in 36 months from the closing date and bears interest at a rate of two percent (2.0%) per annum. Monthly payments including interest are $12,889.
On January 1, 2022 (“Effective Date”), the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Dynamic Tech Services, Inc. (“DTS”) to acquire certain assets of DTS. The purchase price for the acquired assets was $1,335,000, $500,000 of which was paid in cash and $835,000 of which was paid through the issuance of a four-year $835,000 promissory note dated January 1, 2022, paying interest at the rate of 3.25% per annum (the “DTS Note”). The principal amount of the Note is subject to a downward adjustment in the event the Company loses any subscription renewal revenue during the one-year period immediately following the Effective Date from any persons that were customers of DTS immediately prior to the Effective Date (the “DTS Customers”). Any such downward adjustment will be determined by calculating the percentage of loss of Acumatica subscription renewals during the one-year period immediately following the Effective Date from DTS Customers. In the event that subscription renewal revenue received from DTS Customers during the one-year period immediately following the Effective Date is less than 95% of the subscription renewal revenue received by DTS from DTS Customers during the one-year period immediately preceding the Effective Date, the principal amount of the Note will be reduced. The measuring period for any downward adjustment will be as of the one-year anniversary of the Effective Date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, under no circumstances will the principal amount of the Note be reduced by reason of such downward adjustment by more than $150,000 (i.e., to a principal amount below $685,000). The Note will be amortized as follows: The first payment of principal and interest due under the Note, which will be an annual payment, is due and payable on January 1, 2023, after the revised principal amount of the Buyer Note is determined and thereafter, payments will be made quarterly in twelve equal installments.
On January 22, 2022, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire certain assets of NEO3, LLC (“NEO3”). The purchase price for the acquired assets was $225,000, $150,000 of which was paid in cash and $75,000 of which was paid through the issuance of a three-year $75,000 promissory note dated January 22, 2022, paying interest at the rate of 2% per annum (“the “NEO3 Note”).
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net increase in cash of $218,701. The Company’s principal sources and uses of funds were as follows:
Cash provided by operating activities:
The Company provided $226,034 in cash for operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to providing $1,729,091 of cash from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in cash provided by operations is primarily because of the increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets as a result due from a vendor in the amount of $691,680 and the increase in accounts receivable offset partially by the increase in accounts payable.
Cash (used in) provided by investing activities:
Investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 used cash of $510,464 as compared to providing $839,808 of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in cash provided is due to proceeds received in 2020 from the sale of the Company’s EDI practice, and such payments not occurring during the year ended December 31, 2021. This was partially offset by the proceeds received in 2021 from the sale of a product line. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company spent $645,703 to acquire new businesses as compared to only $185,410 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021 financing activities provided cash of $503,131 as compared to using cash of $4,631,884 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash provided is attributed to the received net proceeds of $4,180,904 from the sale of common stock under its Registration Statement on Form S-3 and the previously disclosed At Market Issuance Sales Agreement with a sales agent offset by lower dividend payments to shareholders.
The Company believes that it has adequate liquidity to fund its operating plans for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
There was no significant impact on the Company’s operations because of inflation for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to bad debts, intangible assets, and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified below the accounting policies, related to what we believe are most critical to our business operations and are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition or Plan of Operation where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
Revenue Recognition
The Company has elected the significant financing component practical expedient in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. In determining the transaction price, the Company does not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component as the Company expects, at contract inception, that the period between when the entity transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
Software product revenue is recognized when the product is delivered to the customer and the Company’s performance obligation is fulfilled.
Service revenue is recognized when the professional consulting, maintenance or other ancillary services are provided to the customer. Shipping and handling costs charged to customers are classified as revenue, and the shipping and handling costs incurred are included in cost of sales.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist primarily of invoices for maintenance and professional services. Full payment for software ordered by customers is primarily due in advance of ordering from the software supplier. Payments for maintenance and support plan renewals are due before the beginning of the maintenance period. Terms under our professional service agreements are generally 50% due in advance and the balance on completion of the services.
The Company maintains an allowance for bad debt estimated by considering a number of factors, including the length of time the amounts are past due, the Company’s previous loss history and the customer’s current ability to pay its obligations. Accounts are written off against the allowance when deemed uncollectable.
Unbilled Services
The Company recognizes revenue on its professional services as those services are performed. Unbilled services represent the revenue recognized but not yet invoiced.
Definite Lived Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets
The values assigned to intangible assets were based on an independent valuation. Purchased intangible assets are amortized over the useful lives based on the estimate of the use of economic benefit of the asset using the straight-line amortization method.
The Company assesses potential impairment of its intangible assets and other long-lived assets when there is evidence that recent events or changes in circumstances have made recovery of an asset’s carrying value unlikely. Factors the Company considers important, which may cause impairment include, among others, significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired asset, negative industry or economic trends, and significant underperformance relative to historical or projected operating results.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires the recording of acquired assets and assumed liabilities at their acquisition date fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Results of operations related to business combinations are included prospectively beginning with the date of acquisition and transaction costs related to business combinations are recorded within general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method described in FASB ASC 740, “Income Taxes”. Deferred tax assets arise from a variety of sources, the most significant being: a) tax losses that can be carried forward to be utilized against profits in future years; b) expenses recognized for financial reporting purposes but disallowed in the tax return until the associated cash flow occurs; and c) valuation changes of assets which need to be tax effected for book purposes but are deductible only when the valuation change is realized.
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes, as well as net operating loss carryforwards. Based on ASU 2015-17, all deferred tax assets or liabilities are classified as long-term. Valuation allowances are established against deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates or laws is recognized in operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company accounts for uncertainties in income taxes under ASC 740-10-50 which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC 740-10 requires that the Company determine whether the benefits of its tax positions are more-likely-than-not of being sustained upon audit based on the technical merits of the tax position. The Company recognizes the impact of an uncertain income tax position taken on its income tax return at the largest amount that is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority.
The Company has federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards which are subject to limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal and state jurisdictions. Tax years 2018 to 2021 remain open to examination for both the U.S. federal and state jurisdictions.
Despite the Company’s belief that its tax return positions are consistent with applicable tax laws, one or more positions may be challenged by taxing authorities. Settlement of any challenge can result in no change, a complete disallowance, or some partial adjustment reached through negotiations or litigation. Interest and penalties related to income tax matters, if applicable, will be recognized as income tax expense. There were no liabilities for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2021 and 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 the Company did not incur any expense related to interest or penalties for income tax matters, and no such amounts were accrued as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
During fiscal 2021, we did not engage in any material off-balance sheet activities or have any relationships or arrangements with unconsolidated entities established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Further, we have not guaranteed any obligations of unconsolidated entities, nor do we have any commitment or intent to provide additional funding to any such entities.