Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this filing. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements including statements about our plans, estimates and beliefs. These statements involve risks and uncertainties and our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied in forward-looking statements. See “Forward Looking Statements” above. See also the “Risk Factors” disclosure in Item 1A above for additional discussion of the risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements.
For a discussion as to how COVID-19 has affected our business, see “COVID-19 Update” below.
Overview and Recent Developments
Shutterstock is a leading global creative platform offering full-service solutions, high-quality content, and creative workflow solutions for brands, businesses and media companies. Our platform brings together users and contributors of content by providing readily-searchable content that our customers pay to license and by compensating contributors as their content is licensed.
Our key offerings include:
•Images - consisting of photographs, vectors and illustrations. Images are typically used in visual communications, such as websites, digital and print marketing materials, corporate communications, books, publications and other similar uses.
•Footage - consisting of video clips, premium footage filmed by industry experts and cinema grade video effects, available in HD and 4K formats. Footage is often integrated into websites, social media, marketing campaigns and cinematic productions.
•Music - consisting of high-quality music tracks and sound effects, which are often used to complement images and footage.
•3 Dimensional (“3D”) Models - consisting of 3D models, used in a variety of industries such as advertising, media and video production, gaming, retail, education, design and architecture, following our acquisition of TurboSquid, Inc. (“TurboSquid”) on February 1, 2021.
•Creative Design Software - consisting of our online graphic design and image editing platform. On September 3, 2021, we completed the acquisition of substantially all of the assets and assumption of certain liabilities from PicMonkey, LLC (“PicMonkey”).
For customers seeking specialized solutions, Shutterstock Studios extends our offerings by providing custom, high-quality content matched with production tools and services at scale. Shutterstock Studios delivers end-to-end custom creative services providing data-driven content strategy and full-scale production for our customers. Shutterstock Editorial provides imagery and video content for the latest news, sports and entertainment, and Shutterstock Editorial also offers the Newsroom, for global breaking news, exclusives and archival content.
In addition, in July 2021, through our newly formed entity Shutterstock.AI, Inc. (“Shutterstock.AI”), we acquired Pattern89, Inc., Datasine Limited, and assets from Shotzr, Inc., three artificial intelligence entities that provide data driven insights through their artificial intelligence platforms. Shutterstock.AI will commercialize data assets within our content library and enable companies to grow their capabilities in computer vision and content insights. In addition, with artificial intelligence tools obtained from these acquisitions, we plan to develop predictive performance capabilities to help customers make more data-informed content decisions.
Over 2.0 million active, paying customers contributed to our revenue in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, more than 2.0 million approved contributors made their images, footage and music tracks available in our collection, which has grown to more than 400 million images and more than 24 million footage clips as of December 31, 2021. This makes our collection of content one of the largest of its kind, and we delivered 180.0 million paid downloads to our customers across all of our brands during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Through our platform, we generate revenue by licensing content to our customers. During the year ended December 31, 2021, 63% of our revenue and the majority of our content licenses came from our E-commerce sales channel. The majority of our customers license content directly through our self-service web properties, including our Shutterstock.com, bigstock.com, premiumbeat.com and turbosquid.com websites. E-commerce customers have the ability to purchase plans that are paid on
either a monthly or annual basis or to license content on a transactional basis. E-commerce customers generally license content under our standard or enhanced licenses, with additional licensing options available to meet customers’ individual needs.
Customers in our Enterprise sales channel generally have unique content, licensing and workflow needs. These customers benefit from communication with our dedicated sales, service and research teams which provide a number of personalized enhancements to their creative workflows including non-standard licensing rights, multi-seat access, ability to pay on credit terms, multi-brand licensing packages, increased indemnification protection and content licensed for use-cases outside of those available on our e-commerce platform. Customers in our enterprise sales channel may also benefit from our API platform as well as access to Shutterstock Editorial, which includes our library of editorial images and videos and Shutterstock Studios, which provides data-driven content strategy, brand storytelling and full scale production services. Our Enterprise sales channel provided approximately 37% of our revenue in 2021.
As the use cases for our creative solutions expand, we believe our customers are seeking alternative means to consume our offerings. As a result, we have seen strong growth in customers purchasing monthly subscription products, including our suite of multi-asset subscriptions, launched during 2021. These multi-asset products are credit-based and enable customers to license images, footage and music in a single subscription. Our monthly subscriptions provide for either a fixed number of content licenses or credits that may be used to download content during the period. Our subscription-based pricing model makes the creative process easier because customers can download content in our collection for use in their creative process without incremental costs, which provides greater creative freedom and helps improve work product. In addition, customers may also purchase licenses through other contractual plans where the customer commits to buy a predetermined quantity of content licenses that may be downloaded over a period of time, generally between one month to one year. For users who need less content, individual content licenses may also be purchased on a transactional basis, paid for at the time of download.
Contributors of content typically earn a royalty each time their work is licensed. Contributors earn royalties based on our published earnings schedule that is based on annual licensing volume, which determines the contributor’s earnings tier and the purchase option under which the content was licensed. Royalties represent the largest component of our operating expenses, are reported within cost of revenue, tend to fluctuate proportionately with revenue and paid downloads, and may be impacted by the mix of products sold.
COVID-19 Update
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) was initially reported and on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. Our operations have been impacted by office closures globally and restrictions on employee travel and in-person meetings, however, we have generally been able to deliver our services remotely. The economic uncertainty caused by COVID-19 has had an impact on our customers and their ability to spend marketing budgets on our products, to varying degrees during 2020 and into 2021. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Key Operating Metrics
In addition to key financial metrics, we regularly review a number of key operating metrics to evaluate our business, determine the allocation of resources and make decisions regarding business strategies. We believe that these metrics can be useful for understanding the underlying trends in our business. The following table summarizes our key operating metrics, which are unaudited, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Subscribers
We define subscribers as those customers who purchase one or more of our monthly recurring products for a continuous period of at least three months, measured as of the end of the reporting period excluding customers from our acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey. We believe the number of subscribers is an important metric that provides insight into our monthly recurring business and its growth. We believe that an increase in our number of subscribers is an indicator of engagement in our platform and potential for future growth.
Subscriber Revenue
We define subscriber revenue as the revenue generated from subscribers during the period excluding revenues from our acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey. We believe subscriber revenue, together with our number of subscribers, provide insight into the portion of our business and growth driven by our monthly recurring products.
Average Revenue Per Customer
Average revenue per customer is calculated by dividing total revenue for the last twelve-month period by customers, excluding revenues from our recent acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey. We define customers as total active, paying customers that contributed to total revenue over the last twelve-month period, excluding customers from our recent acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey. Changes in our average revenue per customer will be driven by changes in the mix of our subscription-based products and the pricing in our transactional business.
Paid Downloads
We define paid downloads as the number of downloads that our customers make in a given period of our content. Paid downloads exclude content related to custom content, downloads of content that are offered to customers for no charge, including our free image of the week, and downloads associated with our computer vision offering. Measuring the number of paid downloads that our customers make in a given period is important because they are the primary method of delivering licensed content, which drives a significant portion of the Company’s revenue and contributor royalties.
Revenue per Download
We define revenue per download as the amount of revenue recognized in a given period divided by the number of paid downloads in that period excluding revenue from custom content, revenue that is not derived from or associated with content licenses and revenue associated with our computer vision offering. This metric captures any changes in our pricing, including changes resulting from the impact of competitive pressures, as well as the mix of licensing options that our customers choose, some of which generate more revenue per download than others, and the impact that changes in foreign currency rates have on our pricing. Changes in revenue per download are primarily driven by the introduction of new product offerings, changes in product mix and customer utilization of our products.
Content in our Collection
We define content in our collection as the total number of approved images (photographs, vectors and illustrations) and footage (in number of clips) in our library on shutterstock.com at the end of the period. We exclude content from this collection metric that is not uploaded directly to our site but is available for license by our customers through an application program interface, custom content and certain content that may be licensed for editorial use only. We believe that our large selection of high-quality content enables us to attract and retain customers and drives our network effect.
Basis of Presentation
Revenue
The majority of our revenue is earned from licensing content. Content licenses are generally purchased by our customers on a monthly or annual subscription basis, whereby a customer pays for a predetermined quantity of content that may be downloaded over a specific period of time, or, on a transactional basis, whereby a customer pays for individual content licenses at the time of download. Subsequent to the acquisition of PicMonkey, we also generate revenue from the license of creative editing tools.
We recognize revenue upon the satisfaction of performance obligations, which occurs when content is downloaded by a customer. For content licenses, we recognize revenue on both our subscription-based and transaction-based products when content is downloaded, at which time the license is provided. In addition, management estimates expected unused licenses for
subscription-based products and recognizes the estimated revenue associated with the unused licenses as digital content is downloaded and licenses are obtained for such content by the customer during the subscription period. The estimate of unused licenses is based on historical download activity and future changes in the estimate could impact the timing of revenue recognition of our subscription products. For revenue associated with the license of our creative editing tools, the Company recognizes revenue on a straight-line basis over the subscription period. We expense contract acquisition costs as incurred, to the extent that the amortization period would otherwise be one year or less.
Collectability is reasonably assured at the time the electronic order or contract is entered. The majority of our customers purchase products by making an electronic payment with a credit card at the time of the transaction. Customer payments received in advance of revenue recognition are contract liabilities and are recorded as deferred revenue. Customers that do not pay in advance are invoiced and are required to make payments under standard credit terms. Collectability for customers who pay on credit terms allowing for payment beyond the date at which service commences, is based on a credit evaluation for certain new customers and transaction history with existing customers.
We recognize revenue gross of contributor royalties because we are the principal in the transaction as we are the party responsible for the performance obligation and control the product or service before transferring it to the customer. We also license content to customers through third-party resellers. Third-party resellers sell our products directly to customers as the principal in those transactions. Accordingly, we recognize revenue net of costs paid to resellers.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue consists of royalties paid to contributors, credit card processing fees, content review costs, customer service expenses, infrastructure and hosting costs related to maintaining our creative platform and cloud-based software platform, depreciation and amortization of capitalized internal-use software, purchased content and acquisition-related intangible assets, allocated facility costs and other supporting overhead costs. Cost of revenue also includes employee compensation, including non-cash equity-based compensation, bonuses and benefits associated with the maintenance of our creative platform and cloud-based software platform.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses include third-party marketing, advertising, branding, public relations and sales expenses. Sales and marketing expenses also include associated employee compensation, including non-cash equity-based compensation, bonuses and benefits, and commissions as well as allocated facility and other supporting overhead costs.
Product Development. Product development expenses consist of employee compensation, including non-cash equity-based compensation, bonuses and benefits, and expenses related to vendors engaged in product management, design, development and testing of our websites and products. Product development costs also includes software and other IT equipment costs, allocated facility expenses and other supporting overhead costs.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses include employee compensation, including non-cash equity-based compensation, bonuses and benefits for executive, finance, accounting, legal, human resources, internal information technology, internet security, business intelligence and other administrative personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include outside legal, tax and accounting services, bad debt expense, insurance, facilities costs, other supporting overhead costs and depreciation and amortization expense.
Other Income / (Expense), Net. Other income / (expense), net consists of non-operating costs such as foreign currency transaction gains and losses, in addition to interest income.
Income Taxes. We compute income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted statutory income tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our results of operations for the periods indicated. The period-to-period comparisons of results are not necessarily indicative of results for future periods.
The following table presents the components of our results of operations for the periods indicated as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table presents our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue increased by $106.7 million, or 16%, to $773.4 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. On a constant currency basis, revenue increased approximately 15% in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020. Our revenue growth in 2021 is primarily driven by revenue generated from our 2021 acquisitions and the increase in our subscription business. From 2020 to 2021, subscribers grew by 22% to 343,000 and subscriber revenue grew by 20% to $317.5 million.
E-commerce revenues increased by 19%, to $490.2 million in 2021, as compared to 2020. On a constant currency basis, E-commerce revenues increased by 16% in 2021, as compared to 2020. During 2021, growth in our E-commerce sales channel was driven by increased subscriber revenue and revenue generated by our acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey, which were completed on February 1, 2021 and September 3, 2021, respectively.
Enterprise revenues increased by 11%, to $283.2 million in 2021, as compared to 2020. On a constant currency basis, Enterprise revenues increased by 10% in 2021, as compared to 2020. We have continued to execute on our strategy to respond to market trends including making updates to product offerings and continuously improving our platform. We believe these enhancements impacted our Enterprise sales operations during the period and were one of the drivers of the increased deferred revenue balance as of December 31, 2021.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we delivered 180.0 million paid downloads, and our revenue per download increased to $4.16 in 2021, as compared to $3.68 in 2020. During 2021, the 13% increase in revenue per download, is primarily due to changes in product mix.
Changes in our revenue by region were as follows: revenue from North America increased by $54.4 million, or 23%, to $291.0 million, revenue from Europe increased by $32.8 million, or 15%, to $253.5 million and revenue from outside Europe and North America increased by $19.5 million, or 9%, to $229.0 million, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Cost and Expenses
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue increased by $18.1 million, or 7%, to $277.7 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by: (i) higher royalty expense, content procurement costs and credit card fees, associated with our increased revenue and (ii) increased depreciation and amortization expense driven by our recent acquisitions. In addition, in 2020, cost of revenue included severance charges of $1.2 million. We expect that our cost of revenue will continue to fluctuate in line with changes in revenue and paid downloads.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $45.6 million, or 29%, to $204.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. As a percent of revenue, sales and marketing expenses increased to 26% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 24% for 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily driven by (i) $31.7 million in higher marketing spend which includes performance marketing, brand marketing and television ad spend, and (ii) $11.3 million in higher employee-related costs, primarily related to commissions associated with increased enterprise billings. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, sales and marketing includes severance charges of $2.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to fluctuate as we optimize our sales channels and invest in new customer acquisition, products and geographies.
Product Development. Product development expenses increased by $6.0 million, or 13%, to $52.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher personnel costs and higher non-cash compensation expense. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in software and other IT-related costs, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. We expect product development expenses, of which a portion will be capitalized, to continue in the foreseeable future, as we pursue opportunities to invest in developing new products and internal tools and enhance the functionality of our existing products and technologies.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $14.2 million, or 12%, to $130.8 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase was primarily driven by (i) $5.9 million in higher employee-related costs in 2021 as compared to 2020, (ii) $4.7 million in higher non-cash compensation expense; and (iii) $4.3 million in higher professional fees, which were impacted by transaction costs associated with our acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey. These increases were partially offset by a $2.4 million decline in bad debt expense, and other reductions associated with ongoing vendor management initiatives. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses include severance charges of $0.5 million and $1.4 million, respectively.
Other (expense) / income, net. During 2021, other (expense) / income, net substantially consisted of $3.3 million of expense due to foreign currency fluctuations. We expect to experience future foreign currency gains and losses as the US Dollar fluctuates relative to non-US currencies in which we transact.
During 2020, approximately $3.1 million of other (expense) / income, net related to favorable foreign currency fluctuations, in addition to $1.2 million of interest income.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense decreased by $4.9 million, to $12.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately 12.3% and 19.8%, respectively.
The 2021 effective tax rate includes discrete items, the most significant of which relate to windfall tax benefits associated with equity-based compensation and the impact of a capital loss transaction. The net effect of these items decreased our effective tax rate by 8.6%. Excluding these discrete items, our effective tax rate would have been 20.9% for 2021.
The 2020 effective tax rate includes certain discrete items and the net effect of these discrete items increased the effective tax rate for 2020 by 0.8%. Excluding these discrete items, the effective tax rate would have been 19.0% for 2020.
As we continue to expand our operations outside of the United States, we have been and may continue to become subject to taxation in additional non-U.S. jurisdictions and our effective tax rate could fluctuate accordingly.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table presents our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue increased by $16.2 million, or 2%, to $666.7 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Foreign currency fluctuations did not have a significant impact on revenues in 2020, as compared to 2019. Our revenue growth in 2020 is primarily driven by our subscription business. From 2019 to 2020, subscribers grew by 45% to 281,000 and subscriber revenue grew by 12% to $265.3 million. During 2020, the majority of our subscriber revenue growth is attributed to our E-commerce sales channel.
E-commerce revenues increased by 5%, to $412.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Foreign currency fluctuations did not have a significant impact on E-commerce revenues in 2020, as compared to 2019. During 2020, growth in our E-commerce sales channel was primarily driven by increased subscriber revenue.
Enterprise revenues decreased by 2%, to $254.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. Foreign currency fluctuations did not have a significant impact on Enterprise revenues in 2020, as compared to 2019. During 2020, the Company identified and implemented certain changes to improve performance, updated product offerings and made further platform investments. We believe these enhancements impacted our Enterprise sales operations at the end of 2020 and is one of the drivers of the increased deferred revenue balance as of December 31, 2020.
In addition, we believe our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was unfavorably affected by the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our customers and their ability to spend marketing budgets on our products.
In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we delivered 180.0 million and 187.8 million paid downloads, respectively, and our revenue per download increased to $3.68 for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $3.43 for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the 4% decrease in the number of paid downloads compared to 2019, is due to lower customer utilization of our products. We believe that the decline in usage during 2020, compared to 2019, is partially attributable to COVID-19.
Changes in our revenue by region were as follows: revenue from North America increased by $8.4 million, or 4%, to $236.6 million, revenue from Europe increased by $3.3 million, or 2%, to $220.7 million and revenue from outside Europe and North America increased by $4.5 million, or 2%, to $209.4 million, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Cost and Expenses
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue decreased by $18.6 million, or 7%, to $259.6 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to lower royalty expense, content procurement costs and depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by higher costs associated with website hosting, hardware and software licenses as well as increased credit card fees. In addition, cost of revenue includes severance charges of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduction in royalty expense was driven by the 4% decline in paid downloads as well as a modification in the way we compensate contributors. We expect that our cost of revenue will fluctuate in line with changes in revenue and paid downloads.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $22.5 million, or 12%, to $159.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. As a percent of revenue, sales and marketing expenses decreased to 24% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 28% for 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a $21.1 million decline in marketing spend as we focused resources on more efficient customer acquisition and improved marketing return on investment. In addition, travel and related expense costs declined by $2.2 million due to travel restrictions resulting from COVID-19. These declines were partially offset by $2.3 million in higher employee-related costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, sales and marketing expense includes severance charges of $1.7 million. We expect sales and marketing expenses to fluctuate as we optimize our sales channels and invest in new customer acquisition, products and geographies.
Product Development. Product development expenses decreased by $11.2 million, or 20%, to $46.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a $7.6 million reduction in software and other IT-related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year. In addition, employee and consulting related expenses decreased by $1.4 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, product and development expense includes severance charges of $1.1 million. We expect product development expenses, of which a portion will be capitalized, to continue in the foreseeable future, as we pursue opportunities to invest in developing new products and internal tools and enhance the functionality of our existing products and technologies.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $3.3 million, or 3%, to $116.6 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by (i) higher non-cash compensation expense of $5.6 million, attributable to certain performance-based awards; (ii) higher employee-related costs of $4.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019; and (iii) an increase in bad debt expense of $2.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019. These increases were partially offset by (i) a reduction in expense of $3.4 million, associated with the 2019 accrual of long-term incentives, related to our 2017 acquisition of Flashstock; (ii) lower depreciation and amortization expense of $3.2 million, driven by the recognition of $1.5 million of accelerated amortization expense in 2019 in conjunction with the Company’s re-branding of its Editorial product, in addition to lower depreciation driven by assets which became fully depreciated in prior periods; and (iii) lower professional and consulting fees of $1.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, general and administrative expenses include severance charges of $1.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively.
Other income, net. During 2020, $3.1 million of other income related to favorable foreign currency fluctuations, in addition to $1.2 million of interest income.
During 2019, $4.2 million of other income consisted of interest income, in addition to $0.5 million related to favorable foreign currency fluctuations. As we increase the volume of business transacted in foreign currencies resulting from international expansion and as currency rates fluctuate, we expect foreign currency gains and losses to continue to fluctuate.
Income Taxes. Income tax expense increased by $12.9 million, or 269%, to $17.8 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase in 2020 income tax expense was primarily driven by the increase in pre-tax income from $24.9 million in 2019 to $89.5 million in 2020. Our effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately 19.8% and 19.3%, respectively.
The 2020 effective tax rate includes certain discrete items and the net effect of these discrete items increased the effective tax rate for 2020 by 0.8%. Excluding these discrete items, the effective tax rate would have been 19.0% for 2020.
The 2019 effective tax rate includes discrete items, the most significant of which relate to a discrete tax benefit for the release of reserves for uncertain tax positions due to a lapse in the statute of limitations, the effects of the foreign-derived intangible income deduction and the U.S. Research and Development tax credit claimed on the Company’s 2018 tax return, which was completed in 2019. The net effect of these discrete items decreased our effective tax rate for 2019 by 5.2%. Excluding these discrete items, the 2019 effective tax rate would have been 24.5%.
As we continue to expand our operations outside of the United States, we have been and may continue to become subject to taxation in additional non-U.S. jurisdictions and our effective tax rate could fluctuate accordingly.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $314.0 million, which primarily consisted of bank balances and money market funds. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through cash flows generated from operations.
Historically, our principal uses of cash have included funding our operations, capital expenditures, content acquisitions, business combinations and asset acquisitions that enhance our strategic position, cash dividend payments and share purchases under our share repurchase program. We plan to finance our operations and capital expenses largely through cash generated by our operations. Since our results of operations are sensitive to the level of competition we face, increased competition could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources.
Stock Offering
On August 14, 2020, we completed an offering (the “Stock Offering”), whereby 2,580,000 shares of our common stock were sold to the public at a price to the public of $48.50 per share. We sold 516,000 shares of common stock in the Stock Offering and our Founder and Executive Chairman of the Board sold 2,064,000 shares of common stock in the Stock Offering. We received net proceeds from the shares sold, of approximately $23.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable. We did not receive any proceeds from the shares sold by the Company’s Founder and Executive Chairman of the Board.
Dividends
We declared and paid cash dividends of $0.84 per share of common stock, or $30.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On January 24, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.24 per share of outstanding common stock payable on March 17, 2022 to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 3, 2022. The Company currently expects to continue to pay comparable cash dividends on a quarterly basis in the future. Future declarations of dividends are subject to the final determination of our Board of Directors, and will depend on, among other things, our future financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, capital expenditure requirements, contractual restrictions, anticipated cash needs, business prospects, provisions of applicable law and other factors our Board of Directors may deem relevant.
Long-Term Investments
In 2020, we invested $5.0 million in preferred shares of an entity with a creative production and analytics platform. These preferred shares do not have a readily determinable fair value and provide us less than a 2% fully diluted ownership interest.
Share Repurchase Program
In October 2015, our board of directors approved a share repurchase program, authorizing us to repurchase up to $100 million of our common stock and in February 2017, our Board of Directors approved an increase to the share repurchase program, authorizing us to repurchase up to an additional $100 million of our outstanding common stock. We expect to fund future repurchases, if any, through a combination of cash on hand, cash generated by operations and future financing transactions, if appropriate. Accordingly, our share repurchase program is subject to us having available cash to fund repurchases. Under the share repurchase program, management is authorized to purchase shares of our common stock from time to time through open market purchases or privately negotiated transactions at prevailing prices as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements, and subject to market conditions and other factors.
As of December 31, 2021, we have repurchased approximately 2.8 million shares of our common stock under the share repurchase program at an average per-share cost of $45.55. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased approximately 233,700 shares of our common stock at an average per share cost of $116.26. As of December 31, 2021, we had $73 million of remaining authorization for purchases under the share repurchase program.
Equity-Based Compensation
Upon the vesting of restricted stock units (“RSUs”), the Company has a practice of net share settlement, to cover any required withholding taxes by retaining the number of shares with a value equal to the amount of the tax and remitting an equal amount of cash to the appropriate taxing authorities, rather than requiring employees to sell a portion of the shares that they receive upon vesting to fund the required withholding taxes (“sell-to-cover”). The net share settlement approach has increased our cash outflows compared to the cash outflows under the sell-to-cover approach. In addition, as compared to the sell-to-cover approach, net share settlement has resulted in fewer shares being issued into the market as employees’ RSUs vest, thereby reducing the dilutive impact of our equity-based compensation programs on stockholders.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, shares with an aggregate value of $22.7 million were withheld upon vesting of RSUs and paid in connection with related remittance to taxing authorities. In addition, $2.1 million of proceeds were received during 2021 from the issuance of common stock in connection with the exercise of stock options.
Sources and Uses of Funds
We believe, based on our current operating plan, that our cash and cash equivalents, and cash from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our longer-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance. Future capital expenditures will generally relate to building enhancements to the functionality of our current platform, the acquisition of additional storage, servers, network connectivity hardware, security apparatus and software, leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures related to office expansion and relocation, content and general corporate infrastructure.
See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our other non-lease commitments as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow data for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating Activities
Our primary source of cash from operating activities is cash collections from our customers. The majority of our revenue is generated from credit card transactions and is typically settled within one to five business days. Our primary uses of cash for operating activities are for the payment of royalties to content contributors, employee-related expenditures and the payment of other operating expenses incurred in the ordinary course of business.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $216.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $165.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, operating cash flows were favorably impacted from our increased operating income and changes in the timing of payments pertaining to operating expenses, which can cause operating cash flow to fluctuate from period to period. In addition, in the year ended December 31, 2020, operating cash flows were impacted by $7.8 million in one-time payments associated with long-term incentives related to our 2017 acquisition of Flashstock.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $165.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $102.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In the year ended December 31, 2020, operating cash flows were favorably impacted from our increased operating income, partially offset by $7.8 million in one-time payments associated with long-term incentives related to our 2017 acquisition of Flashstock, and changes in the timing of payments pertaining to operating expenses, which can cause operating cash flow to fluctuate from period to period.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of capital expenditures, business combinations, asset acquisitions, investments and content acquisitions. Capital expenditures include internal-use software and website development costs, purchases of software equipment, and capitalization of leasehold improvements. Capital expenditures are primarily attributable to investments in internally developed software. We continue to invest significantly in product development to enhance our customer experience and increase the efficiency with which we deploy new products and features. Cash used in investing activities totaled $250.4 million, $35.3 million and $27.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $250.4 million, consisting primarily of (i) $181.6 million cash used in the acquisitions of TurboSquid and PicMonkey, net of cash acquired; (ii) $31.6 million cash used in the asset acquisitions of Pattern89, Inc., Datasine Limited and assets from Shotzr, Inc.; (iii) capital expenditures of $28.1 million for internal-use software and website development costs, and purchases of software and equipment, and (iv) $8.9 million paid to acquire the rights to distribute certain digital content in perpetuity.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.3 million, consisting primarily of capital expenditures of $25.6 million for internal-use software and website development costs, and purchase of software and equipment, an investment of $5.0 million in a creative production and analytics platform, $3.0 million to acquire the rights to distribute certain digital content in perpetuity and $1.9 million associated with the acquisition of AI driven music technology.
Cash used in investing activities during 2019 mostly consisted of capital expenditures and content acquisitions of $26.1 million and $3.3 million, respectively, partially offset by $2.5 million net cash received from the sale of Webdam.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of payments associated with cash dividends, settlements of tax withholding obligations related to employee stock-based compensation awards and repurchases of common stock under our share repurchase program. Our financing activities also includes proceeds from our Stock Offering and proceeds received in connection with the exercise of stock options. Cash used in financing activities totaled $77.7 million, $4.6 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cash used in financing activities during 2021 primarily consisted of (i) $30.7 million, related to the payment of the quarterly cash dividend; (ii) $26.5 million in connection with the repurchase of common stock under our share repurchase program, and (iii) $22.7 million paid in settlement of tax withholding obligations related to employee stock-based compensation awards. These amounts were partially offset by approximately $2.1 million in proceeds received in connection with the exercise of stock options.
Cash used in financing activities during 2020 primarily consisted of $24.4 million related to the payment of the quarterly cash dividends and $4.5 million, paid in settlement of tax withholding obligations related to employee stock-based compensation awards. These amounts were partially offset by $23.2 million of proceeds from our Stock Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses paid and $1.2 million in proceeds received in connection with the exercise of stock options.
Cash used in financing activities during 2019 primarily consisted of $7.1 million, paid in settlement of tax withholding obligations related to employee stock-based compensation awards, partially offset by approximately $5.4 million of proceeds received in connection with the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We lease real estate under operating lease agreements that expire on various dates during the period from 2022 through 2029. We do not have any material capital lease obligations, and our property, equipment and software have been purchased primarily with cash. We do not anticipate any difficulties in renewing those leases that expire within the next several years or in leasing other space or hosting facilities, if required. We enter into unconditional purchase obligations related to contracts for cloud-based services, infrastructure and other business services as well as minimum royalty guarantees in connection with certain content licenses. Our future minimum payments under non-cancelable operating leases and purchase obligations are as follows as of December 31, 2021:
On March 21, 2013, we entered into an operating lease agreement to lease our headquarters in New York City, which was amended in January 2016, which we refer to as the ESB Lease. The ESB Lease will expire in 2029, and the aggregate undiscounted future minimum lease payments, are approximately $50.4 million. We are also party to a letter of credit as a security deposit for this leased facility in the amount of $1.7 million.
We also enter into license agreements under which we agree to provide indemnification of varying scope and terms to customers with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements for damages directly attributable to a breach by us. We are not responsible for any damages, costs, or losses to the extent such damages or losses arise as a result of the modifications made by the customer, or the context in which content is used. Our license agreements entered into with customers limit our indemnification obligations at amounts ranging from $10,000 to
$250,000, with certain exceptions for which our indemnification obligations are uncapped. We have experienced nominal losses to date as a result of the indemnification we offer and, as such, our reserves for indemnification-related losses are also nominal. We believe that we have the appropriate insurance coverage in place to adequately cover such indemnification obligations, if necessary.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, our management considers certain financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, collectively referred to as non-GAAP financial measures, including adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted net income per diluted common share, revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis (expressed as a percentage), and free cash flow. These non-GAAP financial measures are included solely to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results and are not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and are not necessarily comparable to similarly-titled measures presented by other companies.
These non-GAAP financial measures have not been calculated in accordance with GAAP and should be considered only in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, GAAP measures. In addition, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted net income per diluted common share, revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis (expressed as a percentage) and free cash flow should not be construed as indicators of our operating performance, liquidity or cash flows generated by operating, investing and financing activities, as there may be significant factors or trends that they fail to address. We caution investors that non-GAAP financial information, by its nature, departs from traditional accounting conventions; accordingly, its use can make it difficult to compare our current results with our results from other reporting periods and with the results of other companies.
Shutterstock’s management uses these non-GAAP financial measures, in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, as an integral part of managing the business and to, among other things: (i) monitor and evaluate the performance of Shutterstock’s business operations, financial performance and overall liquidity; (ii) facilitate management’s internal comparisons of the historical operating performance of its business operations; (iii) facilitate management’s external comparisons of the results of its overall business to the historical operating performance of other companies that may have different capital structures and debt levels; (iv) review and assess the operating performance of Shutterstock’s management team and, together with other operational objectives, as a measure in evaluating employee compensation and bonuses; (v) analyze and evaluate financial and strategic planning decisions regarding future operating investments; and (vi) plan for and prepare future annual operating budgets and determine appropriate levels of operating investments.
Management believes that adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted net income per diluted common share, revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis (expressed as a percentage) and free cash flow are useful to investors because these measures enable investors to analyze Shutterstock’s operating results on the same basis as that used by management. Additionally, management believes that adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted common share provide useful information to investors about the performance of the Company’s overall business because such measures eliminate the effects of unusual or other infrequent charges that are not directly attributable to Shutterstock’s underlying operating performance and revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis, provides useful information to investors by eliminating the effect of foreign currency fluctuations that are not directly attributable to Shutterstock’s operating performance. Management also believes that providing these non-GAAP financial measures enhances the comparability for investors in assessing Shutterstock’s financial reporting. Management believes that free cash flow is useful for investors because it provides them with an important perspective on the cash available for strategic measures, after making necessary capital investments in internal-use software and website development costs to support the Company’s ongoing business operations and after excluding the impact of nonrecurring payments associated with long-term incentives related to our 2017 acquisition of Flashstock, and provides them with the same measures that management uses as the basis for making resource allocation decisions.
Our use of non-GAAP financial measures has limitations as an analytical tool, and these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP, as the excluded items may have significant effects on our operating results and financial condition. Additionally, our methods for measuring non-GAAP financial measures may differ from other companies’ similarly titled measures. When evaluating our performance, these non-GAAP financial measures should be considered alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income and our other GAAP results.
Our method for calculating adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted net income, adjusted net income per diluted common share, revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis and free cash flow, as well as a reconciliation of the differences between adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis and free cash flow, and the most comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, is presented below.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as net income adjusted for depreciation and amortization, non-cash equity-based compensation, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, expenses related to long-term incentives and contingent consideration related to acquisitions, interest income and expense and income taxes. We define adjusted EBITDA margin as the ratio of adjusted EBITDA to revenue.
The following is a reconciliation of net income to adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
_______________________________________________________________________________
(1)Included in other adjustments, net is foreign currency transaction gains and losses, expenses related to long-term incentives and contingent consideration related to acquisitions, and interest income and expense.
Adjusted Net Income
We define adjusted net income as net income adjusted for the impact of non-cash equity-based compensation, the amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, expenses related to long-term incentives and contingent consideration related to acquisitions and the estimated tax impact of such adjustments. We define adjusted net income per diluted common share as adjusted net income divided by weighted average diluted shares.
The following is a reconciliation of net income to adjusted net income for each of the periods indicated:
(1)Statutory tax rates are used to calculate the tax effect of the adjustments.
(2)Represents expenses related to long-term incentives and contingent consideration related to the Flashstock acquisition.
Revenue Growth (including by distribution channel) on a Constant Currency Basis
We define revenue growth (including by distribution channel) on a constant currency basis (expressed as a percentage) as the increase in current period revenues over prior period revenues, utilizing fixed exchange rates for translating foreign currency revenues for all periods in the comparison.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as our cash provided by operating activities, adjusted for capital expenditures and content acquisition, and, with respect to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, a payment associated with long-term incentives related to our 2017 acquisition of Flashstock.
The following is a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow for each of the periods indicated:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure or inclusion of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the period. We evaluate our significant estimates on an ongoing basis, including, but not limited to, estimates related to allowance for doubtful accounts, the volume of expected unused licenses used in revenue recognition for our subscription-based products, the fair value of acquired goodwill and intangible assets, and income tax provisions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with our revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of acquired goodwill and intangible assets, and accounting for income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenues are earned from the license of content. Content licenses are generally purchased on a monthly or annual basis, whereby a customer pays for a predetermined quantity of content that may be downloaded over a specific period of time, or, on a transactional basis, whereby a customer pays for individual content licenses at the time of download. Subsequent to the acquisition of PicMonkey, the Company also generates revenue from the license of creative editing tools.
We recognize revenues upon the satisfaction of performance obligations, which generally occurs when content is downloaded by a customer. For content licenses, we recognize revenues on both a subscription-based and transaction-based products when content is downloaded, at which time the license is provided. In addition, we estimate expected unused licenses for subscription-based products and recognize the estimated revenue associated with unused licenses as digital content is downloaded and licenses are obtained for such content by the customer during the subscription period. The estimate of unused licenses is based on historical download activity and future changes in the estimate could impact the timing of revenue recognition of our subscription products. For revenue associated with the license of our creative editing tools, the Company recognizes revenue on a straight-line basis over the subscription period. We expense contract acquisition costs as incurred, to the extent that the amortization period would otherwise be one year or less.
Collectability is reasonably assured at the time the electronic order or contract is entered. The majority of our customers purchase products by making electronic payments with a credit card at the time of the transaction. Customer payments received in advance of revenue recognition are contract liabilities and are recorded as deferred revenue. Customers that do not pay in advance are invoiced and are required to make payments under standard credit terms. Collectability for customers who pay on
credit terms allowing for payment beyond the date at which service commences, is based on a credit evaluation for certain new customers and transaction history with existing customers.
We recognize revenue gross of contributor royalties because we are the principal in the transaction as we are the party responsible for the performance obligation and we control the product or service before transferring it to the customer. We also license content to customers through third-party resellers. Third-party resellers sell our products directly to customers as the principal in those transactions. Accordingly, we recognize revenue net of costs paid to resellers.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our accounts receivable consists of customer obligations due under normal trade terms, carried at their fair value less an allowance for doubtful accounts, if required. We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts based on an evaluation of the aging of our accounts receivable and on a customer-by-customer basis where appropriate. Our reserve analysis contemplates our historical loss rate on receivables, specific customer situations and the economic environments in which we operate.
Historically, the Company used an incurred loss model to calculate its allowance for doubtful accounts. Upon the adoption of ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses of Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”) on January 1, 2020, the Company shifted to a current expected credit loss model.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an allowance for doubtful accounts of $1.9 million and $4.9 million, respectively. Fluctuations in our allowance for doubtful accounts are primarily attributable to changes in the aging profile of our gross accounts receivable balances and specific customer situations arising during the year.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense includes U.S. (federal and state) and foreign income taxes. Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax basis, and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered.
We account for unrecognized tax benefits using a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes may be due. We record an income tax liability for the difference, if any, between the benefit recognized and measured and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax returns. To the extent that the assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. The reserves are adjusted in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcomes of tax audits or lapses in statutes of limitations. Any reserve for uncertain tax provisions and related penalties and interest is included in the income tax provision.
On a quarterly basis, we assess the realizability of deferred tax assets, based on the available evidence including a history of taxable income, estimates of future taxable income and planning strategies and a valuation allowance is recorded to the extent that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes and deferred tax assets and liabilities. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates, we will adjust these estimates in future periods which may result in a change in the effective tax rate in a future period.
In January 2018, the FASB released guidance on the accounting for tax on the global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) provisions of the TCJA. The GILTI provisions impose a tax on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. We have elected to treat any potential GILTI inclusions as a period cost.
Acquisitions
Business combinations are recorded at fair value and the purchase price is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the transaction. Assets acquired may include intangible assets such as customer relationships, trade names, developed technology and contributor content. Fair values are based on the exit price (i.e., the price that would be received to sell an asset or transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date) and valuation methods that may be utilized include the multiple-period excess earnings method, the relief-from-royalty method and the cost-to-recreate method. Determining the fair value requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including estimates of future revenue growth rates from existing customers, research and development expense adjustments, sales and marketing expense adjustments, the discount rate, earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization (“EBITA”) margins and the customer attrition rate, among others. Other assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination are recorded based on the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at acquisition date. Changes to these factors could affect the measurement and allocation of fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.