ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our business, financial condition, results of operations, and liquidity and capital resources. You should read the following discussion in conjunction with Item 1: Business and our Financial Statements, each included elsewhere in this Report.
The statements in this discussion regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources, and other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A: Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Report. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Overview
Sensata continued to deliver mission-critical, highly engineered solutions to our customers in 2021. As we look towards 2022 and beyond, we are confident in our ability to sustain total outgrowth in the markets we serve of 400 to 600 basis points per year. We use the term "market outgrowth" to describe the impact of an increasing quantity and value of our products used in customer systems and applications, above normal market growth. It is only loosely correlated to normal unit demand fluctuations in the markets we serve. We believe we can deliver this end market outgrowth based on our high levels of new business awards and our large and expanding pipeline of new opportunities.
In fiscal year 2021, we continued to produce strong market outgrowth of 960 basis points, including 860 basis points and 1,930 basis points in our automotive and heavy vehicle and off-road ("HVOR") businesses, respectively.
We are also targeting adding 400 to 600 basis points of inorganic revenue growth annually through acquisitions. We believe that the overall business environment provides opportunities to further strengthen our portfolio through strategically important, value-creating acquisitions and/or joint ventures. We are also pursuing new technology collaborations and partnerships with third parties to expand our capabilities and accelerate our megatrend-driven growth potential.
We will continue to innovate on behalf of our customers, solving some of their most demanding engineering challenges. We will also continue to provide differentiated, Electrification and Insights solutions to our broad array of customers. Solving these mission-critical challenges enables Sensata to continue to deliver differentiated value for both our customers and shareholders while also increasing investments in our growth opportunities and our people.
We continue to invest in our megatrend growth initiatives that are enabling large and rapidly growing opportunities for Sensata across all our end markets. We are working to become a leading and foundational player in electrification components and sub-systems across broad industrial, transportation, and stationary energy storage end-markets and to be a comprehensive solutions provider in select end-market segments. We are making progress in Electrification and Insights, both organically through new business wins and inorganically through bolt-on acquisitions or joint ventures.
To better pursue clean energy components and system opportunities, in the third quarter of 2021 we reorganized our Sensing Solutions operating segment, moving the portion of our electrical protection product category that includes high-voltage contactors, inverters, and battery management systems from the industrial business unit to a new business unit, Clean Energy Solutions. This business unit will focus largely on the industrial and stationary, commercial/industrial energy storage end-markets. Applications include e-bikes, stationary charging infrastructure, battery-energy storage, and renewable energy applications. With the acquisition of Spear Power Systems ("Spear") and Sendyne Corp ("Sendyne") as described in Item 1: Business - Business Combinations included elsewhere in this Report, we are expanding our portfolio with energy storage systems and electrical sensing products to expand on existing and new end-markets and applications. These acquisitions expand on our capabilities in battery management systems and high-voltage contactors introduced with the previous acquisitions of Lithium Balance and GIGAVAC, LLC ("GIGAVAC"), respectively.
With our Insights megatrend initiative, we are focusing on becoming the leader in delivering data-driven insight, connectivity, and prognostics to commercial fleet operators and asset managers, by providing solutions that increase overall productivity and operational efficiency. This initiative addresses a large and fast-growing market opportunity to deliver data insights across heavy, medium, and light vehicle fleets; supply chain and logistics including cargo, container, and warehouse segments; and high-value stationary asset monitoring. As discussed in Item 1: Business - Business Combinations included elsewhere in this Report, we acquired Xirgo Technologies, LLC ("Xirgo") and SmartWitness Holdings, Inc. ("SmartWitness") in fiscal year 2021, expanding our capabilities to provide data insights to transportation and logistics customers through telematics, video telematics, asset tracking devices, and other cloud-based solutions.
We continue our journey on Sensata's long-standing mission to help create a cleaner, safer, and more connected world, not just for our customer's products but also through our own operations. We're on our way to achieving the targets laid out in our first sustainability report, bolstering the long-term sustainability and success of the company for all of its stakeholders.
Refer to Item 1: Business included elsewhere in this Report for detailed discussion of our business strategies, including those related to our key megatrend initiatives, and market drivers of our business.
Fiscal Year 2021 Markets and Financial Results
We analyze revenue in terms of inorganic revenue growth/decline (i.e. changes in foreign currency exchange rate and acquisitions/divestitures) vs organic revenue growth/decline (market growth and market outgrowth).
Market results
We believe regulatory requirements for safer vehicles, higher fuel efficiency, and lower emissions, as well as customer demand for operator productivity and convenience, drive the need for advancements in powertrain management, efficiency, safety, and operator controls. These advancements lead to sensor growth rates that we expect to exceed underlying production growth in many of our key end-markets, which we expect will continue to offer us significant growth opportunities.
In fiscal year 2021, global production of light vehicles increased 1.2% from fiscal year 2020, according to third-party data. This increase from the significant decline in 2020 was tempered due to global supply constraints, including shortages of semiconductor components. Global production in the HVOR markets we serve increased 24% from fiscal year 2020. Our China on-road truck business saw significant market outgrowth from the adoption of NS6 emissions regulations, and we are also benefiting from a wave of electromechanical operator controls being installed in new off-road equipment. In addition, we have continued to see recovery in the global industrial end-markets.
Market outgrowth
We continue to produce strong market outgrowth, above our previously-stated target ranges. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we delivered 960 basis points of market outgrowth, including 860 basis points, 1,930 basis points, and 580 basis points in our automotive, HVOR, and Sensing Solutions businesses, respectively.
During fiscal year 2021, we closed $640 million in new business wins ("NBOs"), including $270 million in Electrification wins, in each case the highest we have ever closed. We define NBOs as incremental revenue to our current base of business that is expected to be recognized on average in the fifth year after entry into the agreement, when programs typically reach their normal volume.
Revenue
Consolidated net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 25.5% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding an increase of 2.3% attributed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase of 2.5% due to the effect of acquisitions, consolidated net revenue increased 20.7% on an organic basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Automotive net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 17.6% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding an increase of 2.5% attributed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, automotive net revenue increased 15.1% on an organic basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, representing market outgrowth of 860 basis points, excluding the estimated effects of original equipment manufacturer ("OEM") efforts to replenish inventory channels. This outgrowth was led by new product launches in powertrain and emissions, safety, and electrification-related applications and systems.
HVOR net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 63.3% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding an increase of 2.1% attributed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase of 14.8% due to the effect of acquisitions, HVOR net revenue increased 46.4% on an organic basis compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, representing market outgrowth of 1,930 basis points, excluding the estimated effects of OEM efforts to replenish inventory channels. Our China on-road truck business saw significant market outgrowth from the adoption of NS6 emissions regulations, and we are also benefiting from a wave of electromechanical operator controls being installed in new off-road equipment.
Sensing Solutions net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 18.4% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding an increase of 1.7% attributed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an increase of 0.3% due to the effect of acquisitions, Sensing Solutions net revenue increased 16.4% on an organic basis compared to the year
ended December 31, 2020, representing market outgrowth of 580 basis points. This outgrowth was driven by new Electrification launches.
Operating Income
We continue to see elevated costs related to the global supply chain shortages, which are causing production delays on a vast and varied number of products across industries and geographies and increased procurement and logistics costs, which are contributing to a higher cost and inflationary environment that has impacted our margins in fiscal year. Despite these elevated costs, which we are working to mitigate, operating income increased $295.5 million, or 87.5%, to $633.2 million (16.6% of net revenue) compared to $337.7 million (11.1% of net revenue) in fiscal year 2020. This increase is the result of (1) improved gross margins, due mainly to higher organic sales volumes as well as the turnaround effect of the settlement of litigation brought by Wasica Finance GmbH ("Wasica") in 2020, partially offset by increased costs related to global supply chain shortages, and (2) lower restructuring costs. These improvements were partially offset by (1) higher spend to support megatrend growth initiatives, (2) higher incentive compensation aligned to improved financial performance, and (3) the turnaround effect of temporary salary reductions and furloughs taken in the second quarter 2020.
We expect to see constraints on global production of light vehicles lifting slowly throughout the course of fiscal year 2022. Refer to Results of Operations - Operating Costs and Expenses included elsewhere in this Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (this "MD&A") for additional discussion of our operating costs and expenses.
Net Income
Net income increased $199.3 million in fiscal year 2021, to $363.6 million, compared to $164.3 million in fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily a result of higher operating income partially offset by higher taxes and the loss on redemption of the $750.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.25% senior notes due 2026 (the "6.25% Senior Notes").
Forward-looking information
We expect to see constraints on global production of light vehicles lifting slowly throughout the course of fiscal year 2022. We expect low single-digit end market growth across all our markets in fiscal year 2022, with automotive growth of approximately 7% and HVOR production approximately flat. However, in 2021, our customers ordered over production to compensate for supply chain shortages. We estimate this amounted to approximately $90 million of revenue over production in 2021 that will not repeat in fiscal year 2022. Our revenue outgrowth to market will continue to be driven by ongoing efforts to improve energy efficiency, safety, and the environment. We continue to invest in our megatrend initiatives both organically and inorganically, with the acquisitions of Lithium Balance, Xirgo, Spear, SmartWitness, and Sendyne, expanding not only our capabilities, but also our access to end-markets and product portfolios in these pivotal areas. Refer to Item 1: Business - Business Combinations included elsewhere in this Report for additional information related to these acquisitions. We expect continued significant growth in these megatrend areas over the coming years, driven by Electrification trends, the infrastructure requirements to support Electrification, and the proliferation of Insights on stationary and mobile equipment.
Liquidity
We have sufficient cash to take advantage of strategic opportunities as they arise. We generated $554.2 million of operating cash flow in fiscal year 2021, ending the year with $1.7 billion in cash. Our ability to generate positive cash flows allows us to continue to pursue the acquisition of innovative businesses that will expand our presence in our targeted growth vectors. In November 2021, we resumed our share repurchase program, which we had previously suspended on April 2, 2020, and we repurchased 0.8 million shares for approximately $47.8 million in fiscal year 2021. On January 20, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors had authorized a new ordinary share repurchase program of $500 million (the “January 2022 Program”), which replaces the $500.0 million program previously authorized by our Board of Directors in July 2019 (the "July 2019 Program"). Sensata’s shareholders have previously approved the forms of share repurchase agreements and the potential broker counterparties needed to execute the buyback program. Refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources included elsewhere in this MD&A for additional information related to our share repurchase program.
In the first quarter of 2021, we used the flexibility provided by our large cash balance to lower our cost of capital and extend our debt maturity by redeeming the full amount outstanding on the 6.25% Senior Notes. Subsequently, on March 29, 2021, we issued the first $750.0 million of the $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.0% senior notes due 2029 (the "4.0% Senior Notes"), at par, and on April 8, 2021, we issued an additional $250.0 million of 4.0% Senior Notes at a price of 100.75%. The combined effect of these transactions was to extend the average maturity of our debt profile and lower our total cost of fixed debt. Proceeds from the 4.0% Senior Notes will be used for general corporate purposes, to fund future acquisitions and our
capital deployment strategy, and for future debt repayments. Refer to Note 14: Debt of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information related to these transactions and our overall debt.
Acquisitions
We completed various acquisitions in 2021 in support of our key strategic priorities. A summary of these acquisitions is included in the table below:
__________________________
(1) Step acquisition completed on the date indicated
(2) Purchase price accounting is preliminary
(3) Contingency estimated as of the date of acquisition, subject to change
Refer to Item 1: Business - Business Combinations and Note 21: Acquisitions of our Financial Statements, each included elsewhere in this Report, for additional information related to these acquisitions.
Summary
During fiscal year 2021, we experienced continued positive momentum from the business and economic growth that began in the second half of 2020. We responded well to the rapid changes in many of our end-markets, demonstrating the strength, resiliency, and reliability of our business and organizational model, enabling us to capitalize on the recovery in end-market demand and deliver on customers’ orders. We will continue to focus on delivering differentiated value for both our customers and shareholders, while also increasing investments in our growth opportunities and our people.
Selected Segment Information
We present financial information for two reportable segments, Performance Sensing and Sensing Solutions. Set forth below is selected information for each of these segments for the periods presented. Amounts and percentages in the tables below have been calculated based on unrounded numbers, accordingly, certain amounts may not appear to recalculate due to the effect of rounding.
The following table presents net revenue by segment for the identified periods:
The following table presents segment operating income in U.S. dollars ("USD") and as a percentage of segment net revenue for the identified periods:
For a reconciliation of total segment operating income to consolidated operating income, refer to Note 20: Segment Reporting of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Selected Geographic Information
We are a global business with significant operations around the world and a diverse revenue mix by geography, customer, and end-market. The following table presents (as a percentage of total) property, plant and equipment, net ("PP&E"), and net revenue by geographic region for the identified periods:
Refer to Note 20: Segment Reporting of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information related to our PP&E, net balances by selected geographic area as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and net revenue by selected geographic area for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Net Revenue by End-Market
Our net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was derived from the following end-markets (amounts are calculated based on unrounded numbers, and may not appear to recalculate):
__________________________
(1) Heating, ventilation and air conditioning
We are a significant supplier to multiple OEMs within many of these end-markets, thereby reducing customer concentration risk.
Factors Affecting Our Operating Results
The following discussion describes components of the consolidated statements of operations as well as factors that impact those components. Refer to Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report, and Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates included elsewhere in this MD&A for additional information related to the accounting policies and estimates made related to these components. Refer to Results of Operations included elsewhere in this MD&A for discussion of the actual impact on our financial statements of these factors.
Net revenue
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of tangible products. Because we derive a significant portion of our revenue from sales into the automotive end-market, conditions in the automotive industry can have a significant impact on the amount of revenue that we recognize. However, outside of the automotive industry, we sell our products to end-users in a wide range of industries, end-markets, and geographic regions. As a result, the drivers of demand for these products vary considerably and are influenced by industry, market, or geographic conditions. Our overall net revenue is impacted by various factors, which we characterize as either "organic" or "inorganic."
Our net revenue may be impacted by the following organic factors:
•fluctuations in overall economic activity within the geographic regions in which we operate;
•underlying growth in one or more of our end-markets, either worldwide or particular geographies in which we operate;
•the number of our products used within existing applications, or the development of new applications requiring these products, due to regulations or other factors;
•the "mix" of products sold, including the proportion of new or upgraded products and their pricing relative to existing products;
•changes in product sales prices (including quantity discounts, rebates, and cash discounts for prompt payment);
•changes in the level of competition faced by our products, including the launch of new products by competitors;
•our ability to successfully develop, launch, and sell new products and applications; and
•the trend of the automotive market evolving from internal combustion engine powertrain products to more environmentally-friendly vehicles that rely more heavily on Electrification and other adjacent technologies.
Our net revenue may be impacted by the following inorganic factors:
•fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; and
•acquisitions and divestitures.
While the factors described above may impact net revenue in each of our reportable segments, the magnitude of that impact can differ. For more information about revenue risks relating to our business, refer to Item 1A: Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Report.
Cost of revenue
We manufacture the majority of our products and subcontract only a limited number of products to third parties. As such, our cost of revenue consists principally of the following:
•Production Materials Costs. We source materials used in production on a global basis to ensure a highly-effective and efficient supply chain, but we are still impacted by local market conditions, including fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. A portion of our production materials contains certain commodities, resins, and metals, and the cost of these materials may vary with underlying pricing and foreign currency exchange rates. However, we enter into forward contracts to economically hedge a portion of our exposure to the potential change in prices and fluctuation of exchange rates associated with certain of these commodities. The terms of these contracts fix the price at a future date for various notional amounts associated with these commodities. Gains and losses recognized on these derivatives are recorded in other, net and are not included in cost of revenue. Refer to Note 6: Other, Net of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.
•Employee Costs. Employee costs include wages and benefits, including variable incentive compensation, for employees involved in our manufacturing operations and certain customer service and engineering activities, including variable incentive compensation. A significant portion of these costs can fluctuate on an aggregate basis in direct correlation with changes in production volumes. As a percentage of net revenue, these costs may decline as a result of economies of scale associated with higher production volumes, and conversely, may increase with lower production volumes. These costs also fluctuate based on local market conditions. We rely on contract workers for direct labor in certain geographies. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 1,900 direct labor contract workers on a worldwide basis.
•Sustaining Engineering Activity Costs. These costs relate to modifications of existing products for use by new and existing customers in familiar applications as well as improvements made to our manufacturing processes.
•Other. Our remaining cost of revenue primarily consists of:
◦gains and losses on certain foreign currency forward contracts that are designated as cash flow hedges;
◦material yields;
◦costs to import raw materials, such as tariffs;
◦depreciation of fixed assets used in the manufacturing process;
◦freight costs;
◦warehousing expenses;
◦maintenance and repair expenses;
◦costs of quality assurance;
◦operating supplies; and
◦other general manufacturing expenses, such as expenses for energy consumption and operating lease expense.
Changes in cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue have historically been impacted by a number of factors, including:
•changes in the price of raw materials, including the impact of changes in costs to import such raw materials, such as tariffs;
•changes in customer prices and surcharges;
•implementation of cost improvement measures aimed at increasing productivity, including reduction of fixed production costs, refinements in inventory management, design and process driven changes, and the coordination of procurement within each subsidiary and at the business level;
•product lifecycles, as we typically incur higher cost of revenue associated with new product development (related to excess manufacturing capacity and higher production costs during the initial stages of product launches) and during the phase-out of discontinued products;
•changes in production volumes - production costs are capitalized in inventory based on normal production volumes, as revenue increases, the fixed portion of these costs does not;
•transfer of production to our lower-cost manufacturing facilities;
•changes in depreciation expense, including those arising from the adjustment of PP&E to fair value associated with acquisitions;
•fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates;
•changes in product mix;
•changes in logistics costs;
•acquisitions and divestitures - acquired and divested businesses may generate higher or lower cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue than our core business; and
•the increase in the carrying value of inventory that is adjusted to fair value as a result of the application of purchase accounting associated with acquisitions.
Research and development expense
We develop products that address increasingly complex engineering and operating performance requirements to help our customers solve their most difficult challenges in the automotive, HVOR, fleet management, industrial, clean energy, and aerospace industries. We believe that continued focused investment in research and development ("R&D") is critical to our future growth and maintaining our leadership positions in the markets we serve. Our R&D efforts are directly related to timely development of new and enhanced products that are central to our business strategy. We continually develop our technologies to meet an evolving set of customer requirements and new product introductions. We conduct such activities in areas that we believe will increase our long-term revenue growth. Our development expense is typically associated with engineering core technology platforms to specific applications and engineering major upgrades that improve the functionality or reduce the cost of existing products. In addition, we continually consider new technologies where we may have expertise for potential investment or acquisition.
An increasing portion of our R&D activities are being directed towards technologies and megatrends that we believe have the potential for significant future growth, but that relate to products that are not currently within our core business or include new features and capabilities for existing products. Expenses related to these activities are less likely to result in increased near-term revenue than our more mainstream development activities.
R&D expense consists of costs related to product design, development, and process engineering. Costs related to modifications of existing products for use by new and existing customers in familiar applications are presented in cost of revenue and are not included in R&D expense. The level of R&D expense in any period is related to the number of products in development, the stage of the development process, the complexity of the underlying technology, the potential scale of the product upon successful commercialization, and the level of our exploratory research.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense consists of all expenditures incurred in connection with the sale and marketing of our products, as well as administrative overhead costs, including:
•salary and benefit costs for sales and marketing personnel and administrative staff;
•share-based incentive compensation expense;
•charges related to the use and maintenance of administrative offices, including depreciation expense;
•other administrative costs, including expenses relating to information systems, human resources, and legal and accounting services;
•other selling and marketing related costs, such as expenses incurred in connection with travel and communications; and
•transaction costs associated with acquisitions.
Changes in SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue have historically been impacted by a number of factors, including:
•changes in sales volume, as higher volumes enable us to spread the fixed portion of our selling, marketing, and administrative expense over higher revenue (e.g. expenses relating to our sales and marketing personnel can fluctuate due to prolonged trends in sales volume, while expenses relating to administrative personnel generally do not increase or decrease directly with changes in sales volume);
•changes in customer prices and surcharges;
•changes in the mix of products we sell, as some products may require more customer support and sales effort than others;
•new product launches in existing and new markets, as these launches typically involve a more intense sales and marketing activity before they are integrated into customer applications and systems;
•changes in our customer base, as new customers may require different levels of sales and marketing attention;
•fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; and
•acquisitions and divestitures - acquired and divested businesses may require different levels of SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue than our core business.
Depreciation expense
Depreciation expense includes depreciation of PP&E, which includes assets held under finance lease and amortization of leasehold improvements. Depreciation expense is included in either cost of revenue or SG&A expense depending on the use of the asset as a manufacturing or administrative asset. Depreciation expense will vary according to the age of existing PP&E and the level of capital expenditures.
Amortization expense
We have recognized a significant amount of definite-lived intangible assets. Acquisition-related definite-lived intangible assets are amortized on an economic-benefit basis according to the useful lives of the assets, or on a straight-line basis if a pattern of economic benefits cannot be reliably determined. The amount of amortization expense related to definite-lived intangible assets depends on the amount and timing of definite-lived intangible assets acquired and where previously acquired definite-lived intangible assets are in their estimated life-cycle. In general, the economic benefit of a definite-lived intangible asset is concentrated towards the beginning of its useful life.
Restructuring and other charges, net
Restructuring and other charges, net consists of severance, outplacement, other separation benefits, and facility and other exit costs. These charges may be incurred as part of an announced restructuring plan or may be individual charges recognized related to acquired businesses or the termination of a limited number of employees that do not represent the initiation of a larger restructuring plan. Restructuring and other charges, net also includes the gain, net of transaction costs, from the sale of businesses and other operating income or expense that is not presented elsewhere in operating income.
Amounts recognized in restructuring and other charges, net will vary according to the extent of our restructuring programs and other income or expense items not presented elsewhere in operating income.
Interest expense, net
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had gross outstanding indebtedness of $4,280.2 million and $4,036.6 million, respectively. This indebtedness consists of a secured credit facility and senior unsecured notes. Refer to Note 14: Debt of our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.
The credit agreement governing our secured credit facility (as amended, the "Credit Agreement") provides for senior secured credit facilities (the "Senior Secured Credit Facilities") consisting of a term loan facility (the "Term Loan"), the $420.0 million revolving credit facility (the "Revolving Credit Facility"), and incremental availability (the "Accordion") under which additional secured credit facilities could be issued under certain circumstances.
Our respective senior unsecured notes (the "Senior Notes") accrue interest at fixed rates. However, the Term Loan and the Revolving Credit Facility accrue interest at variable interest rates, which drives some of the variability in interest expense, net. Refer to