ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The matters addressed in this Item 7 that are not historical information constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Readers can recognize forward-looking statements by the use of words like “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “will,” “should,” “forecast” and similar expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. In particular, these include statements about any of the following: any guidance as to earnings, revenue, sales, profit margins, expense rate, cash, effective tax rate, product mix, capital expense or any other financial items; the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related public health measures (including but not limited to their impact on sales, operations or clinical trials globally), the plans, strategies, and objectives of management for future operations or prospects for achieving such plans; statements regarding new, existing, or improved products, including but not limited to, expectations for success of new, existing, and improved products in the U.S. or international markets or
government approval of a new or improved products (including the EVO family of lenses in the U.S. and the EVO Viva family of lenses for presbyopia internationally); commercialization of new or improved products; future economic conditions or size of market opportunities; expected costs of operations; statements of belief, including as to achieving 2022 business plans; expected regulatory activities and approvals, product launches, and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, such statements are inherently subject to risks and we can give no assurance that our expectations will prove to be correct. Actual results could differ from those described in this report because of numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control. These factors include, without limitation, those described in this Annual Report in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements after the date of this report to reflect future events or circumstances or to reflect actual outcomes.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements of STAAR, including the related notes, provided in this report.
Overview
STAAR Surgical Company designs, develops, manufactures, and sells implantable lenses for the eye and companion delivery systems used to deliver the lenses into the eye. We are the world’s leading manufacturer of intraocular lenses for patients seeking lens-based refractive vision correction, and we also make lenses for use in surgery to treat cataracts. All the lenses we make are foldable, which allows the surgeon to insert them into the eye through a small incision during minimally invasive surgery. Refractive surgery is performed to treat the type of visual disorders that have traditionally been corrected using eyeglasses or contact lenses. We refer to our lenses used in refractive surgery as “implantable Collamer® lenses” or “ICLs.” The field of refractive surgery includes both lens-based procedures, using products like our ICL family of products, and laser-based procedures like LASIK. Successful refractive surgery can correct common vision disorders such as myopia, hyperopia, and astigmatism. Cataract surgery is a common outpatient procedure where the eye’s natural lens that has become cloudy with age is removed and replaced with an artificial lens called an intraocular lens (IOL) to restore the patient’s vision. STAAR employs a commercialization strategy that strives for increased share of the refractive market and sustainable profitable growth. Our goal is to position our refractive lenses throughout the world as primary and premium solutions for patients seeking visual freedom from wearing eyeglasses or contact lenses while achieving excellent visual acuity through refractive vision correction. We position our IOL lenses used in surgery that treats cataracts based on quality and value.
See Item 1. “Business,” for a discussion of:
•
Operations
•
Principal Products
•
Distribution and Customers
•
Competition
•
Regulatory Matters
•
Research and Development
Strategic Imperatives for 2022
For 2022 we intend to achieve the following strategic imperatives:
•
Position EVO Implantable Lenses as a Special and Transformational Pathway to Visual Freedom;
•
Innovate and Develop a Pipeline of Next Generation Premium Collamer-Based Intraocular Lenses;
•
Support the Transformation of the Refractive Surgery Paradigm to Lens-Based through Clinical Validation and Medical Affairs Excellence;
•
Achieve our corporate imperatives in alignment with our Environmental, Social and Governance commitments;
•
Continue our Focus on and Commitment to STAAR’s Culture of Quality; and
•
Deliver Shareholder Value.
Finally, we will continue to evaluate opportunities to acquire new product lines, technologies, and companies.
We continue to monitor the commercial and operational impact of new variants of COVID-19 in our markets, which remains uncertain at this time and may adversely affect our financial results. For example, COVID-19 impacted certain of our European customers and, in the U.S., STAAR’s manufacturing operations. Production output and modest supply chain challenges continue to impact us and resulted in a continued backlog of over 20,000 lenses at the end of the fourth quarter. We continue to focus on meeting the significant demand of our ICL lenses and achieving standard inventory level requirements in 2022.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the percentage of total sales represented by certain items reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Statement of Income for the period indicated.
Net Sales
The following table presents our net sales, by product for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
Net sales for 2021 increased 41% from 2020. The increase in net sales was due to increased ICL sales of $71.5 million, partially offset by a decrease in other product sales of $4.5 million. Changes in foreign currency favorably impacted net sales by $0.5 million.
Net sales for 2020 increased 9% from 2019. The increase in net sales was due to increased ICL sales of $12.1 million and in other product sales of $1.2 million. Changes in foreign currency favorably impacted net sales by $1.5 million.
Total ICL sales for 2021 increased 51% from 2020, with unit growth up 48%. The sales increase was driven by the APAC region, which grew 51% with unit growth of 47%, primarily due to sales growth in India up 123%, Japan up 56%, China up 50%, other APAC Distributors up 50% and Korea up 36%. The Europe, Middle East, Africa and Latin America region sales increased 46% with unit increase of 48%, due to sales growth in the Middle East and North Africa up 81%, Latin America up 68%, United Kingdom up 61%, Distributor Operations up 45%, Spain up 40% and Germany up 35%. The North America region sales increased 57%, with unit increase of 61%, due to sales growth in the U.S. up 58% and Canada up 53%. Changes in foreign currency favorably impacted ICL sales by $0.8 million. ICL sales represented 92.4% of our total sales for fiscal year 2021.
Total ICL sales for 2020 increased 9% from 2019, with unit growth up 11%. The sales increase was driven by the APAC region, which grew 15% with unit growth of 17%, primarily due to sales growth in Japan up 56%, other APAC Distributors up 38%, Korea up 17% and China up 11%. The Europe, Middle East, Africa and Latin America region sales decreased 3% and units decreased 11%, as a result of decreased sales in the Middle East and North Africa down 35%, Latin America down 13% and Spain down 4%, partially offset by sales growth in Germany up 15%, the United Kingdom up 8% and Other Distributors up 4%. The North America region sales decreased 14% and units decreased 12%, mainly due to decreased sales in the U.S. down 17%, slightly offset by sales growth in Canada up 2%. The decreases in these various regions were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the first half of 2020; most markets started to reopen in mid-May/early June, with India and the Middle East being the two markets that remained the most challenged by COVID-19 during the second half of 2020. Changes in foreign currency favorably impacted ICL sales by $1.0 million. ICL sales represented 86.5% of our total sales for fiscal year 2020.
Other product sales, including cataract IOLs for 2021 decreased 20% from 2020, mainly due to product yield issues requiring rework related to preloaded injector parts manufactured on our behalf by a third-party manufacturer then sold by us to a third-party manufacturer for product they sell to their customers, as well as decreased cataract IOL sales. Changes in foreign currency unfavorably impacted other product sales by $0.3 million. Other product sales represented 7.6% of our total sales for fiscal year 2021.
Other product sales in 2020 increased 6% from 2019, due to increased preloaded injector part sales to a third-party manufacturer for product they sell to their customers, partially offset by decreased IOL sales. Changes in foreign currency favorably impacted other product sales by $0.5 million. Other product sales represented 13.5% of our total sales for fiscal year 2020.
Gross Profit
The following table presents our gross profit and gross profit margin for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
Gross profit for 2021 increased 50.9% from 2020. Gross profit margin increased to 77.5% of revenue for 2021 compared to 72.4% of revenue for 2020, due to higher mix of ICL sales, geographic sales mix, a decreased mix of injector part sales which carry a lower margin and the non-recurring expenses related to the 2020 COVID-19 manufacturing pause, partially offset by increased period costs associated with manufacturing expansion projects.
Gross profit for 2020 increased 5.7% from 2019. Gross profit margin decreased to 72.4% of revenue for 2020 compared to 74.5% of revenue for 2019, due to geographic sales mix, $1.2 million in expenses related to the COVID-19 manufacturing pause from March 17 through April 27, 2020, increased period costs associated with the manufacturing expansion projects and increased mix of injector part sales which carry a lower margin, partially offset by increased ICL volume.
General and Administrative Expense
The following table presents our general and administrative expense for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
General and administrative expenses for 2021 increased 30.2% from 2020, due to increased bonus and stock-based compensation expenses, salary-related and payroll tax expenses, outside services, facilities costs and corporate insurance.
General and administrative expenses for 2020 increased 15.7% from 2019, due to increased salary-related and payroll expenses, stock-based compensation expenses, tax consulting, corporate insurance and facility costs, slightly offset by decreased travel expenses.
Selling and Marketing Expense
The following table presents our marketing and selling expense for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
Selling and marketing expenses for 2021 increased 47.0% from 2020, due to increased advertising and promotional activities, salary-related and payroll tax expenses, trade shows expense, commission expense, and bonus and stock-based compensation expenses.
Selling and marketing expenses for 2020 increased 0.6% from 2019, due to increased advertising and promotional activities and salary-related and payroll expenses, offset by decreased trade shows and travel expenses.
Research and Development Expense
The following table presents our research and development expense for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses for 2021 increased 6.1% from 2020 due to increased bonus and stock-based compensation expenses and salary-related and payroll tax expenses, partially offset by decreased clinical expenses associated with our U.S. EVO clinical trial.
Research and development expenses for 2020 increased 26.2% from 2019 primarily due to increased clinical expenses associated with our EVO clinical trial in the U.S., and increased salary-related and payroll tax expenses.
Research and development expense consist primarily of compensation and related costs for personnel responsible for the research and development of new and existing products, the regulatory and clinical activities required to acquire and maintain product approvals globally and medical affairs expenses. These costs are expensed as incurred.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The following table presents our other income, net for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
*
Denotes change is greater than +100%.
Other expense, net for 2021 was $2.0 million and other income, net for 2020 and 2019 was $1.5 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The change in 2021 was due primarily to increased foreign exchange losses (primarily euro). The increase for 2020 was mainly due to increased foreign exchange gains (primarily euro), partially offset by decreased net interest income, as a result of lower interest rates.
Other income, net generally relates to interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents, interest expense on notes payable and finance lease obligations, gains or losses on foreign currency transactions, and royalty income. The table below summarizes the year over year changes in other income, net (in thousands):
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
The following table presents our provision (benefit) for income taxes for the fiscal years presented (in thousands):
*
Denotes change is greater than +100%.
We recorded income taxes for 2021 due to income tax expense generated from pre-tax profits in our foreign jurisdictions and a recapture of our U.S. valuation allowance of $0.8 million, as a result of increased tax deductions in the projection of taxable income in our valuation assessment. From time to time, we may adjust the projections of taxable income as a result of current conditions. We recorded income taxes for 2020 due to income tax expense generated from pre-tax profits in our foreign jurisdictions and a release of $0.5 million of our U.S. valuation allowance, as a result of increases in foreign income and changes in the usage and release of our deferred tax assets. We recorded an income tax benefit for 2019 due to a release of our U.S. valuation allowances of $3.4 million as a result of positive evidence in U.S. projected future profits, offset by income tax expense generated from pre-tax profits in our foreign jurisdictions. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, there were no unrecognized benefits related to uncertain tax positions taken by us.
All earnings from our subsidiaries are not considered to be permanently reinvested. Beginning 2019, we do not need to accrue withholding taxes on foreign earnings (Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). During 2021, 2020 and 2019 there were no withholding taxes paid to foreign jurisdictions.
ASC 740 requires that a valuation allowance be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset may not be realizable. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon future generation of income during the periods in which temporary differences representing net future deductible amounts become deductible. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets, we consider among other things, projected future income, tax planning strategies and all other available evidence in making this assessment. Under the incremental cash tax savings approach (Notes 1 and 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements), our U.S. cumulative valuation allowance was as follows (in thousands):
Under the incremental cash tax savings approach, the U.S. valuation allowance recorded reflects the net operating losses and deferred tax assets which would not result in future cash tax savings and therefore provide no additional benefit. Total U.S. net deferred tax assets were $3.0 million and $3.9 million at December 31, 2021 and January 1, 2021, respectively.
A reconciliation of the federal statutory income tax rate to our effective tax rate is set forth in Note 10 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that current cash, cash equivalents and future cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital needs, capital expenditures and contractual obligations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the financial statements included in this Annual Report. Our financial condition at December 31, 2021, January 1, 2021 and January 3, 2020 included the following (in millions):
We invest our net proceeds in short-term interest-bearing obligations, investment-grade instruments, certificates of deposit or direct or guaranteed obligations of the U.S. government. Additionally, during 2021 we fully repaid and cancelled our Japan line of credit and cancelled our Swiss framework agreement given our current cash resources. We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Overview of changes in cash and cash equivalents and other working capital accounts.
A summary of cash flows for the fiscal years presented (dollars in thousands):
For 2021, net cash provided by operating activities consisted of $24.5 million in net income and $21.9 million in non-cash items, offset by $2.4 million in working-capital changes. For 2020, net cash provided by operating activities consisted of $17.8 million in non-cash items and $5.9 million in net income, offset by $2.7 million in working-capital changes. For 2019, net cash provided by operating activities consisted of $14.0 million in net income and $13.0 million in non-cash items, offset by $1.2 million in working-capital changes.
The increase in investment in property, plant and equipment during 2021, relative to 2020, is primarily due to an increased in investments in manufacturing facilities. The decrease in investment in property, plant and equipment during 2020, relative to 2019, is primarily due to a slight decrease in investments in manufacturing facilities.
For 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $19.4 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $1.3 million repayment on the Japan line of credit and $0.3 million repayment of finance lease obligations. For 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $20.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $0.6 million repayment of finance lease obligations and a $0.5 million repayment on the Japan line of credit. For 2019, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $3.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, offset by a $2.0 million repayment on the Japan line of credit and $1.3 million repayment of finance lease obligations.
Accounts receivable, net was $43.5 million and $35.2 million at December 31, 2021 and January 1, 2021, respectively. Days’ Sales Outstanding (DSO) was 67 and 70 days, respectively in 2021 and 2020. The decrease in DSO was mainly due to increased customer collections of receivables in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Inventories, net was $17.2 million and $18.1 million at December 31, 2021 and January 1, 2021, respectively. Days’ Inventory on Hand (DOH) was 79 and 114 days in 2021 and 2020, respectively, for finished goods, including consignment inventory. The decrease in DOH is due to increased sales of ICL products resulting in more frequent inventory turnover.
Shelf Registration
On May 6, 2020, STAAR filed a universal shelf registration statement with the SEC covering the future public offering and sale of up to $200 million in equity or debt securities or any combination of such securities. The shelf registration statement became effective on February 22, 2021 and expires on February 22, 2024. Among the purposes for which STAAR could use the proceeds of securities sold in the future under the shelf registration statement are working capital, capital expenditures, expansion of sales and marketing, and continuing research and development. STAAR could also use a portion of the net proceeds to acquire or invest in businesses, assets, products, and technologies that are complementary to our own, although we are not currently contemplating or negotiating any such acquisitions or investments. The availability of financing in the public capital markets through the shelf registration statement depends on several factors in place at the time of financing, including the strength of STAAR’s business performance, general economic conditions and investment climate, and investor perceptions of those factors. If STAAR seeks financing under the shelf registration statement in the future, we cannot assure that such financing will be available on favorable terms, if at all.
Credit Facilities, Lease Line of Credit, Contractual Obligations, and Commitments
Credit Facilities
Refer to Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table represents the Company’s known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
*
Refer to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. As disclosed in Note 1, the preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results may differ, significantly at times, from these estimates if actual conditions differ from our assumptions.
We believe the following discussion represents our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Sales Return Reserves
We provide allowances for sales returns such that returns are matched against the sales from which they originated. While such allowances have historically been within our expectations, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same return rates that we have in the past. Measurement of such returns is based on an expected loss model which requires consideration of, among other factors, historical returns experience and current/anticipated trends, including the need to adjust for current conditions and product lines, the entry of a competitor, and judgments about the probable effects of relevant observable data. We consider all available information in our quarterly assessments of the adequacy of the allowance for sales returns.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain provisions for uncollectible accounts based on estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to remit payments. While such credit losses have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that we have in the past. Measurement of such losses is based on an expected loss model which requires consideration of historical loss experience, including the need to adjust for current conditions, and judgments about the probable effects of relevant observable data, including present economic conditions such as delinquency rates and financial health of specific customers. We consider all available information in our assessments of the adequacy of the reserves for uncollectible accounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for the issuance of stock awards by estimating the fair value of awards issued using the Black-Scholes pricing model. This model’s calculations include the exercise price, the market price of shares on grant date, risk-free interest rates, expected term of the award, expected volatility of our stock and expected dividend yield. For those awards which contain a performance condition, stock-based compensation cost will be recognized when it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved, net of an estimate of pre-vesting forfeitures, over the requisite service period based on the grant-date fair value of the stock. We reassess the probability of vesting at each reporting period and adjust stock-based compensation cost based on our probability assessment.
Income Taxes
In evaluating our ability to recover the deferred tax assets within a jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results and incorporate assumptions including overall current and projected business and industry conditions, the amount of future federal, state, and foreign pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences and the successful implementation of feasible and prudent tax-planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates management uses to manage its businesses. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, we also consider three years of cumulative operating results. Valuation allowances, or reductions to deferred tax assets, are recognized if, based on the weight of all the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset may not be realized.
Inventories
We provide estimated inventory allowances for excess, slow moving, expiring and obsolete inventory as well as inventory whose carrying value is more than net realizable value. These reserves are based on current assessments about future demands, market conditions and related management initiatives. If market conditions and actual demands are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on the expiration of products with a shelf life of less than four months, estimated forecasts of product demand and production requirements for the next twelve months. Several factors may influence the realizability of our inventories, including significant changes in demand, decisions to exit a product line, technological change, and new product development. While such inventory losses have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same loss rates that we have in the past.
Lease Accounting
We recognize right-of-use (ROU) assets and lease liabilities for leases with terms greater than twelve months. In recording a lease ROU asset, we consider the following lease extensions only if we are reasonably certain to extend the lease. For leases that increase using an inflation rate indicator, we use the inflation rate at the time the lease was entered into for the length of the lease term. In addition, we use our incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate to record the lease ROU asset.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Intangible assets (excluding goodwill) and other long-lived assets (including property, plant and equipment and lease ROU assets) are reviewed for impairment whenever events such as product discontinuance, plant closures, product dispositions or other changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Certain factors which may occur and indicate that an impairment exists include, but are not limited to, the following: significant underperformance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results; significant changes in the manner of use of the underlying assets; and significant adverse industry or market economic trends. In reviewing for impairment, we compare the carrying value of such assets to the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. If the carrying value of assets is determined to be unrecoverable, we would estimate the fair value of the assets and record an impairment charge for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value. The estimate of fair value requires management to make several assumptions and projections, which could include, but would not be limited to, future revenues, earnings and the probability of certain outcomes and scenarios.
Employee Defined Benefit Plans - Pension
The liabilities and annual income or expense of our pension plans are determined using methodologies that involve several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, expected years of service, salary increases and the expected long-term rate of asset return. The fair values of plan assets are determined based on prevailing market prices.
Foreign Exchange
Management does not believe that the fluctuation in the value of the dollar in relation to the currencies of its suppliers or customers in the last three fiscal years has adversely affected our ability to purchase or sell products at agreed upon prices. No assurance can be given, however, that adverse currency exchange rate fluctuations will not occur in the future, which could significantly affect our operating results. We do not currently hedge transactions to offset changes in foreign currency.
Inflation
Management believes inflation has not had a significant impact on our net sales and revenues and on income from continuing operations during the past three years.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Part II. Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1 - Organization and Description of Business and Accounting Policies - Income Taxes” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.