ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Quarterly Report. This section includes a number of forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including, but not limited to, statements about our plans, strategies, adequacy of resources and future financial results (such as revenue, gross profit, operating profit, cash flow), are forward-looking statements. Some of the forward-looking statements can be identified by words like “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “can,” “could,” “should,” “intends,” “project,” “predict,” “plans,” “estimates,” “goal,” “target,” “possible,” “potential,” “would,” “seek,” and similar references to future periods. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Because these forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: negative outcome of pending and future claims and litigation; our ability to access the capital markets by pursuing additional debt and equity financing to fund our business plan and expenses on terms acceptable to us or at all; and our ability to comply with our contractual covenants, including in respect of our debt; potential cost overruns and possible rejection of our business model and/or sales methods; weakness in general economic conditions and levels of capital spending by customers in the industries we serve; weakness or volatility in the financial and capital markets, which may result in the postponement or cancellation of our customers’ capital projects or the inability of our customers to pay our fees; delays or reductions in U.S. government spending; credit risks associated with our customers; competitive market pressures; the availability and cost of qualified labor; our level of success in attracting, training and retaining qualified management personnel and other staff employees; changes in tax laws and other government regulations, including the impact of health care reform laws and regulations; the possibility of incurring liability for our business activities, including, but not limited to, the activities of our temporary employees; our performance on customer contracts; and government policies, legislation or judicial decisions adverse to our businesses. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We assume no obligation to update such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. We recommend readers to carefully review the entirety of this Annual Report, including the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report and the other reports and documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), particularly our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and our Current Reports on Form 8-K.
Overview
We are incorporated in the State of Delaware. As a rapidly growing public company in the international staffing sector, our high-growth business model is based on finding and acquiring suitable, mature, profitable, operating, U.S. and U.K. based staffing companies. Our targeted consolidation model is focused specifically on the Professional Business Stream and Commercial Business Stream disciplines.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
In December 2019, a strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, and has spread globally, resulting in government-imposed quarantines, travel restrictions and other public health safety measures in affected countries. The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting worldwide economic activity, and activity in the United States and the United Kingdom where our operations are based. Much of the independent contractor work we provide to our clients is performed at the site of our clients. As a result, we are subject to the plans and approaches our clients have made to address the COVID-19 pandemic, such as whether they support remote working or if they have simply closed their facilities and furloughed employees. To the extent that our clients were to decide or are required to close their facilities, or not permit remote work when they close facilities, we would no longer generate revenue and profit from that client. In addition, in the event that our clients’ businesses suffer or close as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience declines in our revenue or write-off of receivables from such clients. Therefore, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operation and to disrupt the marketplace in which we operate and may negatively impact our sales in fiscal year 2022 and our overall liquidity.
While the ultimate economic impact brought by, and the duration of, the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, the pandemic has resulted in significant disruptions in general commercial activity and the global economy and caused financial market volatility and uncertainty in significant and unforeseen ways in the recent years. A continuation or worsening of the levels of market disruption and volatility seen in the recent past could have an adverse effect on our ability to access capital and on the market price of our common stock, and we may not be able to successfully raise needed capital. If we are unsuccessful in raising capital in the future, we may need to reduce activities, curtail, or cease operations.
In addition, the continuation or worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic or an outbreak of other infectious diseases could result in a widespread health crisis that could adversely affect the economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Headway Acquisition
On April 18, 2022, we entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with Headway Workforce Solutions, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Headway”), and Chapel Hill Partners, LP, as the representatives of all the stockholders (collectively, the “Sellers”) of Headway (the “Sellers’ Representative”), pursuant to which, among other things, we agreed to purchase all of the issued and outstanding securities of Headway in exchange for (i) a cash payment of $14, and (ii) 9,000,000 shares of our Series H Convertible Preferred Stock, with a value equal to the Closing Payment, as defined in the Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Headway Acquisition”). On May 18, 2022, the Headway Acquisition closed. The purchase price in connection with the Headway Acquisition was approximately $9,000. Pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement and in connection with the closing of the Headway Acquisition, on May 17, 2022, the Company filed a certificate of designation (the “Certificate of Designation”) with the Secretary of State of Delaware designating the rights, preferences and limitations of the Series H Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.00001 per share (the “Series H Preferred Stock”).
The purchase price in connection with the Headway Acquisition was $9,000, subject to adjustment as provided in the Stock Purchase Agreement. Pursuant to certain covenants in the Stock Purchase Agreement, we may be subject to a Contingent Payment based on the Adjusted EBITDA (such term as defined in the Stock Purchase Agreement) of Headway during the Contingent Period (such term as defined in the Stock Purchase Agreement).
The Stock Purchase Agreement also contains representations, warranties and indemnification obligations of the parties customary for transactions similar to those contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement. Such representations and warranties are made solely for purposes of the Stock Purchase Agreement and, in some cases, may be subject to qualifications and limitations agreed to by the parties in connection with the negotiated terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement and may have been qualified by disclosures that were made in connection with the parties’ entry into the Stock Purchase Agreement.
In connection with the Headway Acquisition, the Sellers’ Representative and certain of the Sellers entered into voting agreements whereby each will agree to, at every meeting of our stockholders, and at every adjournment or postponement thereof, to appear or issue a proxy to a third party to be present for purposes of establishing a quorum, and to vote all applicable shares in favor of each matter proposed and recommended for approval by our board of directors either in person or by proxy, amongst other provisions.
In connection with the Headway Acquisition, on April 18, 2022, we entered into a limited consent and wavier (the “Second Limited Consent”) to the Amended Note Purchase Agreement with Jackson Investment Group, LLC (“Jackson”). The Second Limited Consent permits, among other things, the Stock Purchase Agreement, and additionally grants one-time waivers under the Amended Note Purchase Agreement of (i) the occurrence of a breach of a financial covenant as of the first fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2022, and (ii) the delivery of certain audited financial statements until May 2, 2022. On June 23, 2022, the deadline for complying with the waiver was extended to June 30, 2022.
Additionally on April 18, 2022, we and certain of our domestic subsidiaries entered into an amendment to the Credit and Security Agreement, dated as of April 8, 2015, as amended, and entered into Amendment No. 20 (“Amendment No. 20”) to the Credit and Security Agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), with MidCap Funding X Trust. Amendment No. 20 permits, among other things, the Headway Acquisition and the issuance of the Series H Preferred Stock, and additionally grants one-time waivers under the Credit Agreement of (i) the occurrence of a breach of a financial covenant for the months ended December 31, 2021, January 31, 2022, February 28, 2022 and March 31, 2022, and (ii) the delivery of certain audited financial statements until May 2, 2022. On June 23, 2022, the deadline for complying with the waiver was extended to June 30, 2022. For more information on the Headway Acquisition, please refer to “Note 18 - Subsequent Events.”
Nasdaq Bid Price Requirement
On June 3, 2020, we received a letter from the Staff of Nasdaq notifying us that we were no longer in compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on Nasdaq under Stockholders’ Equity Requirement. A hearing before the Panel was held on January 21, 2021, and we were granted an extension to regain compliance until February 28, 2021, which was subsequently further extended to May 31, 2021. On June 28, 2021, we received a letter from the Staff notifying us that the Panel determined that we had regained compliance with the Stockholders’ Equity Requirement. The Panel also imposed a Panel Monitor under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5815(d)(4)(A) for a period of one year from the date of the June 28, 2021 letter, during which period we are expected to remain in compliance with all of Nasdaq’s continued listing requirements. On February 23, 2022, we received a letter from the Listing Qualifications of Nasdaq notifying us that we were no longer in compliance with the Bid Price Requirement, for continued listing on Nasdaq. Pursuant to the Panel Decision, we were not eligible for the 180-day bid price compliance period set forth in the Listing Rules. On March 2, 2022, we timely requested a hearing before the Panel, which was held on March 31, 2022.
On April 12, 2022, we received a letter from Nasdaq notifying us that the Panel determined to grant our request for continued listing on Nasdaq, subject to the following: (i) on or about May 2, 2022, we advised the Panel of the status of the proxy statement it plans to file to obtain shareholder approval for a reverse stock split, (ii) on or about May 23, 2022, we advised the Panel on the status of the shareholder meeting we plan to hold to obtain approval of the reverse stock split, (iii) on or about May 26, 2022, we will affect a reverse stock split and (iv) on or before about June 22, 2022, we shall demonstrate compliance with the Bid Price Requirement by evidencing a closing bid price above $1.00 per share for the previous ten consecutive trading sessions. On April 19, 2022, we received a letter from the Staff notifying us that as we had not yet filed our Form 10-K for the period ended January 1, 2022, such matter serves as an additional basis for delisting our securities from Nasdaq under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(2)(A). On May 4, 2022 the Panel granted us an extension request until July 11, 2022 to demonstrate compliance with the bid price requirement. On May 20, 2022, we received a notice from the Staff notifying us that as we had not yet filed our Form 10-Q for the period ended April 2, 2022, such matter serves as a basis for delisting our securities from Nasdaq in addition to the aforementioned matters.
Although we are taking actions intended to restore our compliance with the listing requirements, we can provide no assurance that any action taken by us will be successful. If Nasdaq delists our common stock from trading on its exchange for failure to meet the listing standards, an investor would likely find it significantly more difficult to dispose of or obtain our shares, and our ability to raise future capital through the sale of our shares could be severely limited. We additionally may not be able to list our common stock on another national securities exchange, which could result in our securities being quoted on an over-the-counter market. If this were to occur, our shareholders could face significant material adverse consequences, including limited availability of market quotations for our common stock and reduced liquidity for the trading of our securities. In addition, we could experience a decreased ability to issue additional securities and obtain additional financing in the future. There can be no assurance that an active trading market for our common stock will develop or be sustained. Delisting could also have other negative results, including the potential loss of confidence by employees, the loss of institutional investor interest and fewer business development opportunities.
Nasdaq Minimum Stockholders’ Equity Requirement
On June 3, 2020, we received a letter from the Listing Qualifications Department notifying us that we were no longer in compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity requirement for continued listing on Nasdaq. Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1) requires listed companies to maintain stockholders’ equity of at least $2,500. Further, as of June 9, 2020, we did not meet the alternative compliance standards relating to the market value of listed securities or net income from continuing operations.
In accordance with the Nasdaq Listing Rules, we were afforded the opportunity to submit a plan to regain compliance with the minimum stockholders’ equity standard. Based on our submissions, the Listing Qualifications Department granted us an extension to regain compliance with Rule 5550(b)(1) until November 30, 2020.
On December 1, 2020, we received notice that because we had not met the terms of the extension, our common stock would be subject to delisting from Nasdaq, unless we timely requested a hearing before a Nasdaq Hearings Panel (the “Panel”). We timely requested a hearing before the Panel, which automatically stayed any suspension or delisting action pending the issuance of a decision by the Panel following the hearing and the expiration of any additional extension period granted by the Panel. The hearing occurred on January 21, 2021. At the hearing, we provided the Panel with an update on our compliance plan and requested a further extension of time in which to regain compliance. On February 3, 2021, we received a letter from the Panel noting it had granted our request for an extension until February 28, 2021 to regain compliance with the minimum $2,500 stockholders’ equity requirement, or the alternative compliance standards as set forth in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1). On March 4, 2021 we received a letter extending the deadline for compliance to May 31, 2021.
On June 11, 2021, we received a letter from the Staff notifying us that the Panel had determined to delist our shares from Nasdaq and that trading in our shares would be suspended effective at the open of business on June 15, 2021 but that due to a procedural issue, the Panel had determined not to implement the decision and afforded us an opportunity to make an additional submission for the Panel’s consideration.
On June 28, 2021, we received a letter from the Staff informing us that we had regained compliance with the Rule. As a result, the Panel determined to continue the listing of our securities on Nasdaq. The Panel also determined to impose a Panel Monitor under Listing Rule 5815(d)(4)(A) for a period of one year from the date of the June 28, 2021 letter. We are expected to remain in compliance with all of Nasdaq’s continued listing requirements during the Monitoring Period. If at any time during this period we fail to satisfy any continued listing standard, the Staff will issue a Delist Determination Letter, which we may appeal.
February 2021 Public Offering
On February 9, 2021, we announced the pricing of a public offering (“the “February 2021 Offering”) of an aggregate of 364,255 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $54.00 per share. The February 2021 Offering was made pursuant to our registration statement on Form S-1 initially filed on January 13, 2021, as subsequently amended and declared effective on February 9, 2021. The February 2021 Offering was made only by means of a prospectus forming a part of the effective registration statement.
The February 2021 Offering closed on February 12, 2021. In the February 2021 Offering, we issued 347,520 shares of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 16,735 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $0.001 per share (the “Pre-funded Warrants”). The Pre-funded Warrants were sold at $54.00 per Pre-funded Warrant. The Pre-funded Warrants were immediately exercisable and could be exercised at any time after their original issuance until such Pre-funded Warrants were exercised in full. The Pre-funded Warrants were exercised immediately upon issuance, and 16,735 shares of common stock were issued on February 12, 2021.
The net proceeds to us from the February 2021 Offering were approximately $18,100, after deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us. Because of certain covenants in the Certificate of Designation (the “Series E Certificate of Designation”) governing our then-outstanding Series E Preferred Stock (as defined herein), we were required to use the proceeds of any contemporaneous sales of equity securities, including the securities offered in the February 2021 Offering, exclusively to redeem any outstanding shares of our Series E Preferred Stock, subject to certain limitations. Pursuant to the Limited Consent (as defined below), we were permitted to use approximately 75% of the net proceeds from the February 2021 Offering to redeem a portion of the outstanding Second Amended and Restated 12% Senior Secured Note, due September 30, 2022 (the “Jackson Note”) that we issued on October 26, 2020 to Jackson Investment Group LLC (“Jackson”) pursuant to that certain Second Amended and Restated Note Purchase Agreement, dated October 26, 2020, among us, certain of our subsidiaries and Jackson (the “Amended Note Purchase Agreement”) and 25% of the net proceeds from the February 2021 Offering to redeem 4,518 shares of the Series E Preferred Stock. Following the redemption of the Series E Preferred Stock, we had 6,172 shares of Series E Preferred Stock outstanding with an aggregate stated value of $6,172.
Jackson Waivers
On February 5, 2021, we entered into a Limited Consent and Waiver (the “Limited Consent”) with Jackson whereby, among other things, Jackson agreed that we may use 75% of the proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of the 2020 Jackson Note, which at the time had an outstanding principal amount and accrued interest of $32,710, and 25% of the net proceeds from the Offering to redeem a portion of our Base Series E Preferred Stock, notwithstanding certain provisions of the Series E Certificate of Designation that would have required us to use all the proceeds from the Offering to redeem the Base Series E Preferred Stock. In addition, we also agreed in the Limited Consent to additional limits on our ability to incur other indebtedness, including limits on advances under our revolving loan facility with MidCap Funding X Trust. We also agreed that to the extent that any of our PPP Loans are forgiven after the Offering, Jackson may convert the Base Series E Preferred Stock and Series E-1 Preferred Stock that remains outstanding into a secured note that is substantially similar to the 2020 Jackson Note. On April 8, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 17, 2021.
Jackson also entered into a Limited Waiver and Agreement with us on February 5, 2021, whereby Jackson agreed that it would not convert any shares of the Base Series E Preferred Stock or Series E-1 Preferred Stock into shares of our common stock or exercise any warrants to purchase shares to the extent that doing so would cause the number of our authorized shares of common stock to be less than the number of shares being offered in the Offering. Jackson also waived any event of default under the Series E Certificate of Designation and the 2020 Jackson Note that would have resulted from the Company having an insufficient number of authorized shares of common stock to honor conversions of the Base Series E Preferred Stock and the exercise of Jackson’s warrants. On April 8, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 17, 2021 and on May 6, 2021, in connection with the issuance of the Series G Preferred Stock (as defined below) in exchange for the Series E Preferred Stock, the limited waiver was extended to June 30, 2021.
Jackson also entered into a Limited Waiver and Agreement with us on February 5, 2021, whereby Jackson agreed that it would not convert any shares of the Base Series E Preferred Stock or Series E-1 Preferred Stock into shares of our common stock or exercise any warrants to purchase shares to the extent that doing so would cause the number of our authorized shares of common stock to be less than the number of shares being offered in the Offering. Jackson also waived any event of default under the Series E Certificate of Designation and the 2020 Jackson Note that would have resulted from the Company having an insufficient number of authorized shares of common stock to honor conversions of the Base Series E Preferred Stock and the exercise of Jackson’s warrants. On April 8, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 17, 2021, on May 6, 2021, the limited waiver was extended to June 30, 2021 and on April 18, 2022, the limited waiver was extended to May 2, 2022.
In connection with the Headway Acquisition, on April 18, 2022, we entered into the Second Limited Consent with Jackson. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Headway Acquisition.”
April 2021 Private Placement
On April 21, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “April 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors for the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 469.76328 shares of Series F Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.00001 (“the Series F Preferred Stock”) at a price of $10,000 per share and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 130,491 shares of common stock, at an exercise price of $36.00 per share (the “April 2021 Warrants”) in a private placement (the “April 2021 Private Placement”). The April 2021 Warrants became exercisable six months following the closing of the April 2021 Private Placement and will expire five years following such date.
The Series F Preferred Stock was convertible into an aggregate of approximately 130,491 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $36.00 per share, subject to certain ownership limitations, upon the amendment of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to effect a reverse split within the range of 2-into-1 to up to 20-into-1 to be determined by the Board.
The net proceeds to us from the sale of the Series F Preferred Stock and the warrants were approximately $4,200, after deducting placement agent fees and estimate offering expenses payable by us. We used $3,200 of the net proceeds to redeem a portion of the 2020 Jackson Note, which had an outstanding principal amount of $19,154 immediately prior to such redemption. In addition, we used $1,000 of the net proceeds for working capital purposes. There are no shares of Series F Preferred Stock outstanding as of January 1, 2022.
Series G Preferred Stock
On May 6, 2021, we entered into an Exchange Agreement with Jackson, pursuant to which, among other things, Jackson agreed to exchange 6,172 shares of our then-outstanding Series E Convertible Preferred Stock, and 1,493 shares of our then-outstanding Series E-1 Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series E-1 Convertible Preferred Stock” and, together with the Series E Convertible Preferred Stock, the “Series E Preferred Stock”) for an equivalent number of shares of the Company’s then-newly issued Series G Convertible Preferred Stock and Series G-1 Convertible Preferred Stock, respectively (the “Series G Convertible Preferred Stock” and the “Series G-1 Convertible Preferred Stock,” and together, the Series G Preferred Stock”). The Series G Preferred Stock was subject to the same terms stated in the Limited Waiver.
At issuance, the Series G Preferred Stock ranked senior to each of our common stock, Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, Series B Convertible Preferred Stock and Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, and any other classes and series of our stock then or thereafter authorized, issued or outstanding, which by their terms expressly provided that they were junior to the Series G Preferred Stock or which did not specify their rank (which included the Series F Preferred Stock). Each share of Series G Preferred Stock was initially convertible into 1,000 shares of pre-Reverse Stock Split common stock at any time then or thereafter.
There are no shares of Series E Preferred Stock outstanding as of January 1, 2022.
Reverse Stock Splits
On June 23, 2022, we held a special meeting of stockholders (the “Special Meeting”), at which meeting our stockholders, by an affirmative vote of the majority of our outstanding shares of capital stock to effect, at the discretion of our Board of Directors (the “Board”) but prior to the Company’s 2022 annual stockholder meeting, a reverse split of the common stock at a ratio determined by the Board in the range of 1-for-2 to 1-for-20, such ratio to be determined by the Board, without reducing the authorized number of shares of Common Stock. Following the Special Meeting, the Board determined to effect the Reverse Stock Split at a ratio of 1-for-10. On June 23, 2022, we filed a Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of Delaware to effect the Reverse Stock Split.
As a result of the Reverse Stock Split, every ten shares of issued and outstanding common stock was automatically combined into one issued and outstanding share of common stock, without any change in the par value per share. No fractional shares were issued as a result of the Reverse Stock Split. The Reverse Stock Split reduced the number of shares of common stock then-outstanding from 17,618,300 shares to approximately 1,761,830 shares, subject to adjustment for the rounding up of fractional shares. The number of authorized shares of common stock under the Certificate of Incorporation remained unchanged.
On June 21, 2021, we held a special meeting of stockholders, at which meeting our stockholders, by an affirmative vote of the majority of our outstanding shares of capital stock to effect, at the discretion of our Board but prior to the Company’s 2021 annual stockholder meeting, a reverse split of the common stock at a ratio determined by the Board in the range of 1-for-2 to 1-for-20, such ratio to be determined by the Board, without reducing the authorized number of shares of Common Stock. Following the Special Meeting, the Board determined to effect the Reverse Stock Split at a ratio of 1-for-6. On June 30, 2021, we filed a Certificate of Amendment of Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of Delaware to effect the Reverse Stock Split.
As a result of the Reverse Stock Split, every six shares of issued and outstanding common stock was automatically combined into one issued and outstanding share of common stock, without any change in the par value per share. No fractional shares were issued as a result of the Reverse Stock Split. The Reverse Stock Split reduced the number of shares of common stock then-outstanding from 39,166,528 shares to approximately 6,527,755 shares (with the latest split of 1 for 10 the shares will reduce from 3,916,653 shares to approximately 652,776), subject to adjustment for the rounding up of fractional shares. The number of authorized shares of common stock under the Certificate of Incorporation remained unchanged.
PPP loan forgiveness
On July 14, 2021, we were notified by our lender, Affinity Bank, that the PPP loans (the “PPP Loans”) for Key Resources Inc., Lighthouse Placement Services, LLC and Staffing 360 Georgia, LLC, in the amounts of $5,443, $1,890 and $2,063, respectively, in principal and $63, $22 and $24, respectively, in interest, were forgiven in their entirety by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”).
In addition to the forgiveness of these loans, we had previously received notification of forgiveness for Monroe Staffing Services, LLC’s (“Monroe”) PPP Loan. In total, we have received full forgiveness of its PPP Loans totaling $19,395 of principal and $214 in interest. This is presented in our Statement of Operations as a PPP forgiveness gain of $19,609 within Other Income.
July 2021 Registered Direct Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
On July 20, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “July 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors. Pursuant to the July 2021 Purchase Agreement, we sold, in a registered direct offering (the “July 2021 Registered Direct Offerings), 219,914 shares of our common stock to the investors at an offering price of $34.50 per share and associated warrant. In a concurrent private placement (the “July 2021 Private Placement” and, together with the July 2021 Registered Direct Offering, the “July 2021 Offerings”), we sold to the same investors, unregistered warrants (the “July 2021 Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 109,957 shares of common stock, representing 50% of the shares of common stock sold in the July 2021 Registered Direct Offering. The July 2021 Warrants are exercisable at an exercise price of $38.00 per share, were exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years from the date of issuance.
The net proceeds from the July 2021 Offerings were approximately $6,760, after deducting placement agent fees and other estimated offering expenses payable by us. While our Series G Preferred Stock was outstanding, we were required to use the proceeds of any sales of equity securities, including the common stock offered in the July 2021 Registered Direct Offering, exclusively to redeem any outstanding shares of Series G Preferred Stock, subject to certain limitations. As discussed above under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Jackson Consent”, we received a waiver from Jackson, the sole holder of our outstanding shares of Series G Preferred Stock, to pay accrued and unpaid interest and prepay a portion of the outstanding principal balance of the 2020 Jackson Note, which at the time had an outstanding principal amount of $16,077 and paid accrued and unpaid dividends on the Series G-1 Convertible Preferred Stock upon conversion of such preferred stock into the New Note (as defined below).
Jackson Consent
In connection with the July 2021 Offerings, on July 22, 2021, we entered into a limited consent with Jackson whereby, among other things, Jackson agreed that we could effect the July 2021 Offerings and use $5,000 of the net proceeds thereof to pay accrued and unpaid interest and prepay a portion of the outstanding principal balance of the 2020 Jackson Note, notwithstanding certain provisions of the certificate of designation for the then-outstanding Series G Convertible Preferred Stock that would have required us to use all the proceeds from the July 2021 Offerings to redeem the Series G Convertible Preferred Stock.
Conversion of Series G Convertible Preferred Stock into Senior Debt
On July 21, 2021, we exchanged 6,172 shares of our Series G Convertible Preferred Stock and 1,561 shares of Series G-1 Preferred Stock for senior indebtedness by entering into a new 12% Senior Secured Note, in aggregate principal amount of $7,733 (the “New Note”), which amount represented all of the then-outstanding Series G Preferred Stock totaling $6,172 and Series G-1 Convertible Preferred Stock totaling $1,561 held by Jackson as of July 21, 2021, under the Amended Note Purchase Agreement. The New Note was deemed issued pursuant to the Amended Note Purchase Agreement.
Under the terms of the New Note, we are required to pay interest on the New Note at a per annum rate of 12%, in cash only, accruing from and after the date of the New Note and until the entire principal balance of the New Note shall have been repaid in full, and on and at all times during which the “Default Rate” (as defined in the Amended Note Purchase Agreement) applies, to the extent permitted by law, at a per annum rate of 17%. The entire outstanding principal balance of the New Note is due and payable in full on September 30, 2022. Upon an Event of Default (as defined in the Amended Note Purchase Agreement), the principal of the New Note and all accrued and unpaid interest thereon may be accelerated and declared or otherwise become due and payable in accordance with the terms of the Amended Note Purchase Agreement.
There are no shares of Series G Preferred Stock outstanding as of January 1, 2022.
August 2021 Registered Direct Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
On August 5, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “First August 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors. Pursuant to the First August 2021 Purchase Agreement, we agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering, 138,317 shares of our common stock to the purchasers at an offering price of $26.425 per share and associated warrant (the “First August 2021 Registered Direct Offering”). Pursuant to the First August 2021 Purchase Agreement, in a concurrent private placement (the “First August 2021 Private Placement” and, together with the First August 2021 Registered Direct Offering, the “First August 2021 Offerings”), we also sold to the purchasers unregistered warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 69,159 shares of common stock, representing 50% of the shares of common stock that were issued and sold in the First August 2021 Registered Direct Offering (the “First August 2021 Warrants”). The First August 2021 Warrants are exercisable at an exercise price of $25.80 per share, were exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years from the date of issuance.
The net proceeds to us from the First August 2021 Offerings were approximately $3,217, after deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the First August 2021 Offerings together with cash on hand to redeem $3,281 of the 2020 Jackson Note, which had an outstanding principal amount of approximately $16,730 immediately prior to such redemption.
Second August 2021 Registered Direct Offering and Concurrent Private Placement
On August 22, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Second August 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors. Pursuant to the Second August 2021 Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to sell, in a registered direct offering (the “Second August 2021 Registered Direct Offering”), 136,048 shares of our common stock to the purchasers at an offering price of $21.00 per share and associated warrant. Pursuant to the Second August 2021 Purchase Agreement, in a concurrent private placement (the “Second August 2021 Private Placement” and, together with the Second August 2021 Registered Direct Offering, the “Second August 2021 Offerings”), we also sold to the purchasers unregistered warrants (the “Second August 2021 Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 68,024 shares of common stock, representing 50% of the shares of common stock that were issued and sold in the Second August 2021 Registered Direct Offering. The Second August 2021 Warrants are exercisable at an exercise price of $20.40 per share, were exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years from the date of issuance.
The net proceeds to us from the Second August 2021 Offerings were approximately $2,466, after deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us. We used all proceeds for working capital purposes.
November 2021 Private Placement
On October 28, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional and accredited investors for the issuance and sale, in a private placement, of 468,355 shares of common stock, or pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of common stock, and warrants (the “November 2021 Warrants”) to purchase up to 468,355 shares of common stock, with an exercise price of $18.50 per share (the “November 2021 Private Placement”). The November 2021 Warrants were exercisable immediately upon issuance and have a term of exercise equal to five years from the date of issuance. The combined purchase price for one share of common stock (or pre-funded warrant) and one associated warrant was $19.75.
The net proceeds to us from the November 2021 Private Placement were approximately $9,072, after deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by us. We used all proceeds for the repayment of debt and general working capital purposes.
Business Model, Operating History and Acquisitions
We are a high-growth international staffing company engaged in the acquisition of U.S. and U.K. based staffing companies. As part of our consolidation model, we pursue a broad spectrum of staffing companies supporting primarily the Professional and Commercial Business Streams. Our typical acquisition model is based on paying consideration in the form of cash, stock, earn-outs and/or promissory notes. In furthering our business model, the Company is regularly in discussions and negotiations with various suitable, mature acquisition targets. Since November 2013, the Company has completed ten acquisitions.
firstPRO Transaction
On September 24, 2020, we and Staffing 360 Georgia, LLC d/b/a firstPRO, our wholly-owned subsidiary (for purposes of this paragraph and the succeeding two paragraphs, the “Seller”), entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with firstPRO Recruitment, LLC (for purposes of this paragraph, the “Buyer”), pursuant to which the Seller sold to the Buyer substantially all of the Seller’s assets used in or related to the operation or conduct of its professional staffing and recruiting business in Georgia (the “Assets,” and such sale, the “firstPRO Transaction”). In addition, the Buyer agreed to assume certain liabilities related to the Assets. The purchase price in connection with the firstPRO Transaction was $3,300, of which (a) $1,220 was paid at closing (the “Initial Payment”) and (b) $2,080 was held in a separate escrow account (the “Escrow Funds”), which was released upon receipt of the forgiveness of the Seller’s PPP Loans by the SBA. In the event that all or any portion of the PPP Loan is not forgiven by the SBA, all or a portion of the certain funds being held in escrow will be used to repay any unforgiven portion of the PPP Loan in full. The firstPRO Transaction closed on September 24, 2020. As of July 2021, all PPP Loans had been forgiven in full by the SBA.
In connection with the execution of the Asset Purchase Agreement, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into a Consent Agreement with Jackson (the “Consent”), a noteholder pursuant to that certain Amended and Restated Note Purchase Agreement, dated as of September 15, 2017, as amended (the “Existing Note Purchase Agreement”). Under the terms of the Consent and the Series E Certificate of Designation, in consideration for Jackson’s consent to the firstPRO Transaction, the Initial Payment was used to redeem a portion of the Series E Preferred Stock, and the Escrow Funds, subject to the forgiveness of PPP Loan discussed above, will be used to redeem a portion of the Series E Preferred Stock. As this provision results in a contingent redemption feature, approximately $2.1 million of the Series E Preferred Stock was reclassified to mezzanine equity during the year ended January 1, 2022.
To induce the Buyer to enter into the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Seller also entered into a Transition Services Agreement with the Buyer, pursuant to which each party will provide certain transition services to minimize any disruption to the businesses of the Seller and the Buyer arising from the firstPRO Transaction.
For Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020
Revenue
Fiscal 2021 revenue decreased by 3.3% to $197,770 as compared with $204,527 for Fiscal 2020. Of that decline, $10,848 was attributable to organic revenue decline, slightly offset by $4,091 of favorable foreign currency translation. Within organic revenue, temporary contractor revenue declined $9,175 and permanent placement declined $1,673. The primary driver of temporary contractor revenue decline was due to the sale of firstPRO and government-mandated lockdowns in Fiscal 2021 due to the Covid-19 outbreaks.
Revenue in Fiscal 2021 was comprised of $192,756 of temporary contractor revenue and $5,014 of permanent placement revenue, compared with $198,066 and $6,461 for Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Cost of revenue, Gross profit and gross margin
Cost of revenue includes the variable cost of labor and various non-variable costs (e.g., workers’ compensation insurance) relating to employees (temporary and permanent) as well as sub-contractors and consultants. For Fiscal 2021, cost of revenue was $163,903, a decrease of 3.4% from $169,714 in Fiscal 2020, compared with revenue decline of 3.3%.
Gross profit for Fiscal 2021 was $33,867, a decrease of 2.7% from $34,813 for Fiscal 2020, representing gross margin of 17.1% and 17.0% for each period, respectively. The increase was driven by $674 of favorable foreign currency translation and $1,620 of organic decline.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for Fiscal 2021 were $41,167, a decrease of 5.6% from $43,593 for Fiscal 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was driven by headcount reductions, lower variable costs, and cost savings initiatives. Included in the 2021 total of $42,741 is $3,104 for impairment of goodwill.
Other Income and Expenses
Other income (expenses) for Fiscal 2021 were $15,101, an increase of 316.9% from $(6,962) in Fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by the PPP forgiveness gain of $19,609. This was partially offset by $4,215 interest expense and amortization of debt discount and deferred financing costs in Fiscal 2021 compared with $7,195 in Fiscal 2020; other loss of $33 in Fiscal 2021 versus other gain of $125 in Fiscal 2020, and $260 loss in remeasuring the intercompany note in Fiscal 2021 compared with a gain of $584 in Fiscal 2020.
Non-GAAP Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), we also use non-GAAP financial measures and Key Performance Indicators (“KPIs”) in addition to our GAAP results. We believe non-GAAP financial measures and KPIs may provide useful information for evaluating our cash operating performance, ability to service debt, compliance with debt covenants and measurement against competitors. This information should be considered as supplemental in nature and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly entitled measures reported by other companies.
We present the following non-GAAP financial measure and KPIs in this report:
Revenue and Gross Profit by Business Streams We use this KPI to measure the Company’s mix of Revenue and respective profitability between its two main lines of business due to their differing margins. For clarity, these lines of business are not the Company’s operating segments, as this information is not currently regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker to allocate capital and resources. Rather, we use this KPI to benchmark the Company against the industry.
The following table details Revenue and Gross Profit by Business Streams:
Adjusted EBITDA This measure is defined as net income (loss) attributable to common stock before: interest expense, benefit from income taxes; depreciation and amortization; acquisition, capital raising and other non-recurring expenses; other non-cash charges; impairment of goodwill; re-measurement gain on intercompany note; restructuring charges; gain from sale of business; PPP Forgiveness Gain; other income; and charges the Company considers to be non-recurring in nature such as legal expenses associated with litigation, professional fees associated potential and completed acquisitions. We use this measure because we believe it provides a more meaningful understanding of the profit and cash flow generation of the Company.
(1) Acquisition, capital raising, and other non-recurring expenses primarily relate to capital raising expenses, acquisition and integration expenses, and legal expenses incurred in relation to matters outside the ordinary course of business. Due to government mandated restrictions, the Company had to temporarily close some of its offices and, due to social distancing restrictions, could not make full use of these facilities for significant periods of time during the year.
(2) Other non-cash charges primarily relate to staff option and share compensation expense, expense for shares issued to directors for board services, and consideration paid for consulting services.
(3) Adjusted EBITDA of Divested Business for the period prior to the divestment date.
(4) Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA excludes the Adjusted EBITDA of Divested Business for the period prior to the divestment date.
(5) Adjusted Gross Profit excludes gross profit of business divested in September 2020, for the period prior to divestment date.
Operating Leverage This measure is calculated by dividing the growth in Adjusted EBITDA by the growth in Gross Profit, on a trailing 12-month basis. We use this KPI because we believe it provides a measure of the Company’s efficiency for converting incremental gross profit into Adjusted EBITDA.
Leverage Ratio Calculated as Total Debt, Net, gross of any Original Issue Discount, divided by Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing 12-months. We use this KPI as an indicator of the Company’s ability to service its debt prospectively.
Operating Cash Flow Including Proceeds from Accounts Receivable Financing calculated as net cash (used in) provided by operating activities plus net proceeds from accounts receivable financing. Because much of the Company’s temporary payroll expense is paid weekly and in advance of clients remitting payment for invoices, operating cash flow is often weaker in staffing companies where revenue and accounts receivable are growing. Accounts receivable financing is essentially an advance on client remittances and is primarily used to fund temporary payroll. As such, we believe this measure is helpful to investors as an indicator of the Company’s underlying operating cash flow.
The Leverage Ratio and Operating Cash Flow Including Proceeds from Accounts Receivable Financing should be considered together with the information in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section, immediately below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Historically, we have funded our operations through term loans, promissory notes, bonds, convertible notes, private placement offerings and sales of equity.
Our primary uses of cash have been for professional fees related to our operations and financial reporting requirements and for the payment of compensation, benefits and consulting fees. The following trends may occur as the Company continues to execute on its strategy:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance organic growth,
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows,
● Increases in advertising, public relations and sales promotions for existing and new brands as we expand within existing markets or enter new markets,
● A continuation of the costs associated with being a public company, and
● Capital expenditures to add technologies.
Our liquidity may be negatively impacted by the significant costs associated with our public company reporting requirements, costs associated with newly applicable corporate governance requirements, including requirements under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and other rules implemented by the Securities and Exchange Commission. We expect all of these applicable rules and regulations could significantly increase our legal and financial compliance costs and increase the use of resources.
For Fiscal 2021 the Company had a working capital deficiency of $18,469, an accumulated deficit of $84,021, and a net income of $8,158.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern. The Company has unsecured payment due in the next 12 months associated with a historical acquisition and secured current debt arrangements representing approximately $9,223 which are in excess of cash and cash equivalents on hand, in addition to funding operational growth requirements. Historically, the Company has funded such payments either through cash flow from operations or the raising of capital through additional debt or equity. If the Company is unable to obtain additional capital, such payments may not be made on time. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments or classifications that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
In addition, beginning in January 2023 the Company has numerous contractual lease obligations representing an aggregate of approximately $4,568 related to current lease agreements. The Company intends to fund the majority of this by a combination of cash flow from operations, as well as the raising of capital through additional debt or equity.
Operating activities
For Fiscal 2021, net cash used in operations of $14,634 was primarily attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities totaling $11,601 and a net income of $8,158, offset by non-cash adjustments of $11,191. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relates to a decrease in accounts receivable of $3,765, decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2,479, decrease in interest payable - related party of $733, decrease in other current liabilities of $197, decrease in other assets of $50, and decrease in other long-term liabilities of $4,636, offset by increase in prepaid expenses of $260. Non-cash add backs of $11,191 primarily relates to PPP loan forgiveness of 19,609, offset by amortization of intangible assets and depreciation of $2,758, impairment of goodwill of $3,104, right of use assets amortization of $1,299, amortization of debt discount and deferred financing of $359, stock-based compensation of $377, bad debt expense of $260, and remeasurement gain on intercompany note of $260.
For Fiscal 2020, net cash used in operations of $14,256 was primarily attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities totaling $7,800 and a net loss of $15,642, offset by non-cash adjustments of $9,186. Changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relates to a decrease in accounts receivable of $7,314, decrease in other assets of $941, increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,659, decrease in other current liabilities of $2,058, and decrease in other long-term liabilities of $1,657, offset by increase in accounts payable - related party of $1,598, increase in prepaid expenses of $427, and increase in other of $424. Non-cash add backs of $9,186 primarily relates to amortization of intangible assets and depreciation of $3,275, right of use assets amortization of $1,521, amortization of debt discount and deferred financing of $559, stock-based compensation of $637, bad debt expense of $933, and write-off of goodwill of $2,969, offset by remeasurement gain on intercompany note of $584 and gain on sale of subsidiary of $124.
Investing activities
For Fiscal 2021, net cash flows provided by investing activities was $7,062, of which $7,311 was related to the collection of the UK factoring facility deferred purchase price, partially offset by purchase of property and equipment of $249.
For Fiscal 2020, net cash flows provided by investing activities was $11,697, of which $8,654 was from the collection of UK factoring facility deferred purchase price and $3,300 was attributable to proceeds from the sale of a subsidiary, partially offset by purchase of property and equipment of $257.
Financing activities
For Fiscal 2021, net cash flows used in financing activities totaled $1,799, of which $43,019 related to proceeds from common stock, $4,698 related to proceeds from Series F preferred stock, and $130 related to proceeds from related party note, offset by $34,076 of repayments on term loan, $4,908 of redemption of Series E preferred stock-related party, $1,778 of repayments on accounts receivable financing, net, payment of third-party financing costs of $4,695, and dividends paid to related parties of $591.
For Fiscal 2020, net cash flows provided by financing activities totaled $11,553, of which $2,426 relates to repayments on accounts receivable financing, net, payment of third-party financing costs of $795, dividends paid to related parties of $3,333, redemption of Series E Preferred Stock of $1,920, repayment of term loans of $4,734; and financing costs - related party of $488; offset by proceeds from equity raise of $4,634, proceeds from PPP Loans of $19,395 and proceeds from term loans of $1,220.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. The Company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by the Company may differ materially and adversely from its estimates. To the extent there are material differences between estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected. Significant estimates for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 include the valuation of intangible assets, including goodwill, liabilities associated with earn-out obligations, testing long-lived assets for impairment and valuation reserves against deferred tax assets.
Legal Contingencies and Expenses
From time to time, the Company may become involved in various claims, disputes and legal or regulatory proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business and relate to contractual and other obligations. The Company assesses its potential contingent and other liabilities by analyzing its claims, disputes and legal and regulatory matters using all available information and developing its views on estimated losses in consultation with its legal and other advisors. The Company determines whether a loss from a contingency should be accrued by assessing whether a loss is deemed probable and can be reasonably estimated. If the contingency is not probable or cannot be reasonably estimated, disclosure of the contingency shall be made when there is at least a reasonable possibility that a loss may be incurred. Expenses associated with legal contingencies are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
The Company utilizes Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes,” which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the tax consequences in future years of differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their financial reporting amounts at each period end based on enacted tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 740-10-50, “Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes,” which provides clarification related to the process associated with accounting for uncertain tax positions recognized in the financial statements. Audit periods remain open for review until the statute of limitations has passed. The completion of review or the expiration of the statute of limitations for a given audit period could result in an adjustment to the Company’s liability for income taxes. Any such adjustment could be material to the Company’s results of operations for any given quarterly or annual period based, in part, upon the results of operations for the given period. As of the date of this filing, the Company is current on all corporate, federal and state tax returns. The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense.
Business Combinations
In accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” the Company records acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting, under which the acquisition purchase price is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair values. The Company utilizes management estimates and, in some instances, may retain the services of an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining the fair values of assets acquired, liabilities assumed and contingent consideration granted. Such estimates and valuations require us to make significant assumptions, including projections of future events and operating performance.
Goodwill
Goodwill relates to amounts that arose in connection with various acquisitions and represents the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of the identifiable intangible and tangible net assets when accounted for using the purchase method of accounting. Goodwill is not amortized, but it is subject to periodic review for impairment. Events that would indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, current economic and market conditions, a decline in the equity value of the business, a significant adverse change in certain agreements that would materially affect reported operating results, business climate or operational performance of the business and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
In accordance with ASU No. 2011-08, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350) Testing Goodwill for Impairment, or ASU 2011-08, the Company is required to review goodwill by reporting unit for impairment at least annually or more often if there are indicators of impairment present. During the year ended January 2, 2021 the Company changed its annual measurement date from the first day of the fiscal fourth quarter to the last day of the fiscal year end. A reporting unit is either the equivalent of, or one level below, an operating segment. The Company early adopted the provisions in ASU 2017-04, which eliminates the second step of the goodwill impairment test. As a result, the Company’s goodwill impairment tests include only one step, which is a comparison of the carrying value of each reporting unit to its fair value, and any excess carrying value, up to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit, is impaired.
The carrying value of each reporting unit is based on the assignment of the appropriate assets and liabilities to each reporting unit. Assets and liabilities were assigned to each reporting unit if the assets or liabilities are employed in the operations of the reporting unit and the asset and liability is considered in the determination of the reporting unit fair value.
Known Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Demand for staffing and permanent placement services is highly dependent on growth in specific industries, geographic economic activity, workforce flexibility trends, and the overall strength of the economy. This creates a high degree of volatility in the industry based on overall economic conditions. Historically, economic recovery periods such as the current recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in growth primarily in the temporary contractor segment, however, the current recovery has led to growth mainly in the permanent placement market. It is uncertain whether this trend will continue or whether the reopening of key contractor industries will present a recovery that is more in line with historical trends.