ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
This MD&A section generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in the section entitled “Stem’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results or Operations” contained in our Form S-1 filed with the SEC on July 19, 2021.
The Merger
The information regarding the Merger set forth in the first paragraph of “Item 1. Business - History” above
is incorporated herein by reference. See also Note 1 - Business, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For financial reporting purposes, Legacy Stem is treated as the accounting acquirer.
Acquisition of AlsoEnergy
On February 1, 2022, we completed the acquisition of 100% of the outstanding shares of AlsoEnergy for an aggregate purchase price of $695.0 million, consisting of approximately 75% in cash and approximately 25% in shares of the Company’s common stock. The acquisition was structured on a cash-free, debt free basis and subject to other customary adjustments as set forth in the purchase agreement.
The transaction combines our storage optimization capabilities with AlsoEnergy’s solar asset performance monitoring and control software. We will complete the initial accounting for the acquisition during our first quarter of 2022.
Our 2021 results included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K do not reflect the effects of the AlsoEnergy acquisition.
Overview
Our mission is to build and operate the largest, digitally connected, intelligent energy storage network for our customers. In order to fulfill our mission, (i) we provide our customers, which include commercial and industrial (“C&I”) enterprises as well as independent power producers, renewable project developers, utilities and grid operators, with an energy storage system, sourced from leading, global battery original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”), that we deliver through our partners, including solar project developers and engineering, procurement and construction firms and (ii) through our Athena artificial intelligence (“AI”) platform (“Athena”), we provide our customers with on-going software-enabled services to operate the energy storage systems for 10 to 20 years. In addition, in all the markets where we operate our customers’ systems, we have agreements to manage the energy storage systems using the Athena platform to participate in energy markets and to share the revenue from such market participation.
We operate in two key areas within the energy storage landscape: Behind-the-Meter (“BTM”) and Front-of-the-Meter (“FTM”). An energy system’s position in relation to a customer’s electric meter determines whether it is designated a BTM or FTM system. BTM systems provide power that can be used on-site without interacting with the electric grid and passing through an electric meter. Our BTM systems reduce C&I customer energy bills and help our customers facilitate the achievement of their corporate environmental, social, and corporate governance (“ESG”) objectives. FTM, grid-connected systems provide power to off-site locations and must pass through an electric meter prior to reaching an end-user. Our FTM systems decrease risk for project developers, lead asset professionals, independent power producers and investors by adapting to dynamic energy market conditions in connection with the deployment of electricity and improving the value of energy storage over the course of their FTM system’s lifetime.
Since our inception in 2009, we have engaged in developing and marketing Athena’s software enabled services, raising capital, and recruiting personnel. We have incurred net operating losses and negative cash flows from operations each year since our inception. We have financed our operations primarily through the Merger, the issuance of convertible preferred stock, convertible senior notes, debt financing, and cash flows from customers.
Our total revenue grew from $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $127.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of $101.2 million and $156.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $509.1 million.
We expect that our sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative costs and expenses will continue to increase as we expand our efforts to increase sales of our solutions, expand existing relationships with our customers, and obtain regulatory clearances or approvals for future product enhancements. In addition, we expect our general and administrative costs and expenses to increase due to the additional costs associated with scaling our business operations as well as with being a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations, and other costs and expenses.
Key Factors, Trends and Uncertainties Affecting our Business
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including but not limited to:
Decline in Lithium-Ion Battery Costs
Our revenue growth is directly tied to the continued adoption of energy storage systems by our customers. The cost of lithium-ion energy storage hardware has declined significantly in the last decade and has resulted in a large addressable market today. The market for energy storage is rapidly evolving, and while we believe costs will continue to decline, there is no guarantee. If costs do not continue to decline, or do not decline as quickly as we anticipate, this could adversely affect our ability to increase our revenue and grow our business.
Increase in Deployment of Renewables
Deployment of intermittent resources has accelerated over the last decade, and today, wind and solar have become a low cost fuel source. We expect the cost of generating renewable energy to continue to decline and deployments of energy storage systems to increase. As renewable energy sources of energy production are expected to represent a larger proportion of energy generation, grid instability rises due to their intermittency, which can be addressed by energy storage solutions.
Competition
We are a market leader in terms of capacity of energy storage under management. We intend to strengthen our competitive position over time by leveraging the network effect of Athena’s AI infrastructure. Existing competitors may expand their
product offerings and sales strategies, and new competitors may enter the market. Furthermore, our competitors include other types of software providers and some hardware manufacturers that offer software solutions. If our market share declines due to increased competition, our revenue and ability to generate profits in the future may be adversely affected.
Government Regulation and Compliance
Although we are not regulated as a utility, the market for our product and services is heavily influenced by federal, state, and local government statutes and regulations concerning electricity. These statutes and regulations affect electricity pricing, net metering, incentives, taxation, competition with utilities, and the interconnection of customer-owned electricity generation. In the United States and internationally, governments continuously modify these statutes and regulations and acting through state utility or public service commissions, regularly change and adopt different rates for commercial customers. These changes can positively or negatively affect our ability to deliver cost savings to customers.
Effects of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted and may continue to result in widespread adverse effects on the global and U.S. economies. Ongoing government and business responses to COVID-19, along with COVID-19 variants and the resurgence of related disruptions, could have a continued material adverse impact on economic and market conditions and trigger a period of continued global and U.S. economic slowdown.
Our industry is currently facing shortages and shipping delays affecting the supply of inverters, enclosures, battery modules and associated component parts for inverters and battery energy storage systems available for purchase. These shortages and delays can be attributed in part to the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting government action, as well as broader macroeconomic conditions that may persist once the immediate effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have subsided. While a majority of our suppliers have secured sufficient supply to permit them to continue delivery and installations through the end of 2022, if these shortages and delays persist into 2023, they could adversely affect the timing of when battery energy storage systems can be delivered and installed, and when (or if) we can begin to generate revenue from those systems. We cannot predict the full effects the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations at this time due to numerous uncertainties. We will continue to monitor developments affecting our workforce, our suppliers, our customers and our business operations generally, and will take actions we determine are necessary in order to mitigate these impacts as much as possible.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to financial results determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we use Adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP gross margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures, for financial and operational decision making and as a means to evaluate our operating performance and prospects, develop internal budgets and financial goals, and to facilitate period-to-period comparisons. Our management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance and liquidity by excluding certain expenses and expenditures that may not be indicative of our operating performance, such as stock-based compensation and other non-cash charges, as well as discrete cash charges that are infrequent in nature. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures also facilitate management’s internal comparisons to our historical performance and liquidity as well as comparisons to our competitors’ operating results. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors both because they (1) allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision making and (2) are used by our institutional investors and the analyst community to help them analyze the health of our business. Adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP gross margin should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or superior to, other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP gross margin
We define non-GAAP gross margin as gross margin excluding amortization of capitalized software, impairments related to decommissioning of end-of-life systems, and certain operating expenses including communication and cloud services expenditures reclassified to cost of revenue.
The following table provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP gross margin to GAAP gross margin ($ in millions, except for percentages):
Adjusted EBITDA
As discussed above, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful for investors to use in comparing our financial performance with the performance of other companies. Nonetheless, the expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude when calculating Adjusted EBITDA.
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before net interest expense, income tax provision and depreciation and amortization, including amortization of internally developed software, further adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation and other income and expense items, including the change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivatives, vesting of warrants and loss on extinguishment of debt.
The following table provides a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss:
Financial Results and Key Metrics
The following table presents our financial results and our key metrics (in millions unless otherwise noted):
s
Pipeline
Pipeline represents the total value (excluding market participation revenue) of uncontracted, potential hardware and software contracts that are currently being pursued by Stem direct salesforce and channel partners with developers and independent power producers seeking energy optimization services and transfer of energy storage systems that have a reasonable likelihood of execution within 12 months of the end of the relevant period based on project timelines published by such developers and independent power producers. We cannot guarantee that our pipeline will result in meaningful revenue or profitability.
Bookings
Due to the long-term nature of our contracts, bookings are a key metric that allows us to understand and evaluate the growth of our Company and our estimated future revenue related to customer contracts for our energy optimization services and transfer of energy storage systems. Bookings represents the accumulated value at a point in time of contracts that have been executed under both our host customer and partnership sales models.
For host customer sales, bookings represent the expected consideration from energy optimization services contracts, including estimated incentive payments that are earned by the host customer from utility companies in relation to the services provided by us and assigned by the host customer to us. For host customer sales, there are no differences between bookings and remaining performance obligations at any point in time.
For partnership sales, bookings are the sum of the expected consideration to be received from the transfer of hardware and energy optimization services (excluding any potential revenues from market participation). For partnership sales, even though we have secured an executed contract with estimated timing of project delivery and installation from the customer, we do not consider it a contract in accordance with FASB ASU 2014-09 Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606)”,or a remaining performance obligation, until the customer has placed a binding purchase order. A signed customer contract is considered a booking as this indicates the customer has agreed to place a purchase order in the foreseeable future, which typically occurs within three (3) months of contract execution. However, executed customer contracts, without binding purchase orders, are cancellable without penalty by either party.
For partnership sales, once a purchase order has been executed, the booking is considered to be a contract in accordance with ASC 606, and therefore, gives rise to a remaining performance obligation as we have an obligation to transfer hardware and energy optimization services in our partnership agreements. We also have the contractual right to receive consideration for our performance obligations.
The accounting policy and timing of revenue recognition for host customer contracts and partnership arrangements that qualify as contracts with customers under ASC 606, are described within Note 3- Revenue, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate service revenue and hardware revenue. Service revenue is generated through arrangements with host customers to provide energy optimization services using our proprietary cloud-based software platform coupled with a dedicated energy storage system owned and controlled by us throughout the term of the contract. Fees charged to customers for energy optimization services generally consist of recurring fixed monthly payments throughout the term of the contract and in some arrangements, an installation and/or upfront fee component. We may also receive incentives from utility companies in relation to the sale of our services.
We generate hardware revenue through partnership arrangements consisting of promises to sell an energy storage system to solar plus storage project developers. Performance obligations are satisfied when the energy storage system along with all ancillary hardware components are delivered. The milestone payments received before the delivery of hardware are treated as deferred revenue. We separately generate services revenue through partnership arrangements by providing energy optimization services after the developer completes the installation of the project.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of service revenue includes depreciation of the cost of energy storage systems we own under long-term customer contracts, which includes capitalized fulfillment costs, such as installation services, permitting and other related costs. Cost of revenue may also include any impairment of inventory and energy storage systems, along with system maintenance costs associated with the ongoing services provided to customers. Costs of revenue are recognized as energy optimization and other supporting services are provided to our customers throughout the term of the contract.
Cost of hardware revenue includes the cost of the hardware, which generally includes the cost of the hardware purchased from a manufacturer, shipping, delivery, and other costs required to fulfill our obligation to deliver the energy storage system to the customer location. Cost of revenue may also include any impairment of energy storage systems held in our inventory for sale to our customer. Cost of hardware revenue related to the sale of energy storage systems is recognized when the delivery of the product is completed.
Gross Margin
Our gross margin fluctuates significantly from quarter to quarter. Gross margin, calculated as revenue less costs of revenue, has been, and will continue to be, affected by various factors, including fluctuations in the amount and mix of revenue and the amount and timing of investments to expand our customer base. We hope to increase both our gross margin in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue through enhanced operational efficiency and economies of scale.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists of payroll and other related personnel costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation, employee benefits, and travel for our sales and marketing personnel. In addition, sales and marketing expense includes trade show costs, amortization of intangibles and other expenses. We expect to our selling and marketing expense to increase in future periods to support the overall growth in our business.
Research and development
Research and development expense consists primarily of payroll and other related personnel costs for engineers and third parties engaged in the design and development of products, third-party software and technologies, including salaries, bonus and stock-based compensation expense, project material costs, services and depreciation. We expect research and development expense to increase in future periods to support our growth, including continuing to invest in optimization, accuracy and reliability of our platform and other technology improvements to support and drive efficiency in our operations. These expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, depending primarily upon when we choose to make more significant investments.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists of payroll and other related personnel costs, including salaries, stock-based compensation, employee benefits and expenses for executive management, legal, finance and other costs. In addition, general and administrative expense includes fees for professional services and occupancy costs. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in future periods as we scale up headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our outstanding borrowings under our outstanding notes payable, convertible promissory notes, convertible senior notes, and financing obligations and accretion on our asset retirement obligations.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt consists of penalties incurred in relation to the prepayment of our outstanding borrowings under our outstanding notes payable and the write-off of any unamortized debt issuance costs associated with such notes.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants and Embedded Derivatives
Change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivatives is related to the revaluation of our outstanding convertible preferred stock warrant liabilities and embedded derivatives related to the redemption features associated with our convertible notes at each reporting date.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net consists primarily of income from equity investments and foreign exchange gains or losses.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
*Percentage is not meaningful
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $91.1 million, or 251%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily driven by a $86.2 million increase in hardware revenue due to the growth in demand for systems related to both FTM and BTM partnership agreements. Services revenue increased by $4.8 million primarily due to continued growth in host customers arrangements and partnership revenue related to services provided.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue increased by $85.9 million, or 214%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily driven by an increase of cost of hardware sales of $78.9 million in line with the increase in hardware revenue, and an increase of $7.0 million in cost of service revenue associated with the growth in service revenue.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $5.1 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $3.6 million in amortization of contract origination costs mainly related to hardware deliveries, an increase of $1.3 million in stock-based compensation expense primarily due to grants of stock options and RSUs to employees, $0.3 million in personnel related expenses as a result of
increased headcount, and an increase of $0.6 million in professional services. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $0.6 million in marketing expenses, and a decrease of $0.1 million in miscellaneous expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $6.8 million, or 43%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $8.3 million in personnel related expenses as a result of increased headcount and an increase of $1.2 million in stock-based compensation expense primarily due to grants of stock options and RSUs to employees. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $2.3 million in third-party software and technologies related expenses, and a decrease of $0.4 million in professional services.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $26.9 million, or 183%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $14.6 million in professional and legal services primarily related to various transactions undertaken by us during 2021, an increase of $6.5 million in stock-based compensation expense primarily due to grants of stock options and RSUs to employees, an increase of $4.1 million in insurance related expenses, and an increase of $2.2 million in personnel related expenses due to higher headcount. The increase was partially offset by a decrease of $0.6 million in connection with settlement expenses incurred in 2020 not present in 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $3.4 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the repayment of notes payable during 2021, as discussed in Note 11 - Notes Payable, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The decrease was partially offset by additional interest expense from the issuance of the 2028 Convertible Notes in November 2021, and interest expense from financing obligations.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, is related to a $4.0 million cash penalty paid and the write-off of $1.1 million of unamortized debt issuance costs upon the conversion of our Series D convertible notes in relation to the Merger. There was no loss or gain on debt extinguishment recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants and Embedded Derivative
The change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivative reflected a $3.4 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a $84.5 million expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income of $3.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from a decrease in the fair value of the Public Warrants, which was recorded as a gain in revaluation of the warrant liability, in connection with the exercise and redemption of the Public Warrants during the third quarter of 2021.
The expense of $84.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a loss on revaluation of warrant liabilities and embedded derivatives related to convertible promissory notes issued in 2019 and 2020. The loss was primarily driven by an increased in the fair value of the warrants as a result of increases in fair value of the underlying stock.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net decreased by $2.4 million, or 161%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The net decrease was primarily driven by $1.2 million in legal settlement and late fees incurred in 2020 and not present in 2021, a $0.9 million increase in interest income from debt securities purchased in the current year, and a $0.3 million net gain in connection with equity securities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
Liquidity describes the ability of a company to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of its business operations, including working capital needs, debt service, acquisitions, contractual obligations and other commitments. We
assess liquidity in terms of our cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund our operating and investing activities. To meet our payment service obligations we must have sufficient liquid assets and be able to move funds on a timely basis.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity is cash generated from financing activities. Cash generated from financing activities through December 31, 2021 primarily includes proceeds from the Merger and PIPE financing that provided us with approximately $550.3 million, net of fees and expenses, sales of convertible preferred stock, proceeds from convertible notes, including the 2028 Convertible Notes that provided us net proceeds of $445.7 million, proceeds from our various borrowings, and the exercise of Public Warrants, which increased our cash balance by $145.3 million. In connection with the Merger, the convertible notes and related accrued interest converted to equity and we paid in full all other outstanding debt except the 2021 Credit Agreement described below. On February 1, 2022, we completed the acquisition of AlsoEnergy for an aggregate purchase price of $695.0 million, of which approximately 75% was paid in cash. We believe that our cash position is sufficient to meet our capital and liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of issuance of this Form 10-K.
Our business prospects are subject to risks, expenses and uncertainties frequently encountered by companies in the early stages of commercial operations. The attainment of profitable operations is dependent upon future events, including obtaining adequate financing to complete our development activities, obtaining adequate supplier relationships, building our customer base, successfully executing our business and marketing strategy and hiring appropriate personnel. Failure to generate sufficient revenues, achieve planned gross margins and operating profitability, control operating costs, or secure additional funding may require us to modify, delay, or abandon some of our planned future expansion or development, or to otherwise enact operating cost reductions available to management, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, financial condition and ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
In the future, we may be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in order to support our continued capital expenditures and operations. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our business, growth and results of operations.
Our long-term liquidity requirements are linked primarily to the continued extension of the Athena platform and the use of our balance sheet to improve the terms and conditions associated with the purchase of energy storage systems from our hardware vendors. While we have plans to potentially expand our geographical footprint beyond our current partnerships and enter into joint ventures, those initiatives are not required to achieve our plan.
Financing Obligations
We have entered into arrangements wherein we finance the cost of energy storage systems via special purpose entities (“SPE”) we establish with outside investors. These SPEs are not consolidated into our financial statements, but are accounted for as equity method investments. Through the SPEs, the investors provide us upfront payments. Under these arrangements, the payment by the SPE to us is accounted for as a borrowing by recording the proceeds received as a financing obligation. The financing obligation is repaid with the future customer payments and incentives received. A portion of the amounts paid to the SPE is allocated to interest expense using the effective interest rate method.
Furthermore, we continue to account for the revenues from customer arrangements and incentives and all associated costs despite such systems being legally sold to the SPEs due to our significant continuing involvement in the operations of the energy storage systems.
The total financing obligation as of December 31, 2021 was $88.5 million, of which $15.3 million was classified as a current liability.
Notes Payable
Revolving Loan Due to SPE Member
In April 2017, we entered into a revolving loan agreement with an affiliate of a member of certain SPEs in which we have an ownership interest. The purpose of this revolving loan agreement was to finance our purchase of hardware for our various energy storage system projects.
In May 2020, concurrent with the 2020 Credit Agreement discussed below, we amended the facility to reduce the loan capacity to $35.0 million and extend the maturity date to May 2021. The amendment increased the fixed interest rate for any borrowings outstanding more than nine (9) months to 14% thereafter.
Additionally, under the original terms of the revolving loan agreement, we were able to finance 100% of the value of the hardware purchased up to the total loan capacity. The amendment reduced the advance rate to 85%, with an additional reduction to 70% in August 2020. In April 2021, we repaid the remaining outstanding balance in full.
Term Loan Due to Former Non-Controlling Interest Holder
In June 2018, we acquired, for $8.1 million, the outstanding member interests of an entity we controlled. We financed this acquisition by entering into a term loan agreement with the noncontrolling member bearing fixed interest of 18% (4.5% quarterly) on the outstanding principal balance. This loan requires fixed quarterly payments throughout the term of the loan, which will be paid in full by April 1, 2026. In May 2020, we amended the term loan and, using the proceeds from the 2020 Credit Agreement discussed below, prepaid $1.5 million of principal and interest on the note, of which $1.0 million was towards the outstanding principal balance, thereby reducing the fixed quarterly payment due to the lender. In relation to this amendment, we were required to issue warrants for 400,000 shares of common stock resulting in a discount to the term loan of $0.2 million. Such debt discount is amortized to earnings through interest expense over the expected life of the debt. In April 2021, we repaid the remaining outstanding balance in full.
2020 Credit Agreement
In May 2020, we entered into a credit agreement (“2020 Credit Agreement”) with a new lender that provided us with proceeds of $25.0 million that increased our access to working capital. The 2020 Credit Agreement had a maturity date of the earlier of (1) May 14, 2021, (2) the maturity date of the revolving loan agreement, or (3) the maturity date of the convertible promissory notes discussed below. The loan bore interest of 12% per annum, of which 8% was paid in cash and 4% was added back to principal of the loan balance every quarter. We used a portion of the proceeds towards payments associated with existing debt as previously discussed. In April 2021, we repaid the remaining outstanding balance in full.
2021 Credit Agreement
In January 2021, we entered into a non-recourse credit agreement to provide a total of $2.7 million towards the financing of certain energy storage systems that we own and operate. The credit agreement has a stated interest of 5.45% and a maturity date of June 2031. We received an advance under the credit agreement of $1.8 million in January 2021. The repayment of advances received under this credit agreement is determined by the lender based on the proceeds generated by us through the operation of the underlying energy storage systems. We had $1.9 million of outstanding borrowings under this credit agreement as of December 31, 2021.
2028 Green Convertible Senior Notes
On November 22, 2021, we sold to Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC and Barclays Capital Inc, as initial purchasers (the “Initial Purchasers”), and the Initial Purchasers purchased from the Company, $460 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s 0.50% Green Convertible Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Convertible Notes”), pursuant to a purchase agreement dated as of November 17, 2021, by and between us and the Initial Purchasers. The 2028 Convertible Notes will accrue interest payable semi-annually in arrears and will mature on December 1, 2028, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Upon conversion, we may choose to pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock. The 2028 Convertible Notes are redeemable for cash at the Company’s option at any time given certain conditions. Refer to Note 12 - Convertible Promissory Notes, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On November 17, 2021, in connection with the pricing of the 2028 Convertible Notes, and on November 19, 2021, in connection with the exercise in full by the Initial Purchasers of their option to purchase additional Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with certain of the Initial Purchasers of the 2028 Convertible Notes to minimize the potential dilution to the Company’s common stockholders upon conversion of the 2028 Convertible Notes. Our net proceeds from this offering were approximately $445.7 million, after deducting the Initial Purchasers’ discounts and commissions and the estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. We used approximately $66.7 million of the net proceeds to pay the cost of the capped call transactions described above. We intend to allocate an amount equivalent to the net proceeds from this offering to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, existing or new eligible green expenditures of Stem, including investments related to creating a more resilient clean energy system, optimized software capabilities for energy systems, and reducing waste through operations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $101.3 million, primarily resulting from our operating loss of $101.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $59.5 million and net cash outflow of $59.5 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $24.5 million, non-cash interest expense of $9.6 million, which includes interest expenses associated with debt issuance costs, stock-based compensation expense of $13.5 million, change in the fair value of warrant liability and embedded derivative of $3.4 million, impairment of energy storage systems of $4.3 million, issuance of warrants for services of $9.2 million, noncash lease expense of $0.9 million, accretion expense of $0.2 million, and net amortization of premium on investments of $0.7 million. The net cash outflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable of $48.1 million, an increase in other assets of $24.8 million, a decrease in deferred revenue of $15.0 million, an increase in inventory of $1.9 million, an increase in contract origination costs of $2.6 million, a decrease in lease liabilities of $0.3 million, a decrease in right-of-use-assets arising from the prepayment of our headquarter’s lease of $0.2 million, and a decrease in other liabilities of $0.1 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $33.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $33.7 million, primarily resulting from our operating loss of $156.1 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $118.8 million and net cash flows of $2.7 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivative of $84.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $17.7 million, non-cash interest expense of $10.0 million, which includes amortization of debt issuance costs, stock-based compensation expense of $4.5 million, $1.4 million of impairment charges related to energy storage systems that were determined to not be recoverable and non-cash lease expense of $0.6 million. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue of $31.7 million due to advance payments for hardware sales prior to delivery and rebates from state incentive programs received in the period, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $5.7 million and partially offset by an increase in inventory of $17.3 million in line with revenue growth, including growth in hardware sales, an increase in accounts receivable of $7.0 million primarily due to advance billings for partner hardware sales, an increase in contract origination costs of $2.6 million related to commissions paid on new contracts executed in the period, an increase of $5.3 million in other assets, a decrease of $1.0 million in other liabilities and a decrease of $0.6 million in lease liabilities.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used for investing activities was $185.2 million, primarily consisting of $189.9 million in purchase of available-for-sale investments, $3.6 million in purchase of energy systems, $5.9 in capital expenditures on internally-developed software, $1.2 million in purchase of equity method investment, and $0.6 million in purchase of property plant and equipment, partially offset by $16.0 million proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale investments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used for investing activities was $12.0 million, consisting of $6.2 million in purchase of energy storage systems and $5.8 million in capital expenditures on internally developed software.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $1,027.1 million, primarily consisting of net proceeds from the Merger and PIPE financing of $550.3 million, proceeds from exercise of stock options and warrants of $148.5 million, proceeds from financing obligations of $7.8 million, proceeds from issuance of notes payable of $3.9 million, net proceeds from issuance of convertible promissory notes of $446.8 million, partially offset by purchased capped call options of $66.7 million, the repayment of notes payable of $41.4 million, payments for withholding taxes related to net share settlement of stock options of $12.6 million, and repayment of financing obligations of $9.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $40.3 million, primarily resulting from net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes of $33.1 million, proceeds from the issuance of notes payable of $23.5 million, proceeds from financing obligations of $16.2 million and proceeds from exercise of stock options and warrants of $0.4 million, partially offset by repayment of our notes payable of $22.2 million and repayment of financing obligations of $10.7 million.
The Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
•2028 Convertible Notes: Includes the aggregate principal amounts of the 2028 Convertible Notes on their contractual maturity dates, as well as the associated coupon interest. As of December 31, 2021, we have an outstanding aggregate principal amount of $460.0 million, none of which is payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with the 2028 Convertible Notes total $16.2 million, with $2.3 million payable within 12 months. For maturity dates, stated interest rates and additional information on our convertible senior notes, refer to Note 12 - Convertible Promissory Notes, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Operating Lease Obligations: Our lease portfolio primarily comprises operating leases for our office space. As of December 31, 2021, we have operating lease obligations totaling $15.7 million, with $1.8 million payable within 12 months. For additional information regarding our operating leases, see Note 17 - Leases, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We do not consider our financing obligations as contractual obligations, as our repayments of such obligations are required only to the extent payments are collected in relation to the operation of the underlying energy storage systems. The obligation is nonrecourse and there are no contractual commitments to pay specific amounts at any point in time throughout the life of the obligation.
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, including guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests, or unconsolidated variable interest entities that either have, or would reasonably be expected to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting policies is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below involve the most difficult management decisions because they require the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
•revenue recognition;
•financing obligations;
•energy storage systems, net;
•common stock warrants
•convertible preferred stock warrant liability; and
•2028 Convertible Notes
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue through two types of arrangements with customers, host customer arrangements and partnership arrangements. We recognize revenue under these arrangements as described below.
Host Customer Arrangements
Host customer contracts are generally entered into with commercial entities who have traditionally relied on power supplied directly from the grid. Host customer arrangements consist of a promise to provide energy optimization services through our proprietary SaaS platform coupled with a dedicated energy storage system owned and controlled by us throughout the term of the contract. The host customer does not obtain legal title to, or ownership of the dedicated energy storage system at any point in time. The host customer is the end consumer of the energy that directly benefits from the energy optimization services we provide. The term for our contracts with host customers generally ranges from 5 to 10 years, which may include certain renewal options to extend the initial contract term or certain termination options to reduce the initial contract term.
Although we install energy storage systems at the host customer site in order to provide the energy optimization services, we determined we have the right to direct how and for what purpose the asset is used through the operation of our SaaS platform and, as such, retain control of the energy storage system; therefore, the contract does not contain a lease. We determined the various energy optimization services provided throughout the term of the contract, which may include services such as remote monitoring, performance reporting, preventative maintenance and other ancillary services necessary for the safe and reliable operation of the system, are part of a combined output of energy optimization services and we provide a single distinct combined performance obligation representing a series of distinct days of services.
We determine the transaction price at the outset of the arrangement, primarily based on the contractual payment terms dictated by the contract with the customer. Fees charged to customers for energy optimization services generally consist of recurring fixed monthly payments throughout the term of the contract. In certain arrangements, the transaction price may include incentive payments that are earned by the host customer from utility companies in relation to the services we provide. Under such arrangements, the rights to the incentive payments are assigned to us by the host customer. These incentives may be in the form of fixed upfront payments, variable monthly payments, or annual performance-based payments over the first five years of the customer contract term. Incentive payments may be contingent on approval from utility companies or actual future performance of the energy storage system.
Substantially all of our arrangements provide customers the unilateral ability to terminate for convenience prior to the conclusion of the stated contractual term or the contractual term is shorter than the estimated benefit period, which we have determined to be 10 years based on the estimated useful life of the underlying energy storage systems and the period over which the customer can benefit from the energy optimization services utilizing such energy storage systems. In these instances, we determined that upfront incentive payments received from our customers represent a material right that is, in effect, an advance payment for future energy optimization services to be recognized throughout the estimated benefit period. In contracts where the customer does not have the unilateral ability to terminate for convenience without a penalty during the estimated benefit period, we determined the upfront incentive payments do not represent a material right for services provided beyond the initial contractual period and are therefore a component of the initial transaction price. We revisit our estimate of the benefit period each reporting period. Our contracts with host customers do not contain a significant financing component.
We transfer control of our energy optimization services to our customers continuously throughout the term of the contract (a stand-ready obligation) and recognize revenue ratably as control of these services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for our services. Monthly incentive payments based on the performance of the energy storage system are allocated to the distinct month in which they are earned because the terms of the payments relate specifically to the outcome from transferring the distinct time increment (month) of service and because such amounts reflect the fees to which we expect to be entitled for providing energy optimization services each period, consistent with the allocation objective. Annual variable performance- based payments are estimated at the inception in the transaction price using the expected value method, which takes into consideration historical experience, current contractual requirements, specific known market events and forecasted energy storage system performance patterns, and we recognize such payments ratably using a time-based measure of progress of days elapsed over the term of the contract to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. At the end of each reporting period, we reassess our estimate of the transaction price. We do not begin recognition of revenue until the System is live (i.e., provision of energy optimization services has commenced) or, as it relates to incentive payments, when approval has been received from the utility company if later.
Partnership Arrangements
Partnership arrangements consist of promises to transfer inventory in the form of an energy storage system to a solar plus storage project developer and separately provide energy optimization services as described previously to the ultimate owner of the project after the developer completes the installation of the project. Under partnership arrangements, our customer is the
solar plus storage project developer. The customer obtains legal title to along with ownership and control of the inventory upon delivery and the customer is responsible for the installation of the project. Once installation of the project is complete, the owner of the solar plus storage project provides energy to the end consumer through a separate contractual arrangement directly with the end consumer. The term for our contracts with customers under partnership arrangements generally ranges from 10 to 20 years.
We determined the promise to deliver the inventory as a component of the solar plus storage project for which the customer is responsible to develop is a separate and distinct performance obligation from the promise to provide energy optimization services.
We determine the transaction price at the outset of the arrangement, primarily based on the contractual payment terms dictated by the contract with the customer. Fees charged for the sale of inventory generally consist of fixed fees payable upon or shortly after successful delivery to the customer. Fees charged to customers for energy optimization services consist of recurring fixed monthly payments throughout the term of the contract. We are responsible for designing, procuring, delivering and ensuring the proper components are provided in accordance with the requirements of the contract. Although we purchase the inventory from a third-party manufacturer, we determined we obtain control of the inventory prior to delivery to the customer and are the principal in the arrangement. We are fully responsible for responding to and correcting any customer issues related to the delivery of the inventory. We hold title and assume all risks of loss associated with the inventory until the customer accepts the inventory. We are primarily responsible for fulfilling the delivery of the inventory to the customer, assume substantial inventory risks and have discretion in the pricing charged to the customer. We have not entered into any partnership arrangements where we are not the principal in the transaction.
We allocate revenue between the hardware and energy storage services performance obligations based on the standalone selling price of each performance obligation. The standalone selling price for the hardware is established based on observable pricing. The standalone selling price for the energy optimization services is established using a residual value approach due to the significant variability in the services provided to each individual customer based on the specific requirements of each individual project and the lack of observable standalone sales of such services. Our partnership arrangements do not contain a significant financing component.
We transfer control of the inventory upon delivery and simultaneous transfer of title to the customer. We transfer control of our energy optimization services to our customers continuously throughout the term of the contract (a stand-ready obligation), which does not commence until the customer successfully completes the installation of the project. As a result, the time frame between when we transfer control of the inventory to the customer upon delivery is generally several months, and can be in excess of one year, before we are required to perform any subsequent energy optimization services. Revenue is recognized ratably as control of these services is transferred to our customers based on a time-based output measure of progress of days elapsed over the term of the contract, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for our services.
In some partnership arrangements, we charge shipping fees for the inventory. We account for shipping as a fulfillment activity, since control transfers to the customer after the shipping is complete and include such amounts within cost of revenue.
Financing Obligations
We have formed various SPEs to finance the development and construction of our energy storage systems (“Projects”). These SPEs, which are structured as limited liability companies, obtain financing in the form of large upfront payments from outside investors and purchase Projects from us under master purchase agreements. We account for the large upfront payments received from the fund investor as a borrowing by recording the proceeds received as a financing obligation, which will be repaid through host customer payments and incentives received from the utilities that will be received by the investor.
The financing obligation is non-recourse once the associated energy storage systems have been placed in-service and the associated customer arrangements have been assigned to the SPE. However, we are responsible for any warranties, performance guarantees, accounting, performance reporting and all other costs associated with the operation of the energy storage systems. Despite such systems being legally sold to the SPEs, we recognize host customer payments and incentives as revenue during the period as discussed in the Revenue Recognition section above. The amounts received by the fund investor from customer payments and incentives are recognized as interest using the effective interest method, and the balance is applied to reduce the financing obligation. The effective interest rate is the interest rate that equates the present value of the cash amounts to be received by a fund investor in relation to the underlying Projects with the present value of the cash amounts paid to us by the investor, adjusted for any payments made by us.
Energy Storage Systems, net
We sell energy optimization services to host customers through the use of energy storage systems installed at customer locations. We determined that we do not transfer control of these energy storage systems, which are operated and controlled via our proprietary cloud-based software (“SaaS”) platform; therefore, these energy storage systems do not qualify as a leased asset. The energy storage systems are stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation.
Energy storage systems, net is comprised of system equipment costs, which include components such as batteries, inverters, and other electrical equipment, and associated design, installation, and interconnection costs required to begin providing the energy optimization services to our customers.
Depreciation of the energy storage systems is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the energy storage systems, or 10 years, once the respective systems have been installed, interconnected to the power grid, received permission to operate and we have begun to provide energy optimization services to the host customer (i.e., system is live). The valuation of energy storage systems and the useful life both require significant judgment.
We review our energy storage systems for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of energy storage systems may not be recoverable. If energy storage systems are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assessing energy storage systems for impairment requires significant judgement.
Common Stock Warrants
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Such assessment requires significant judgement.
We accounted for our 19,967,302 public warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering (12,786,168) and Private Placement (7,181,134) as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognized the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusted the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities were subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value was recognized in the Company’s statements of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated using a Black-Scholes method at each measurement date. The fair value of the warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering were initially measured at fair value using a Black-Scholes method and subsequently measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. Refer to Note 13 - Warrants, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
We evaluate whether our warrants for shares of convertible redeemable preferred stock are freestanding financial instruments that obligate us to redeem the underlying preferred stock at some point in the future and determined that each of our outstanding warrants for convertible preferred stock are liability classified. The warrants are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date, and any change in fair value is recognized in the change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivatives in the consolidated statements of operations.
As discussed in Note 13 - Warrants, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, upon effectiveness of the Merger, substantially all of the outstanding convertible preferred stock warrants were converted into shares of common stock of Stem. As such, the associated warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in-capital upon the Merger and was no longer an outstanding Level 3 financial instrument as of December 31, 2021.
2028 Convertible Notes
We accounted for the 2028 Convertible Notes as separate liability and equity components. On issuance, the carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that did not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the principal amount of the Convertible Notes as a whole. We estimated the fair value of the liability and equity components using a binomial lattice model, which includes subjective assumptions such as the expected term, the expected volatility, and the interest rate of a similar non-convertible debt instrument. These assumptions involved inherent uncertainties and management judgement. See Note 12 - Convertible Promissory Notes, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements may be found in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.