Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Sterling Check Corp. (the “Company,” “Sterling,” “we,” “us” or “our”) is a leading global provider of technology-enabled background and identity verification services. We provide the foundation of trust and safety our clients need to create great environments for their most essential resource-people. We offer a comprehensive hiring and risk management solution that begins with identity verification, followed by criminal background screening, credential verification, drug and health screening, processing of employee documentation required for onboarding and ongoing risk monitoring. Our services are delivered through our purpose-built, proprietary, cloud-based technology platform that empowers organizations with real-time and data-driven insights to conduct and manage their employment screening programs efficiently and effectively. Our interfaces are supported by our powerful artificial intelligence (“AI”)-driven fulfillment platform, which leverages more than 3,300 automation integrations, including Application Programming Interfaces (“APIs”) and Robotic Process Automation (“RPA”) bots. This enables 90% of U.S. criminal searches to be automated and allows us to complete 70% of U.S. criminal searches within the first hour and 90% within the first day. As of December 31, 2021, over 95% of our revenue is processed through platforms hosted in the cloud, which allows us to consistently maintain 99.9% platform availability while being prepared to scale into the future.
Our client-centric approach underpins everything we do. We serve a diverse and global client base in a wide range of industries, such as healthcare, gig economy, financial and business services, industrials, retail, contingent, technology, media and entertainment, transportation and logistics, hospitality, education and government. To serve these differing needs, our sales and support delivery model is organized around teams dedicated to specific industries (“Verticals”) and geographic markets (“Regions”). Our clients face a dynamic and rapidly evolving global labor market with increasing complexity and regulatory requirements. As a result, we believe our solutions are mission-critical to their core human resources, risk management and compliance functions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed over 95 million searches for over 50,000
clients, including over 50% of the Fortune 100 and over 45% of the Fortune 500. We believe the combination of our deep market expertise from our sales and support combined with the flexibility of our proprietary technology platform enable us to deliver industry-leading, highly specialized solutions to our clients in a scalable manner, driving growth and differentiating us from our competitors.
Trends and Other Factors Affecting Our Performance
Macroeconomic and Job Environment
Our business is impacted by the overall economic environment and our clients’ hiring volumes. Despite fluctuations in the macroeconomic environment, we have benefited recently from a number of key demand drivers, many of which increase the need for more flexible, comprehensive screening and hiring solutions.
The American gig economy and contingent workforce accounts for a large and growing proportion of the United States (“U.S.”) workforce. As the gig economy caters to clients in a very direct and personal way (e.g., rideshare, goods delivery, household services), safe and effective background screening capabilities have become critical. In addition, generational and structural shifts in the workforce have led to increasing voluntary employee churn, particularly with younger workers. The ongoing structural shift from in-office to remote work further reduces the historical geographic matching challenge employers and employees faced, further reducing switching costs for employees and expanding talent pools for employers. Further, the proliferation of personal data has exposed many identities to risk of exposure and theft, driving the need for identity verification. Verifying identity is a powerful tool that employers can use to help ensure that their candidates and workers are who they claim to be, and that fraudulent data is not used during the hiring and onboarding process. As false claims within job applications are an area of growing concern for employers, our clients use our background and identification verification services to mitigate reputational risks.
Background screening is also gaining broader adoption outside the U.S. Globally, companies are consistently competing for the best talent, regardless of location, and are therefore putting greater emphasis on reducing time-to-hire in a compliant manner as well as creating a positive onboarding experience for the candidate. Additionally, the international expansion of U.S.-based global companies and their desire to offer centralized and comparable hiring practices has introduced the benefits of background screening to foreign markets. Our ability to navigate the complexities of international background checks and verifying foreign credentials drives demand for our products and services.
Our clients are increasingly utilizing ongoing post-hire screening. This allows for greater mobility and safety for remote, onsite and contingent jobs and also ensures prompt risk warnings on any changes to an employee’s profile, including any criminal activity, drug use or health changes and compliance with on-going certification and licensing requirements, amongst others. This has further accelerated demand for our screening products and services.
New Product and Service Development
Our success depends on our ability to develop new products and services and introduce technological enhancements for our current products and services that meet the demands of existing and new clients. We have a robust new product roadmap focused on enhancing our ability to address the constantly evolving needs of our clients and their candidates.
As part of our continued evolution, in early 2019, we launched Project Ignite, a three-phase strategic investment initiative to create an enterprise-class global platform. We are already benefiting from the delivery of our new client and candidate interfaces, scalable cloud-based infrastructure for our global and local production platforms and an improved security environment through new business wins, improved client retention and the ability to launch products rapidly to meet immediate client needs, as we did with our full suite of COVID-19 testing products in 2020. The remaining investment, which we expect to substantially complete in 2022, will migrate our corporate technological infrastructure to the cloud and unify our clients onto a single global production platform. Over the long term, we expect these investments to further enhance our margins, improve time to market as we build once and deploy globally and allow us to increase innovation. We intend to continue to invest in developing industry-first solutions, further innovating in our existing Verticals as well as pursuing adjacent market opportunities that leverage our existing technology platform. We plan to pursue new and under-penetrated adjacent market opportunities, including talent assessment, reference checking, onboarding and investigative due diligence.
Clients
Our results of operations depend on our ability to retain existing clients, offer new products and services to existing clients, attract new clients and maintain a diverse client base. We serve the background and identity verification services needs of more than 50,000 clients. Our client base is diversified in size of client and industry and includes over 50% of the Fortune 100, over 45% of the Fortune 500 and numerous small- and mid-sized business (“SMB”) clients across the world. We have minimal client concentration with no client accounting for more than 5% of revenue, and our top 25 clients accounting for less than 25% of revenue. We serve the healthcare, gig, financial and business services, industrials, retail, contingent, technology, media and entertainment, transportation and logistics, hospitality, education and government industries. We employ an operating model organized by Vertical and Region that produces differentiated end-market insights and allows us to tailor solutions to meet the needs of each industry we serve.
A majority of our U.S. enterprise client contracts are exclusive to Sterling or require Sterling to be used as the primary provider. Additionally, they are typically multi-year agreements with automatic renewal terms, no termination for convenience clauses and set pricing with Sterling’s right to increase prices annually upon notice. Our success is driven by a competitive service offering of fast, reliable, and accurate screening information delivered on a cost-effective basis. Additionally, our offerings are tightly integrated with our clients’ applicant tracking systems (“ATS”) and human capital management (“HCM”) systems, further cementing our services into our clients’ daily human resources (“HR”) workflows. Taken together, these factors have yielded strong client relationships with an average tenure of nine years across our top 100 clients based on 2020 and 2021 total revenue.
Our ability to retain our existing clients and attract new clients will depend on our ability to continue to deliver superior client service and on the quality of the products and services that we provide, including the accuracy and speed of the background checks that we perform and the protection of the data we collect. Our gross retention rate in 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021 was 88%, 91%, 94% and 96%, respectively. Our gross retention rate in 2018 and 2019 reflected the loss of two of our top five clients in 2018, prior to the formation of our new management team, investment in our cloud-based technology platform, and verticalization of the business.
Regulatory Environment
Our business is subject to extensive regulations in the U.S. and internationally, which may expose us to significant regulatory risk and cause additional legal costs to ensure compliance. See Part I, Item 1. “Business-Regulation.” We are subject to a number of laws and regulations regarding protection of the security and privacy of certain healthcare and personal information. While the overarching principles of security and privacy laws and regulations are similar across geographies, the specific laws within each region are not uniform and are often evolving, placing increasingly complicated operational requirements on our business.
However, under certain circumstances, regulation may increase demand for our products and services, and we believe we are well positioned to benefit from any potential increased screenings due to regulatory changes as clients seek products and services that meet regulatory requirements and solutions that help them comply with their regulatory obligations. A growing number of laws and regulations has led to greater complexities and potential legal liabilities related to hiring and workforce management policies that are increasingly difficult to navigate for employers. In response, our clients are increasing their focus on compliance functions to ensure they are meeting these changing legal and regulatory demands.
Competitive Environment
The market for global background and identity verification services is highly fragmented and competitive. To our knowledge, no single private or public firm possesses a market share of greater than 10%. We compete with a diverse group of screening companies, including global full-suite players characterized by their global scale and enterprise offerings; mid-tier players that tend to focus on a particular geographic region, industry or product line; and small and independently-owned background screening players that typically serve SMBs. It is also possible that new competitors or alliances or consolidation among competitors may emerge and significantly increase competition. We expect our market to remain highly competitive.
We believe that reporting accurate information and maintaining security of sensitive information are two fundamental requirements to compete successfully as a reputable background screening provider. We also compete on the basis of a number of factors, including: the technology-enabled, ease-of-use, level of functionality and end-to-end efficiency of our solution; our ability to integrate with client systems and major software applications; the breadth and geographical reach of our service offerings; the speed of our screening results;
pricing and return on investment for our clients; and our successful track record and reference base with similarly situated companies. See Part I, Item 1. “Business-Competition” for more detail on our competitors.
Technology and Cybersecurity Environment
We operate in industries that are subject to rapid technological advances and changing client needs and preferences. In order to remain competitive and responsive to client demands, we continually upgrade, enhance, and expand our security, technology, products and services. If we experience cyber-threats and attempted security breaches or fail to respond successfully to technology challenges and client needs and preferences, the demand for our products and services may diminish. If these threats or breaches were successful, they could impact revenue and operating income and increase costs. We therefore continue to make investments, which may result in increased costs, to strengthen our cybersecurity measures.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Environment
We earn revenues, pay expenses, hold assets and incur liabilities in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Accordingly, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates can affect our results of operations from period to period. In particular, fluctuations in exchange rates for non-U.S. dollar currencies may reduce the U.S. dollar value of revenues, earnings and cash flows we receive from non-U.S. markets, increase our operating expenses (as measured in U.S. dollars) in those markets, negatively impact our competitiveness in those markets or otherwise adversely impact our results of operations or financial condition. Key currencies affecting our results of operations at this time are the Canadian dollar (CAD), Euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Australian dollar (AUD), Indian rupee (INR) and Philippine peso (PHP). As we expand into other markets, other currencies may become relevant. Future fluctuations of foreign currency exchange rates and their impact on our results of operations and financial condition are inherently uncertain. As we continue to pursue growth of our global operations, these fluctuations may be material. See “-Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Foreign Currency and Derivative Risk.”
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have been focused on keeping our employees safe and maintaining our clients’ uninterrupted access to our services. We have implemented a series of measures to protect the health and safety of our employees. The global impact of the outbreak has continued to evolve rapidly. Many countries reacted by instituting quarantines and restrictions on travel and limiting operations of non-essential businesses. Such actions created disruption in global supply chains, increased rates of unemployment and adversely impacted many industries. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, as shelter-in-place policies were relaxed, businesses began to reopen and general economic conditions began to improve, we experienced an increase in the demand for our products and services as we closely partnered with our clients to support their increasing hiring needs. This increase in demand continued through the end of 2020 and throughout 2021 as the broader macroeconomic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic continued. In addition, the structural shift from in-office to remote work has reduced switching costs for employees and expanded talent pools for employers, further increasing demand. We cannot predict the extent to which such increased hiring and turnover trends will continue. The COVID-19 pandemic could have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions, and the full extent of the impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on future developments, including, among other factors, spread of the outbreak and the success of vaccination programs, along with related travel advisories, quarantines and restrictions, the recovery times of disrupted supply chains and industries, the impact of labor market interruptions, the impact of government interventions, and uncertainty with respect to the duration of the global economic slowdown.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the risks described in “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including, but not limited to, those relating to changes in economic, political, social and market conditions; systems failures, interruptions, delays in services, cybersecurity incidents, unforeseen or catastrophic events and any resulting interruptions; our international operations; and our dependence on our senior management team and other qualified personnel.
Operational Enablement
In February 2020, we set up a COVID-19 Business Continuity Planning and Crisis Management Task force led by our Chief Legal & Risk Officer. By mid-March 2020, we had successfully executed a virtual operating model and nearly all of our employees around the globe were working remotely. We have continued to be successful in executing a virtual-first strategy, as a result of which most of our employees have continued to work remotely. Operating in a virtual model has required us to hire employees remotely, train them virtually and expand our network capabilities.
Revenue and Sales Generation
Our financial performance in 2020 was impacted by the general economic downturn experienced as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of our clients froze headcount, furloughed and terminated employees, deferred hiring and partially or completely shut down their business operations and as a result, we experienced reduced demand for our products and services, particularly in industries impacted severely by the COVID-19 pandemic such as brick-and-mortar retail, entertainment, and hospitality. However, we saw increased demand for our products and services in industries such as U.S. healthcare and global gig, which we believe is attributable to changing consumer behavior. Our lack of industry concentration with a highly diversified client base provided a natural hedge against industry-specific effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, due to our increased investment in automation, we were able to fulfill searches in at least 98% of U.S. jurisdictions throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, while we believe certain competitors struggled to operate. We expanded our services to include COVID-19 testing in June 2020, vaccination tracking in September 2021 and antigen testing in December 2021. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, as shelter-in-place policies were relaxed, businesses began to reopen and general economic conditions began to improve, we experienced an increase in the demand for our products and services. This increase in demand continued through the end of 2020 and throughout 2021 with the business moving into year-over-year revenue growth for November and December 2020 compared to 2019 and a 41.4% increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost Optimization and Cash Management
Beginning in March 2020, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented robust cost reduction measures across the organization, reducing selling, general and administrative expenses. We recognized this as an opportunity to implement strategic structural changes to improve operating leverage and accelerate the modernization of our technological infrastructure. We moved to a virtual-first strategy, closed or reduced the size of eleven offices globally, began reducing our data center footprint to prioritize moving our revenue to platforms hosted in the cloud, and streamlined our sales and operations organization for greater operational efficiency. We derived additional cost savings from reducing variable spending, such as bonus expense, lower commissions, and lower marketing, travel, and entertainment expenses due to business performance being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. During the three months ended June 30, 2020, we incurred $1.3 million in incremental costs as we were unable to right-size our fulfillment organization due to a mandate by the Maharashtra state government that prohibited employers from terminating any local employees until July 2020.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits the deferral of employer taxes. We chose to avail ourselves of this provision, resulting in the deferral of $2.7 million of employer taxes from 2020, payable in 2021 and 2022. We did not participate in any other benefits of the CARES Act or in any other government programs globally related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In March 2020, we drew down $83.8 million from our revolving line of credit as a liquidity precaution due to the uncertainty of a credit crisis in the macroeconomic environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we did not use these funds to operate the business and we repaid this amount in full in May 2020, once we had sufficiently established there was no macroeconomic ongoing credit concern.
Components of Our Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key components of our consolidated statements of operations. We have one operating and reporting segment.
Revenues
We generate revenue by providing background and identity verification services to our clients. We have an attractive business model underpinned by stable and highly recurring transactional revenues, significant operating leverage and low capital requirements that contribute to strong cash flow generation. We recognize revenue under Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to clients, generally at a point in time, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we are entitled to for those goods or services. A majority of our U.S. enterprise client contracts are exclusive to Sterling or require Sterling to be used as the primary provider. Additionally, they are typically multi-year agreements with automatic renewal terms, no termination for convenience clauses and set pricing with Sterling’s right to increase prices annually upon notice. The strength of our contracts combined with our high levels of client retention results in a high degree of revenue visibility.
Our revenue drivers are acquiring new clients (which we measure by new client growth, calculated as discussed in the following paragraph), retaining existing clients (which we measure by gross retention rate, calculated as discussed in the following paragraph), and growing our existing client relationships through upselling, cross-selling, and organic and inorganic growth in our client’s operations that lead to an increase in hiring (which we measure by base growth, calculated as discussed in the following paragraph).
New client growth for the relevant period is calculated as revenues from clients that are in the first twelve months of billing with Sterling divided by total revenues from the prior period, expressed as a percentage. Base growth is defined as growth in revenues in the current period, from clients that have been billing with us for longer than twelve calendar months, includes revenue from cross-sell and up-sell, and is provided net of attrition, which is the revenue impact from accounts considered lost. Base growth is expressed as a percentage, where the denominator is total revenues from the prior period. Gross retention rate is a percentage, the numerator of which is prior period revenues less the revenue impact from accounts considered lost and the denominator is prior period revenues. The revenue impact is calculated as revenue decline of lost accounts in the relevant period from the prior period for the months after they were considered lost. Therefore, the attrition impact of clients lost in the current year may be partially captured in both the current and following period’s retention rates depending on what point during the period they are lost. Our gross retention rate does not factor in the revenue impact, whether growth or decline, attributable to existing clients or the incremental revenue impact of new clients, inclusive of cross-sell and up-sell of products.
In addition to organic growth through the drivers mentioned above, we may from time to time consider acquisitions that drive growth in our business. In those instances, inorganic growth will refer to the revenue from acquisitions for the twelve months following an acquisition. Any incremental revenue generation thereafter will be considered organic growth.
Our revenues come from the following services which are sold as a bundle or individually, with revenue recognized at the time of delivery of background screening reports.
•Identity Verification - Leveraging innovative technologies in fingerprinting, facial recognition and ID validation to verify that candidates are who they say they are.
•Background Checks - County, state and federal criminal checks fulfilled through proprietary automation technology enabling global criminal screening capabilities in over 240 countries and territories. Other services include credit checks, civil checks, motor vehicle registration confirmation, and social media checks.
•Credential Verification - Thorough employment and education verification services, and licensing certification backed by a powerful fulfillment engine.
•Drug and Health Screening - Comprehensive, accurate, and fast drug and health screening services through a network of over 15,000 collection sites supporting the SAMHSA.
•Onboarding - Custom forms including I-9 and eVerify employment eligibility, tax withholding forms and Equal Employment Opportunity disclosure forms, with built-in compliance and dynamic validation.
•Post-Hire Monitoring - Continuous screening allowing for greater mobility and safety for remote, onsite and contingent jobs and also ensuring prompt risk warnings on any changes to an employee’s profile.
Operating Expenses
Our cost structure is flexible and provides us with operational leverage to be able to effectively adapt to changing client needs and broader economic events. Additionally, in 2020 and 2021, we implemented strategic structural changes in our business to improve operating leverage and accelerate modernizing our technological infrastructure including leveraging robotics process automation. We moved to a virtual-first strategy and closed or reduced the size of eleven offices globally and began reducing our data center footprint as we executed moving our revenue to the cloud and streamlined our sales and operations organization for greater operational efficiency. In any given period, operating expenses are driven by the amount of revenue, mix of clients and products, and impact of automation, productivity, and procurement initiatives. While we expect operating expenses to increase in absolute dollars to support our continued growth, we believe that operating expenses will decline gradually as a percentage of total revenues in the future as our business grows and our operating scale continues to improve.
Operating expenses include the following costs:
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes costs related to delivery of services and includes third-party vendor costs associated with acquisition of data and to a lesser extent, costs related to our onshore and offshore fulfillment teams and facilities and hosting costs for our cloud-based platforms. Our ability to grow profitably depends on our ability to manage our cost structure. Our costs are affected by third-party costs including government fees and data vendor costs, as these third parties have discretion to adjust pricing.
Third-party data costs include amounts paid to third parties for access to government records, other third-party data and services, as well as costs related to our court runner network. Third-party costs of services are largely variable in nature. Where applicable, these are typically invoiced to our clients as direct pass-through costs.
Cost of revenues also includes salaries and benefits expense for personnel involved in the processing and fulfillment of our screening products and solutions, as well as our client care organization, and facilities costs for our onshore and offshore fulfillment centers. Additional vendor costs are third-party costs for robotics process automation related to fulfillment, and third-party costs related to hosting our fulfillment platforms in the cloud. We do not allocate depreciation and amortization to cost of revenues.
Corporate Technology and Production Systems
Included in this line item are costs related to maintaining our corporate information technology infrastructure and non-capitalizable costs to develop and maintain our production systems.
Corporate information technology expenses consist of personnel costs supporting internal operations such as information technology support and the maintenance of our information security and business continuity functions. Also included are third-party costs including cloud computing costs that support our corporate internal systems, software licensing and maintenance, telecommunications and other technology infrastructure costs.
Production systems costs consist of non-capitalizable personnel costs including contractor costs incurred for the development of platform and product initiatives, and production support and maintenance. Platform and product initiatives facilitate the development of our technology platform and the launch of new screening products. Production support and maintenance includes costs to support and maintain the technology underlying our existing screening products, and to enhance the ease of use for our cloud applications. Certain personnel costs related to new products and features are capitalized and amortization of these capitalized costs is included in the depreciation and amortization line item.
Included within Corporate technology and production systems are non-capitalizable production system and corporate information technology expenses related to Project Ignite, a three-phase strategic investment initiative. Phase one of Project Ignite modernized client and candidate experiences and is complete. Phase two of Project Ignite focused on decommissioning our on-premises data centers and migrating our production systems and corporate information technological infrastructure to a managed service provider in the cloud. During the first half of 2021, we completed phase two related to the migration of our production and fulfillment systems to the cloud, and as a result, over 95% of our revenue is processed through platforms hosted in the cloud. The remaining expense to complete phase two is the decommissioning of our on-premises data centers for our internal corporate technology infrastructure and migration to the cloud. This final component will be substantially completed by June 30, 2022. Phase three of Project Ignite is decommissioning of platforms purchased over the prior ten years and the migration of the clients to one global platform. This third and final phase, which we expect to substantially complete in 2022, will unify our clients onto a single global platform. The future costs related to completing these initiatives will be included in our Corporate technology and production systems expense.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling expenses consist of personnel costs, travel expenses, and other expenses for our client success, sales and marketing teams. Additionally, selling expenses include the cost of marketing and promotional events, corporate communications, and other brand-building activities. General and administrative expenses consist of personnel and related expenses for human resources, legal and compliance, finance, global shared services, and executives. Additional costs include professional fees, stock-based compensation, insurance premiums, and other corporate expenses.
We expect our selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses to increase in the future, primarily as a result of additional public company related reporting and compliance costs.
In addition, non-cash stock-based compensation expense associated with special one-time bonus grants in connection with our IPO of options and restricted stock under our Sterling Check Corp. 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan (discussed in Note 14, “Stock-based Compensation” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K) began in the third quarter of 2021 and will continue over the following four years. Over the long term, we expect our selling, general, and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue as we leverage our past investments.
Depreciation and Amortization
Definite-lived intangible assets consist of intangibles acquired through acquisition and the costs of developing internal-use software. They are amortized using a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives except for customer lists, to which we apply an accelerated method of amortization. The costs of developing internal-use software are capitalized during the application development stage. Amortization commences when the software is placed into service and is computed using the straight-line method over the useful life of the underlying software of three years.
Depreciation of our property and equipment is computed on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the assets, generally three to five years or, for leasehold improvements, the shorter of seven years or the term of the lease.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, such as property, equipment and capitalized internal use software subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable, such as (i) a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which it is being used or in its physical condition, (ii) a significant adverse change in legal factors or in business climate that could affect its value, or (iii) a current-period operation or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a projection or forecast that demonstrates continuing losses associated with its use. An asset is considered impaired if the carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted future net cash flows the asset is expected to generate. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds its fair value. The adjusted carrying amount of the asset becomes its new cost basis. For a depreciable long-lived asset, the new cost basis will be depreciated or amortized over the remaining useful life of that asset. Assets held for sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less selling costs.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense consists of interest and the amortization discount on the First Lien Term Loan (as defined under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Credit Facility.”
Loss on Interest Rate Swaps
Loss on interest rate swaps consists of realized and unrealized gains and losses on our interest rate swap, which we entered into to reduce our exposure to variability in expected future cash flows on the First Lien Term Loan, which bears interest at a variable rate. We are currently party to one interest rate swap. Unrealized gains and losses result from changes in the fair value of the swap and realized gains and losses reflect the amounts payable or receivable between the fixed rate on the swap and LIBOR. Our interest rate swap expires in June 2022 and does not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists of domestic and foreign corporate income taxes related to earnings from our sale of services, with statutory tax rates that differ by jurisdiction. We expect the income earned by our international entities to grow over time as a percentage of total income, which may impact our effective income tax rate. However, our effective tax rate will be affected by many other factors including changes in tax laws, regulations or rates, new interpretations of existing laws or regulations, shifts in the allocation of income earned throughout the world, and changes in overall levels of income before tax. The computation of the provision for or benefit from income taxes for interim periods is determined by applying the estimated annual effective tax rate to year-to-date (loss) income before tax and adjusting for discrete tax items recorded in the period, if any.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2021
The following table sets forth certain historical consolidated financial information for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenues
Revenues increased 41.4%, or $187.8 million, from $454.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $641.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The 41.4% growth rate was driven by 39.0% organic constant currency revenue growth, a 1.7% favorable impact from fluctuations in foreign currency, and 0.7% inorganic growth from the acquisition of Employment Background Investigations, Inc. (“EBI”). The organic revenue increase reflected base revenue growth of 28.4%, including cross-sell and up-sell, net of attrition, and new customer growth of 12.3%. Notably, our investments in technology and products, coupled with our best-in-class turnaround times and customer-first focus, drove a 200 basis point improvement during 2021 in our gross retention rate from 94% to 96%. Pricing was relatively stable across the periods and not meaningful to the change in revenues.
Total revenue in our U.S. business grew 38.5% year-over-year. We saw broad-based strength across our industry Verticals, with particularly exceptional results in our Technology Media and Financial and Business Services Verticals, as we executed our growth playbook and the U.S. economy benefitted from strong macroeconomic factors. Our international business experienced total revenue growth of 55.4%, with double-digit revenue growth in all three of our international regions. International growth also benefited from strong economic factors and continued growth in our international gig business.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased 44.1%, or $95.8 million, from $217.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $313.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was driven by an $89.9 million increase due to increased volume and a $5.9 million increase due to change in the mix of business and other costs. Other cost increases included an increase in bonus expense from strong business performance, additional stock-based compensation resulting from the accelerated vesting of outstanding options upon completion of the initial public offering (“IPO”) in September 2021 and IPO equity grants, and an increase in hosting fees driven by revenue growth.
Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues increased by 93 basis points from 47.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 48.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Corporate Technology and Production Systems
Corporate technology and production systems expenses decreased by 0.1%, or $27,000, and were $44.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021. These expenses include costs related to maintaining our corporate information technology infrastructure and non-capitalizable costs to develop and maintain our production systems. Costs related to maintaining our corporate information technology infrastructure increased by $1.5 million from $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $21.2 million for year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to increased stock-based compensation expense resulting from the accelerated vesting of options upon completion of the IPO. Costs to develop platform and product initiatives decreased by $1.2 million from $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to reduced headcount from 2020 to 2021 as a result of project completions during 2020. Costs related to maintaining our production systems decreased by $0.3 million from $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
These expenses include non-capitalizable costs related to Project Ignite. We incurred $3.2 million related to phase one, $4.1 million related to phase two and $4.9 million related to phase three in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.9 million related to phase one, $6.1 million related to phase two and $6.6 million related to phase three in the year ended December 31, 2021. For detailed disclosure on Project Ignite, including information related to the anticipated completion and treatment of non-capitalizable expenses in future periods, please see “-Components of our Results of Operations - Operating Expenses - Corporate Technology and Production Systems.”
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by 62.1%, or $76.1 million, from $122.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $198.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The year-over-year increase was primarily driven by costs related to the IPO of $38.2 million and an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $25.5 million, of which $23.3 million was due to the accelerated vesting of outstanding options and the forgiveness of promissory notes exchanged for common stock in connection with the IPO. For the year ended December 31, 2021, IPO related expenses of $38.2 million included $16.8 million of contractual compensation payments to former executives (of which $15.6 million was funded by certain stockholders), $7.5 million associated with the final settlement of fees in connection with the Fourth Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement and $13.9 million of professional fees and other related expenses. The remaining increase was driven by normalized bonus expense from strong business performance, one quarter of increased public company costs, including headcount, professional services and insurance, partially offset by a reduction in severance and savings related to reduced rent due to our virtual-first strategy.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by 10.0%, or $9.1 million, from $91.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $82.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to $6.6 million of lower intangible asset amortization, as new intangible assets were added at a lower rate compared to those which became fully depreciated in the period. Fixed asset depreciation decreased by approximately $2.6 million, primarily due to reduced fixed asset additions in 2021 and the write-down of the leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures of closed office locations in 2020.
Impairments of Long-Lived Assets
Impairment of property and equipment and capitalized software increased by 82.2%, or $1.5 million, from $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. During 2021, impairment costs were mainly driven by the write-off of fixed assets related to the exit of our office in Bellevue, Washington, partially offset by lower capitalized software impairments in comparison to 2020. There was no impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased by 6.3%, or $2.1 million, from $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $30.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the reduction in the interest rate on our First Lien Term Loan resulting from a reduction in LIBOR as well as a lower principal balance due to a $6.7 million mandatory principal prepayment during the second quarter of 2021 and $100.0 million
principal repayment in November 2021. This reduction was partially offset by the write-down of debt discount of $1.0 million due to the $100 million principal repayment in November 2021. Amortization of the loan discount resulted in expense of $2.4 million and $3.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
Loss on Interest Rate Swaps
Loss on interest rate swaps decreased by 99.7%, or $9.4 million, from a loss of $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a loss of less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to a realized loss of $7.5 million, offset by a mark to market (“MTM”) gain of $7.4 million.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit decreased by 9.5%, or $1.1 million, from $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to a number of factors principally related to the significant variance in pre-tax loss, the jurisdictional mix of earnings, return to provision adjustments and other permanent items.
Net Loss and Net Loss Margin
Net loss decreased by 64.6%, or $33.8 million, from a net loss of $52.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a net loss of $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net loss margin improved 864 basis points from a net loss margin of 11.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a net loss margin of 2.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily driven by increased revenue and improvements in operating efficiency partially offset by higher SG&A expenses primarily related to the IPO.
The decrease in both net loss and net loss margin resulted from improved operating leverage, as revenues increased by 41.4% while operating expenses grew by only 34.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, notwithstanding IPO related expenses in 2021.
Net Loss Per Share
Net loss per share decreased by 65.3%, or $0.39 per share, from a net loss of $0.59 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a net loss of $0.21 per share for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth certain historical consolidated financial information for the year ended December 31, 2019 and compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Revenues decreased by 8.7%, or $43.1 million, from $497.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $454.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was driven by a decline in demand beginning mid-March 2020, due to the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic as some industry Verticals such as brick-and-mortar retail, travel, entertainment and hospitality, financial services, manufacturing and industrials were particularly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, this decline was partially offset by higher demand in the U.S. healthcare and U.S. and Europe, the EMEA gig businesses. Changing consumer behavior, consumer demand for healthcare services as well as increased at-home delivery of goods led to an increase in hiring in these sectors, particularly in the second half of 2020. In 2020, we experienced approximately 7% new client growth and an approximately 9% decline in base growth due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our gross retention rate was 91% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 94% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Pricing was relatively stable across the periods and not meaningful to the changes in revenues.
We started 2020 with 12.6% year-over-year revenue growth in the first two months and began experiencing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the latter half of March 2020. Overall, revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2020 was 8.0% higher than revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2019. We experienced the most significant negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during the second quarter of 2020 with revenue approximately 33.1% lower than the corresponding period in 2019. As the local shelter-in-place orders began lifting, the business began experiencing some recovery in the third quarter of 2020 where revenue was approximately 11.4% lower than the corresponding period in 2019. The business moved into year-over-year revenue growth of approximately 5.8% for the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, driven by a strong December 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues decreased by 1.8%, or $4.0 million, from $221.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $217.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was driven by a $19.2 million reduction due to lower volume, partially offset by $12.5 million due to a change in the mix of business and $1.3 million in COVID-19 pandemic related costs, as we were temporarily unable to right-size our fulfillment team in India due to a mandate by the Maharashtra state government which prohibited termination of employees. The change in mix of business was driven by a temporary decrease in revenue from some of our higher-margin industry Verticals that were most severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues increased by 333 basis points from 44.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 47.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a change in mix of business as some of our higher-margin industry Verticals were unfavorably impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as increased hosting costs for cloud-based infrastructure for our platforms, including improvements to the security environment.
Corporate Technology and Production Systems
Corporate technology and production systems expenses decreased by 1.4%, or $0.6 million, from $44.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in this line item are costs related to maintaining our corporate information technology infrastructure and non-capitalizable costs to develop and maintain our production systems. Costs related to maintaining our corporate information technology infrastructure decreased by $3.9 million from $23.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due primarily to reduced personnel-related costs. Costs to develop platform and product initiatives increased by $2.2 million, from $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by new product development including the launch of our full suite of COVID-19 testing products in 2020. Costs related to maintaining our production systems increased by $1.1 million from $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
These expenses include non-capitalizable costs related to Project Ignite. We incurred $7.2 million related to phase one, $3.1 million related to phase two and $4.6 million related to phase three in the year ended December 31, 2019, and $3.2 million related to phase one, $4.1 million related to phase two and $4.9 million related to phase three in the year ended December 31, 2020. For detailed disclosure on Project Ignite, including information related to the anticipated completion and treatment of non-capitalizable expenses in future periods, please see “-Components of our Results of Operations - Operating Expenses - Corporate Technology and Production Systems.”
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by 16.7%, or $24.6 million, from $147.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $122.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of savings actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, we implemented robust cost reduction measures across the organization to reduce SG&A expenses. This was accomplished through structural changes like moving to a virtual-first strategy by reducing office space globally, streamlining our sales and operations organization, and variable spend reduction, such as lower bonus expense, lower commissions, and lower marketing, travel, and entertainment expenses due to business performance being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. 2019 also included a one-time settlement of approximately $8.5 million with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors - General Risks - We are exposed to litigation risk.”
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased by 2.8%, or $2.6 million, from $93.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $91.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Depreciation of property and equipment decreased from $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the write-down of the leasehold improvements and furniture and fixtures of closed office locations, partially offset by depreciation of computers and electronic equipment purchased in support of the company-wide virtual-first work from home policy. Amortization of intangible assets decreased from $85.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $84.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Definite-lived intangible assets consist of intangible assets acquired through acquisition and the costs of developing internal-use software. These assets are amortized using a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives except for customer lists which use an accelerated method of amortization. The decrease in amortization on these assets can be attributed to the reducing amortization rate of the customer lists.
Impairments of Long-Lived Assets
Impairment of property and equipment and capitalized software decreased from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, impairment costs were mainly driven by the write down of fixed assets in our exited offices in Roseville, California and Marietta, Georgia. There was no impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased by 16.2%, or $6.4 million, from $39.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2019, interest expense on the First Lien Term Loan was $36.2 million compared to $30.4 million in 2020. The reduction in 2020 was driven by the reduction in interest rate following the fall in LIBOR. Amortization expense of the loan discount was $2.4 million in 2019 and 2020.
Loss on Interest Rate Swap
Loss on interest rate swap consists of realized and unrealized gains and losses on our interest rate swaps, which we entered into to reduce our exposure to variability in expected future cash flows on our Term loan, which bears interest at a variable rate. Unrealized gains and losses result from changes in the fair value of the swaps and realized gains and losses reflect the amounts payable or receivable between the fixed rate on the swap and LIBOR. Loss on interest rate swap changed from a loss of $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to a loss of $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was driven by the change in the MTM valuation of our interest rate swaps, which depends on LIBOR.
Income Tax Benefit
Benefit from income taxes decreased by 2.0%, or $0.2 million, from $(11.8) million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $(11.6) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to a decrease in the U.S. state and international deferred income tax provision.
Net Loss and Net Loss Margin
Net loss increased by 12.0%, or $5.6 million, from $(46.7) million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $(52.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net Loss Margin changed from (9.4)% to (11.5)% primarily driven by an 8.7% decrease in revenues due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a 6.5% decrease in total operating expenses as a result of structural changes and cost savings initiatives implemented.
Net Loss Per Share
Net Loss Per Share increased by 11.3%, or $(0.06), from $(0.53) for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $(0.59) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “non-GAAP financial measures,” which are financial measures that are not calculated and presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”).
Specifically, we make use of the non-GAAP financial measures “organic constant currency revenue growth”, “Adjusted EBITDA,” “Adjusted EBITDA Margin,” “Adjusted Net Income,” “Adjusted Earnings Per Share” and “Adjusted Free Cash Flow” to assess the performance of our business.
Organic constant currency revenue growth is calculated by adjusting for any merger and acquisition (“M&A”) activity that contributed revenue in the current period, which was not present in the prior period, and converting the current period revenue at foreign currency exchange rates consistent with the prior period. There was no impact of M&A activity on our revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, we have provided the impact of revenue in December 2021 from the acquisition of EBI. We present organic constant currency revenue growth because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance; however, it has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider such a measure either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under US GAAP. In particular, organic constant currency revenue growth does not reflect M&A activity or the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss adjusted for provision for income taxes, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation,transaction expenses related to our public offering and
M&A activity, optimization and restructuring, technology transformation costs, foreign currency (gains) and losses and other costs affecting comparability. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue for the applicable period. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. Management and our board of directors use Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate the factors and trends affecting our business to assess our financial performance and in preparing and approving our annual budget and believe it is helpful in highlighting trends in our core operating performance. Further, our executive incentive compensation is based in part on components of Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for our results as reported under US GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA excludes items that can have a significant effect on our profit or loss and should, therefore, be considered only in conjunction with net income (loss) for the period. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA to supplement US GAAP results to evaluate the factors and trends affecting the business to assess our financial performance and in preparing and approving our annual budget and believe it is helpful in highlighting trends in our core operating performance. Because not all companies use identical calculations, these measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
Adjusted Net Income is a non-GAAP profitability measure. Adjusted Net Income is defined as net income adjusted for amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based compensation, transaction expenses related to our public offering and M&A activity, optimization and restructuring, technology transformation costs, and certain other costs affecting comparability, adjusted for the applicable tax rate. Adjusted Earnings Per Share is defined as Adjusted Net Income divided by diluted weighted average shares for the applicable period. We present Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share because we believe they assist investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding certain material non-cash items and unusual items that we do not expect to continue at the same level in the future. Our management believes that the inclusion of supplementary adjustments to net income (loss) applied in presenting Adjusted Net Income provide additional information to investors about certain material non-cash items and about items that we do not expect to continue at the same level in the future. Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider such measures either in isolation or as substitutes for analyzing our results as reported under US GAAP.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow is defined as Net Cash provided by (used in) Operating Activities minus purchases of property and equipment and purchases of intangible assets and capitalized software. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted Free Cash Flow reflects adjustments for one-time, non-operating cash charges related to the IPO. We present Adjusted Free Cash Flow because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding certain material non-recurring, non-operating cash items that we do not expect to continue at the same level in the future. Adjusted Free Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider such measure either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under US GAAP.
Organic Constant Currency Revenue Growth
The following table reconciles revenue growth, the most directly comparable US GAAP measure, to organic constant currency revenue growth for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
_______________________________
(1)Impact to revenue growth in the current period from acquisitions and dispositions that have occurred over the past twelve months.
(2)Impact to revenue growth in the current period from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA increased by 79.5%, or $79.4 million, from $99.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $179.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Adjusted EBITDA Margin increased by 593 basis points year-over-year from 22.0% in 2020 to 27.9% in 2021. This was due to the increase in revenues as well as improved operating margin.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by 16.1%, or $19.2 million, from $119.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $99.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA Margin decreased by 190 basis points year-over-year from 23.9% in 2019 to 22.0% in 2020. This was due to the decline in revenues due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by cost savings from structural changes implemented in 2020.
The following table reconciles net loss, the most directly comparable US GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
_______________________________
(1)Consists of transaction expenses related to mergers and acquisitions, associated earn-outs, investor management fees (“investor management fees” in connection with the Fourth Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement, which was terminated in connection with the IPO), and costs related to preparation of our IPO. For the year ended December 31, 2019, costs include $2.1 million in investor management fees and $0.5 million in M&A transaction costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, costs include $2.0 million in investor management fees and $1.0 million in M&A transaction costs. For the year ended December 31, 2021, IPO related expenses of $38.2 million included $16.8 million of contractual compensation payments to former executives (of which, $15.6 million was funded by certain stockholders), $7.5 million associated with the final settlement of fees in connection with the Fourth Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement, and $13.9 million of professional fees and other related expenses. The year ended December 31, 2021 also includes $1.9 million in costs related to the acquisition of EBI, $1.4 million of earn-out and performance-based incentive payments associated with an acquisition in 2018, and $1.4 million of investor management fees in connection with the Fourth Amended and Restated Management Services Agreement, associated with the terms prior to the final settlement.
(2)Consists of restructuring-related costs, including executive recruiting and severance charges, and lease termination costs and disposal of fixed assets related to our real estate consolidation efforts. During 2019 and 2020, we executed an extensive restructuring program, significantly strengthening our management team and creating a client facing industry-specific Vertical organization. This program was completed by the end of 2020 and the final costs related to this program were incurred through the first quarter of 2021. Beginning in 2020, we began executing a virtual-first strategy, closing offices and reducing office space globally. For the year ended December 31, 2019, these costs include approximately $4.5 million of restructuring-related executive recruiting and severance charges. For the
year ended December 31, 2020, costs include approximately $6.7 million of restructuring-related executive recruiting and severance charges and $2.1 million of lease termination costs and write-offs on disposal of fixed assets related to our real estate consolidation program. For the year ended December 31, 2021, costs include $0.5 million of restructuring-related executive recruiting and severance charges and $4.4 million of lease termination costs and write-offs on disposal of fixed assets related to our real estate consolidation program.
(3)Includes costs related to technology modernization efforts. We believe that these costs are discrete and non-recurring in nature, as they relate to a one-time restructuring and decommissioning of our on-premise production systems and corporate technological infrastructure and the move to a managed service provider, decommissioning redundant fulfillment systems, and modernizing internal functional systems. As such, they are not normal, recurring operating expenses and are not reflective of ongoing trends in the cost of doing business. The significant majority of these are related to the last two phases of Project Ignite, with the remainder related to an investment made to modernize internal functional systems in preparation for our public company infrastructure. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, investments related to phases two and three of Project Ignite were $7.7 million, $9.0 million and $12.7 million, respectively. Additional investment made to modernize internal functional systems were $2.1 million, $1.9 million and $0.4 million in 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
(4)Consists of non-recurring settlements impacting comparability. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the primary components were a settlement with the CFPB of approximately $8.5 million and discrete incremental charges related to the settlement of $1.7 million and a settlement related to sales tax of $1.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, costs include $2.3 million in a settlement related to sales tax. For the year ended December 31, 2021, costs include $0.5 million in a settlement related to sales tax. These sales tax costs are discrete and non-recurring in nature, and we do not expect them to occur in future periods.
(5)Consists of net realized and unrealized loss (gain) on interest rate swaps. See “-Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Interest Rate Risk” for additional information on interest rate swaps.
(6)Consists of costs related to a local government mandate in India, (gain) loss on foreign currency transactions, impairment of capitalized software and other costs outside of the ordinary course of business. The following table summarizes these costs for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
The following table presents the calculation of Net Loss Margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
Adjusted Net Income increased by 245.9%, or $65.6 million, from $26.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $92.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by the increase in revenues and improvement in operating efficiency. Adjusted Net Income decreased by 29.7%, or $11.3 million, from $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $26.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in revenues due to impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a decrease in total operating expenses as a result of structural changes and cost savings initiatives implemented.
Adjusted Earnings Per Share-basic increased by 240.0%, or $0.72, from $0.30 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.02 per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Adjusted Earnings Per Share-diluted increased by 223.3%, or $0.67, from $0.30 per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.97 per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in Adjusted Earnings Per Share-basic and Adjusted Earnings Per Share-diluted was primarily due to the increase in Adjusted Net Income for the corresponding periods.
Adjusted Earnings Per Share-basic decreased by 30.2%, or $0.13, from $0.43 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.30 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted Earnings Per Share-diluted decreased by 30.2%, or $0.13, from $0.43 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.30 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in Adjusted Earnings Per Share-basic and Adjusted Earnings Per Share-diluted was primarily due to the decrease in Adjusted Net Income. This decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in revenues due to impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a decrease in total operating expenses as a result of structural changes and cost savings initiatives implemented.
The following tables reconcile net loss, the most directly comparable US GAAP measure, to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
_______________________________
(1)Consists of transaction expenses related to mergers and acquisitions, associated earn-outs, investor management fees, and costs related to our IPO.
(2)Consists of restructuring-related costs, including executive recruiting and severance charges, and lease termination costs and disposal of fixed assets related to our real estate consolidation efforts. During 2019 and 2020, we executed an extensive restructuring program, significantly strengthening our management team and creating a client facing industry-specific Vertical organization. This program was completed by the end of 2020 and the final costs related to this program have been incurred through the first quarter of 2021. Beginning in 2020, we began executing a virtual-first strategy, closing offices and reducing office space globally.
(3)Includes costs related to technology modernization efforts. We believe that these costs are discrete and non-recurring in nature, as they relate to a one-time restructuring and decommissioning of our on-premise production systems and corporate technological infrastructure and the move to a managed service provider, decommissioning redundant fulfillment systems, and modernizing internal functional systems. As such, they are not normal, recurring operating expenses and are not reflective of ongoing trends in the cost of doing business. The significant majority of these are related to the last two phases of Project Ignite, with the remainder related to an investment made to modernize internal functional systems in preparation for our public company infrastructure.
(4)Consists of non-recurring settlements impacting comparability.
(5)Consists of net realized and realized loss (gain) on interest rate swaps. See “-Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Interest Rate Risk” for additional information on interest rate swaps.
(6)Consists of costs related to a local government mandate in India, (gain) loss on foreign currency transactions, impairment of capitalized software and other costs outside of the ordinary course of
business. The following table summarizes these costs for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
(7)Normalized effective tax rates of 26.0%, 26.0% and 22.5% have been used to compute Adjusted Net Income for the 2019, 2020 and 2021 periods, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $80.7 million for federal income tax purposes and deferred tax assets of approximately $8.2 million related to state and foreign income tax loss carryforwards available to reduce future income subject to income taxes. The amount of actual cash taxes we pay for federal, state, and foreign income taxes differs significantly from the effective income tax rate computed in accordance with US GAAP, and from the normalized rate shown above.
The following tables reconcile net loss per share, the most directly comparable US GAAP measure, to Adjusted Earnings Per Share for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
The following table presents the calculation of Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
_______________________________
(1)Consists of transaction expenses related to mergers and acquisitions, associated earn-outs, investor management fees, and costs related to our IPO.
(2)Consists of restructuring-related costs, including executive recruiting and severance charges, and lease termination costs and disposal of fixed assets related to our real estate consolidation efforts. During 2019 and 2020, we executed an extensive restructuring program, significantly strengthening our management team and creating a client-facing industry-specific Vertical organization. This program was completed by the end of 2020 and the final costs related to this program were incurred through the first quarter of 2021. Beginning in 2020, we began executing a virtual-first strategy, closing offices and reducing office space globally.
(3)Includes costs related to technology modernization efforts. We believe that these costs are discrete and non-recurring in nature, as they relate to a one-time restructuring and decommissioning of our on-premise production systems and corporate technological infrastructure and the move to a managed service provider, decommissioning redundant fulfillment systems and modernizing internal functional systems. As such, they are not normal, recurring operating expenses and are not reflective of ongoing trends in the cost of doing business. The significant majority of these are related to the last two phases of Project Ignite, with the remainder related to an investment made to modernize internal functional systems in preparation for our public company infrastructure.
(4)Consists of non-recurring settlements impacting comparability.
(5)Consists of net realized and unrealized loss (gain) on interest rate swaps. See “-Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Interest Rate Risk” for additional information on interest rate swaps.
(6)Consists of costs related to a local government mandate in India, (gain) loss on foreign currency transactions, impairment of capitalized software and other costs outside of the ordinary course of business.
The following table summarizes these costs for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
(7)Normalized effective tax rates of 26%, 26% and 22.5% have been used to compute Adjusted Net Income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $80.7 million for federal income tax purposes and deferred tax assets of approximately $8.2 million related to state and foreign income tax loss carryforwards available to reduce future income subject to income taxes. The amount of actual cash taxes we pay for federal, state, and foreign income taxes differs significantly from the effective income tax rate computed in accordance with US GAAP, and from the normalized rate shown above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Liquidity describes the ability of a company to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of its business operations, including working capital needs to meet operating expenses, debt service, acquisitions, capital expenditures, other commitments and contractual obligations. We consider liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund our operating and investing activities.
Our primary cash needs are for day-to-day operations, working capital requirements, capital expenditures for ongoing development of our technological offering and other mandatory payments such as taxes, and debt principal and interest obligations. Our liquidity needs are met primarily through cash flows from operations, which include cash received from customers less cash costs related to our operations.
Our capital expenditures can vary depending on the timing of the development of new products and services and technological enhancement-related investments. Capital expenditures, excluding acquisitions, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 were approximately $16.5 million and $19.1 million, respectively, primarily related to capitalizable software development.
We believe that our projected cash position and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our liquidity requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, our future liquidity requirements could be higher than we currently expect as a result of various factors. For example, any future investments, acquisitions, joint ventures or other similar transactions may require additional capital. In addition, our ability to continue to meet our future liquidity requirements will depend on, among other things, our ability to achieve anticipated levels of revenues and cash flows from operations and our ability to manage costs and working capital successfully, all of which are subject to general economic, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. In the event we require any additional capital, it will take the form of equity or debt financing, or both, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise any such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $48.0 million. On November 1, 2021, the Company utilized the net proceeds from the IPO and cash on hand to repay $100.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan. On November 30, 2021, we used available cash of $66.3 million in connection with our purchase of EBI.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $66.6 million, which included $6.7 million accrued at year-end 2020 for our 2020 excess cash flow payment paid to lenders under the Credit Agreement (as defined below) paid in April 2021. Per the terms of the Credit Agreement, there is no excess cash flow payment required for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our total principal amount of indebtedness outstanding was $510.3 million under our First Lien Term Loan as of December 31, 2021. All cash and cash equivalents are held with independent financial institutions with a minimum credit rating of A as defined by the three main credit rating agencies. As of December 31, 2021, all cash and cash equivalents were held in accounts with banks such that the funds are immediately available or in fixed term deposits with a maximum maturity of three months.
Credit Facility
In June 2015, our subsidiary Sterling Midco Holdings, Inc. (predecessor to Sterling Infosystems, Inc.) entered into a first lien credit agreement as borrower (as most recently amended by the Sixth Amendment thereto dated August 11, 2021, the “Credit Agreement”) with KeyBank National Association, as administrative agent (the “Administrative Agent”), certain guarantors party thereto and various lenders, including Goldman Sachs Lending Partners LLC, as lenders. The Credit Agreement provides for aggregate principal borrowings of $795.0 million (subject to the increase described below), comprising a $655.0 million original principal amount of term loan (the “First Lien Term Loan”) which matures in June 2024 and a $140.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which matures the earlier of (a) August 11, 2026 or (b) December 31, 2023 unless, on or prior to December 31, 2023, the First Lien Term Loan has been (i) refinanced with the proceeds of indebtedness with a final maturity date that is no earlier than February 11, 2027 or (ii) amended, modified or waived, such that the final maturity date of the First Lien Term Loan is no earlier than February 11, 2027.
Amounts outstanding under the First Lien Term Loan bear interest under either of the following two rates, elected in advance quarterly by the borrower for periods of either one month, two months, three months or six months: (1) an applicable rate of 2.5% plus a base rate (equal to the greater of (a) the prime rate (b) the federal funds rate plus 1⁄2 of 1% or (c) the one-month LIBOR plus 1%, subject to a 2% floor); or (2) an applicable rate of 3.5% plus one-month LIBOR which is subject to a 1% floor. Interest on LIBOR borrowings is payable on the last business day of the interest period selected except in the case of a six-month election, in which case it is payable on the last day of the third and sixth month. The interest rate in effect for the First Lien Term Loan as of December 31, 2021 was 4.5%. The First Lien Term Loan requires $1.6 million repayment of principal on the last business day of each March, June, September and December. Under the Credit Agreement, we must also make a mandatory prepayment of principal in the amount of 50% of the excess cash, as defined in the Credit Agreement, generated in any given year, if our Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is greater than or equal to 2.95:1.00. In 2020, the mandatory prepayment was $6.7 million and was paid in April 2021. Per the terms of the Credit Agreement, there is no excess cash flow payment required for the year ended December 31, 2021. On November 1, 2021, the Company utilized the net proceeds from the IPO and cash on hand to repay $100.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan. All remaining outstanding principal is due at maturity in June 2024. We have been in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement since origination. Pursuant to the Sixth Amendment to the Credit Agreement, the $85.0 million Revolving Credit Facility automatically increased an additional $55.0 million to $140.0 million upon the consummation of the IPO on September 23, 2021.
Amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a tiered floating interest rate based on the net leverage ratio of the borrower. The rate may be chosen periodically in advance of each interest period at the election of the borrower, as follows: (1) an applicable rate of 2.5% plus the greater of (a) the prime rate (b) the federal funds rate plus 1⁄2 of 1% (c) the one-month LIBOR plus 1% or (d) a 2% floor or (2) an applicable rate of 3.5% plus one-month LIBOR. In addition, there is a quarterly fee of 0.50% or 0.375% on the unused portion of the commitments based on the first lien net leverage ratio. Unused and therefore available borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, net of letters of credit, were $84.0 million and $139.3 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, respectively. The Revolving Credit Facility matures on the earlier of August 11, 2026 or December 31, 2023 unless, on or prior to December 31, 2023, the First Lien Term Loan has been refinanced with a final maturity date that is no earlier than February 11, 2027 or amended, modified or waived, such that the final maturity date of the First Lien Term Loan is no earlier than February 11, 2027. We can use available funding capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility to satisfy letters of credit related to leased office space and other obligations, subject to a sublimit equal to the lesser of $20.0 million or aggregate amounts available for borrowing under the Revolving Credit Facility. The issuance of letters of credit reduces the available capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility. We had outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and additional availability for letters of credit of $19.0 million and $19.3 million, respectively.
The Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to: incur certain additional indebtedness; transfer money between our various subsidiaries; pay dividends on, repurchase or make distributions with respect to our subsidiaries’ capital stock or make other restricted payments; issue stock of subsidiaries; make certain investments, loans or advances; transfer and sell certain assets; create or permit liens on assets; consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets; enter into certain transactions with our affiliates; and amend certain documents. The Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants that require us to maintain a total specified leverage ratio of less than 6.75:1.00 for so long as we have borrowed at least 35% or more of the total availability under the Revolving Credit Facility. Compliance with the financial covenants may be waived by lenders holding a majority of the Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Obligations under the Credit Agreement are collateralized by a first lien on substantially all the assets and outstanding capital stock of the Company subject to exceptions. The Credit Agreement also contains various events of default, including, without limitation, the failure to pay interest or principal when the same is due, cross default and cross acceleration provisions, the failure of representations and warranties contained in the agreements to be true and certain insolvency events. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the principal amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement, together with all accrued and unpaid interest and other amounts owed thereunder, may be declared immediately due and payable by the lenders.
We can use available funding capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility to satisfy letters of credit related to leased office space and other obligations, subject to a sublimit equal to the lesser of $20.0 million or aggregate amounts available for borrowing under the Revolving Credit Facility. Amounts used to satisfy the letters of credit reduce the available capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility. We had outstanding letters of credit totaling $1.2 million, $1.0 million and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $36.2 million and reflected the adjustment to net loss for non-cash charges totaling $87.1 million, primarily driven by $91.2 million of depreciation and amortization (including $60.3 million of acquired intangible asset amortization), a $5.8 million change in fair value of derivatives, $3.5 million of stock-based compensation, $2.4 million amortization of debt discount, and $1.8 million impairment of long-lived assets, partially offset by $17.0 million in deferred income taxes and $0.8 million in deferred rent. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided an additional $1.4 million for the year.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $68.6 million and reflected the adjustment to net loss for non-cash charges totaling $91.6 million, primarily driven by $82.1 million of depreciation and amortization (including $52.1 million of acquired intangible asset amortization), $32.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, $3.3 million for amortization of debt discount, $3.3 million of impairment of long-lived assets, and $1.2 million of provision for bad debt, partially offset by $22.0 million in deferred income taxes, $7.4 million related to changes in the fair value of derivative instruments and $1.6 million in deferred rent. Changes in operating assets and liabilities reduced cash provided by operating activities by $3.3 million for the year.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 was $16.3 million and $85.4 million, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities increased primarily due to the acquisition of EBI for a purchase price of $67.8 million, consisting of $66.3 million of cash and $1.5 million of contingent consideration recorded at fair value.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $14.0 million investment in capitalized software development and $2.3 million in computer hardware and other property, plant and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $66.3 million of cash used for the acquisition of EBI in addition to $15.9 million of investment in capitalized software development and $3.2 million in computer hardware and other property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 was $3.2 million and $1.1 million, respectively. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $6.5 million of principal payments on our long-term debt, partially offset by $3.3 million in cash proceeds from the issuance of common stock. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $113.1 million of repayments of long-term debt coupled with the payment of $7.9 million of IPO costs offset by $102.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in the IPO and a $15.6 million capital contribution from certain stockholders to fund a contractual compensation payment to former executives.
Adjusted Free Cash Flow
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the company generated $84.3 million of Adjusted Free Cash Flow, adjusted for one-time, cash, non-operating expenses related to the IPO, compared to $19.7 million in the previous period. The year-over-year increase is driven by higher revenues driving higher cash flow from operations.
The following table reconciles net cash flow provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable US GAAP measure, to Adjusted Free Cash Flow for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
______________________________
(1) Includes one-time, cash, non-operating charges related to the IPO. Costs included are $16.8 million of contractual compensation payments to former executives, of which $15.6 million was funded by certain stockholders, $7.5 million of a final settlement of investor management fees in connection with the Fourth Amended and Restated Management services agreement, and $10.5 million related primarily to professional fees and other expenses.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations for outstanding debt and leases for our office spaces.
As of December 31, 2021, we had the following contractual obligations:
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. However, we operate in an industry that is subject to intense competition, government regulation and rapid technological change. Our operations are subject to significant risk and uncertainties including financial, operational, technological, regulatory, foreign operations, and other risks. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The most significant accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment or complexity. Management believes the estimates and judgments most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and to the understanding of our reported financial results are described below. Such are determined to involve “critical accounting estimates” because they are particularly dependent on assumptions and estimates made by management about matters that are inherently uncertain.
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on our accounting policies.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to record accounts receivable at their net realizable value. Inherent in the assessment of the allowance for doubtful accounts are certain judgments and estimates relating to, among other things, our customers’ access to capital, our customers’ willingness and or ability to pay, general economic conditions and the ongoing relationship with customers. Allowances have been recorded for receivables believed to be uncollectible, including amounts for the resolution of potential credit and other collection issues such as disputed invoices. Adjustments to the allowance may be required in future periods depending on how such potential issues are resolved or if the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments. We have not historically had material write-offs due to uncollectible accounts receivable. Materially incorrect estimates of bad debt reserves could result in unexpected losses in profitability. The increase in our allowance for doubtful accounts from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 is primarily driven by the significant increase in revenues and receivables for the same period.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets, net and Impairment
We record the excess of purchase price over fair value of net assets of acquired entities as goodwill. Management relies on numerous assumptions and estimates in determining fair value of acquired entities and significant changes in such estimates could yield materially different results when determining goodwill.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or when certain triggering events require additional testing. Our goodwill is predominantly the result of the acquisition of Sterling by our Sponsor on June 19, 2015. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $21.7 million of goodwill related to the acquisition of EBI on November 30, 2021 based on the preliminary purchase price allocation.
We perform an annual goodwill impairment assessment during the fourth quarter of each calendar year. We first assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value. If necessary, after the qualitative assessment, we will perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment loss is recognized if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. We performed qualitative assessments of goodwill during the fourth quarters of 2020 and 2021. Based on the results of these assessments, there were no reporting units at risk of having a carrying value in excess of the fair value and thus, the quantitative goodwill impairment assessments were not performed. Should conditions change which impact fair value and the factors that determine the need for impairment, there is a possibility that we could recognize impairment in future periods. Materially incorrect estimates of fair value could cause an impairment to goodwill and potentially result in a loss of profitability.
Definite-lived intangible assets consist of intangibles acquired through acquisition and the costs of developing internal-use software and are reported net of amortization. Such are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Customer lists are amortized using an accelerated method of amortization. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $56.0 million for customer relationships, $0.8 million for a non-compete agreement and $2.1 million for trademarks related to the acquisition of EBI. For purposes of estimating the fair value of customer relationships, the non-compete agreement and the trademarks, management and a third-party valuation firm considered the prospective income- and cash-generating capability of the assets and determined that the multi-period excess earnings method of the income approach, the avoided loss of income method of the income approach and relief-from-royalty method of the income approach were the most appropriate methods to determine the fair value for the respective intangible assets. Cost of acquisition, renewal and extension of intangible assets are capitalized. There are no significant renewal or extension provisions associated with our intangible assets. We have no indefinite-lived intangible assets.
The costs of developing internal-use software are capitalized during the application development stage and are included in Intangible assets, net on the consolidated balance sheets. Amortization commences when the software is placed into service and is computed using the straight-line method over the useful life of the underlying software of three years.
We assess definite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually as well as when events and circumstances exist that indicate that an impairment may have occurred. Management relies on numerous assumptions and estimates in determining fair value and significant changes in such estimates could yield materially different results when determining and calculating impairment. See “Long-Lived Assets” below for additional discussion of such impairment assessments.
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities
We are exposed to fluctuations in various foreign currencies against our functional currency, the U.S. dollar (“USD”). Specifically, we are exposed to third-party expenses denominated in Indian Rupees (“INR”). As such, we historically have entered into, and plan to enter into in the future, foreign currency forward agreements to manage our exposure to exchange rate fluctuations between the USD and INR exchange rate. Additionally, we are exposed to variability in expected future cash outflows on variable rate debt attributable to changes in LIBOR. As such, we historically have entered into, and plan to enter into in the future, interest rate swaps to economically offset a portion of this risk.
We record all derivatives on the balance sheet at fair value. The accounting for changes in the fair value of derivatives depends on the intended use of the derivative, whether we have elected to designate a derivative in a hedging relationship and apply hedge accounting and whether the hedging relationship has satisfied the criteria necessary to apply hedge accounting. Derivatives designated and qualifying as a hedge of the exposure to variability in expected future cash flows, or other types of forecasted transactions, are considered cash flow hedges. Hedge accounting generally provides for the matching of the timing of gain or loss recognition on the hedging instrument with the earnings effect of the hedged forecasted transactions in a cash flow hedge. We may enter into derivative contracts that are intended to economically hedge certain of our risk, even though hedge accounting does not apply or we elect not to apply hedge accounting.
As the prices of the hedged commodity moves in reaction to market trends and information, our statement of operations will be affected depending on the impact such market movements have on the value of our derivative instruments. Depending on market movements, exchange rates and changes in LIBOR, these price protection positions may cause immediate adverse effects, but are expected to protect the Company over the term of the contracts for the hedged amounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based payments are measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and are expensed over the requisite service period unless they are performance-based (see Note 14, “Stock-Based Compensation” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The equity incentive plans generally provide for stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units to vest over a 4-year period, unless otherwise stated in an individual award agreement. Continued employment is a prerequisite for vesting. Stock-based compensation expense is recorded for each tranche of awards and is recorded over the requisite vesting period in Cost of revenues, Corporate technology and production systems and Selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets consist of property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets. We regularly evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable. Conditions that could indicate that an impairment assessment is needed include a significant decline in the observable market value of an asset or asset group, a significant change in the extent or manner in which an asset or asset group is used, or a significant adverse change that would indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group is not recoverable. When factors indicate that a long-lived asset or asset group should be evaluated for possible impairment, we assess the potential impairment by determining whether the carrying value of such long-lived asset or asset group will be recovered through the future undiscounted cash flows expected from use of the asset or asset group and its eventual disposition. If the carrying amount of the asset or asset group is determined not to be recoverable, an impairment charge is recorded based on the excess, if any, of the carrying amount over fair value. Fair values are determined based on quoted market values or discounted cash flows analyses as applicable. We regularly evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the useful lives of property and equipment and definite-life intangible assets may warrant revision to reflect that the period of economic benefit has changed. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge would be recognized in an amount equal to the amount by which the carrying value of the long- lived asset exceeds its fair value. Based on a quantitative assessment of the carrying values, we recorded an impairment loss related to abandonment of capitalized software costs and property and equipment no longer in use due to office closures in the amount of $3.2 million, $1.8 million and $3.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
Business Combinations
The Company records business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification Topic 805, “Business Combinations” (“ASC 805”). Under the acquisition method of accounting, identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their acquisition-date fair value. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value is recorded as goodwill. Changes in the estimated fair values of net assets recorded for acquisitions based on management’s best estimates may result in adjustments to the amount of purchase price allocable to goodwill. Measurement period adjustments are reflected in the period in which they occur and may be made up to one year subsequent to the acquisition date should new information become available.
The Company utilizes variations of the income approach, which relies on historical financial and qualitative information, as well as assumptions and estimates for projected financial information, to value acquired trade names, customer lists and software developed for internal use.
Revenue Recognition
We must make subjective estimates as to the impact of pricing adjustments and the collectability of our accounts receivable. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation has been satisfied by transferring a promised good or service to a client and the client obtains control of the good or service. To recognize revenue, two parties must have an agreement that creates enforceable rights and obligations, the performance obligations
must be identifiable, and the transaction price must be determinable. The agreement must also have commercial substance and collection must be probable.
Our contracts are primarily for screening service orders. Our screening services include court record reports, credit reports, criminal background checks, employment and education verifications, and drug and health screenings, amongst others. The client takes control of the product when the screening report is completed. Accordingly, revenue is generally recognized at the point in time when the client receives and can use the report. Screening services comprised a substantial portion of the total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively. As such, significant changes in screening services could affect the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and related cash flows. Payment for screening reports generally occurs once the reports have been received by the client.
Our contracts generally do not include any obligations for returns, refunds, or similar obligations, nor do we have a practice of granting significant concessions. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract and client, although terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 60 days of the invoice. Any advanced payments received from clients are initially deferred and subsequently recognized as revenue as the related performance obligations are satisfied. There is typically no variable consideration related to our contracts, nor do they include a significant financing component, non-cash consideration, or consideration payable to a client.
For revenue arrangements containing multiple products or services, we account for the individual products or services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, the product or service is separately identifiable from other terms in the contract, and if a client can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the client. If these criteria are not met, the promised products or services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. We allocate the contract price to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling prices of each distinct product or service in the contract.
We did not have any material contract liabilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Sales taxes collected from clients are remitted to governmental authorities and are therefore excluded from revenues in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a client are recognized as an asset if the benefit of such costs is expected to be longer than one year, with a majority of contracts being multi-year. Incremental costs include commissions to the sales force and are amortized over three years, as we estimate that this corresponds to the period over which a client benefits from existing technology in the underlying product or service that was transferred to the client.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determining the consolidated provision for income taxes. Our effective annual tax rate is determined based on our income and the jurisdictions where it is earned, statutory tax rates, and the tax impacts of items treated differently for tax purposes than for financial reporting purposes. Also inherent in determining our effective tax rate are judgments and assumptions regarding the recoverability of certain deferred tax balances, and our ability to uphold certain tax positions. We are subject to complex tax laws, in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions, and the manner in which they apply can be open to interpretation. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction in future periods, which involves business plans, planning opportunities, and expectations about future outcomes. Our assessment relies on estimates and assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events.
There are a number of estimates and assumptions inherent in calculating the various components of our tax provision. Future events such as changes in tax legislation, geographic mix of earnings, completion of tax audits or earnings repatriation plans could have an impact on those estimates and our effective tax rate.
Estimated State Sales Taxes
Included in Other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2021, are liabilities for estimated state sales taxes in the U.S. of approximately $6.5 million and $7.3 million, respectively. This reflects our review of state sales tax where we have nexus and our best estimate of the cost to become compliant in those states in which we believe we may have nexus but had not historically collected sales tax from our clients. These estimates include the liability for both uncollected sales tax and interest. The calculation of these estimates involves judgment and uncertainty regarding various state sales tax laws, and there is a possibility that a particular state in which we have estimated a liability will disagree with our assessment. It is also possible that a state in which we have determined we do not have a liability will disagree
with our evaluation and assess a retroactive liability for uncollected sales tax. Based on our assessment, we do not expect the resolution of these liabilities to have a material effect on our results of operations or cash flows.
Emerging Growth Company
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2021 permits us, as an “emerging growth company,” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for private companies.
Recent Accounting Standard Updates
Refer to Note 3, “Recent Accounting Standards Updates” of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about recent accounting pronouncements.