Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Financial Information
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") section provides analysis of our operations and financial position for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 and includes information available to March 2, 2022, unless otherwise indicated herein. It is supplementary information and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Certain statements contained in this MD&A may constitute forward-looking statements as defined under securities laws. Forward-looking statements may relate to our future outlook and anticipated events or results and may include statements regarding our future financial position, business strategy, budgets, litigation, projected costs, capital expenditures, financial results, taxes, plans and objectives. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by terms such as "anticipate," "estimate," "target," "intend," "project," "potential," "predict," "continue," "believe," "expect," "can," "could," "would," "should," "may," "might," "plan," "will," "budget," "forecast," or other similar expressions concerning matters that are not historical facts, or the negative of such terms are intended to identify forward-looking statements; however, the absence of these words does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward-looking. To the extent any forward-looking statements contain future-oriented financial information or financial outlooks, such information is being provided to enable a reader to assess our financial condition, material changes in our financial condition, our results of operations, and our liquidity and capital resources. Readers are cautioned that this information may not be appropriate for any other purpose, including investment decisions.
Forward-looking statements contained in this MD&A are based on certain factors and assumptions regarding expected growth, results of operations, performance, and business prospects and opportunities. While we consider these assumptions to be reasonable based on information currently available, they may prove to be incorrect. These factors are more fully described in the "Risk Factors" section at Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Forward-looking statements contained in this commentary are based on our current estimates, expectations, and projections, which we believe are reasonable as of the date of this report. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance or events. You should not place undue importance on forward-looking statements and should not rely upon this information as of any other date. Other than as required under securities laws, we do not undertake to update any forward-looking information at any particular time. Neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of these forward-looking statements, and we hereby qualify all our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
Unless otherwise noted herein, all currency amounts in this MD&A are expressed in U.S. dollars. All tabular dollar amounts are expressed in thousands of U.S. dollars, except per share amounts.
Overview
We procure, process, and package plant-based and fruit-based food and beverage products for sale to retailers, foodservice operators, branded food companies, and food manufacturers. The composition of our operating segments is as follows:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages - We offer a full line of plant-based beverages and liquid and powder ingredients (utilizing oat, almond, rice, soy, coconut, hemp, and other bases), as well as broths, teas, and nutritional beverages. In addition, we package dry- and oil-roasted inshell sunflower and sunflower kernels, and we process and sell raw sunflower inshell and kernel for food and feed applications.
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages - We offer individually quick frozen ("IQF") fruit for retail (including strawberries, blueberries, mango, pineapple, and other berries and blends), IQF and bulk frozen fruit for foodservice (including toppings, purées, and smoothies). In addition, we offer fruit snacks, including bars, twists, ropes, and bite-sized varieties, as well as recently introduced fruit-based smoothie bowls. Prior to the exit from our fruit ingredient processing facility in July 2021 (as described below under "Recent Developments"), we also produced custom fruit preparations for industrial use.
Until December 2020, we had a third operating segment referred to as Global Ingredients that comprised Tradin Organic, which we sold in December 2020 (as discussed below under "Recent Developments"), and our soy and corn business, which we sold February 2019.
SUNOPTA INC. 24 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Fiscal Year
We operate on a fiscal calendar that results in a given fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. Fiscal year 2021 was a 52-week period ending on January 1, 2022, fiscal year 2020 was a 53-week period ending on January 2, 2021, and fiscal year 2019 was a 52-week period ending on December 28, 2019. Except as otherwise noted in this MD&A, the impact of the additional week on our results of operations for fiscal year 2020 was insignificant relative to the current and preceding periods.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to actively address the impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our operations. We began to experience impacts to our business and results of operations late in the first quarter of 2020, and these impacts continued throughout the remainder of 2020. As a result, we saw significant shifts in the mix of our business, resulting in lower demand for our food and beverage products from the foodservice channel due to the full or partial closure of many foodservice outlets, and an increase in demand from retail customers as consumers increased their at-home food and beverage consumption.
In 2021, with the easing of COVID-19 restrictions, we experienced overall higher foodservice demand and lower retail volumes, compared with 2020, as more foodservice outlets reopened and consumer buying patterns adapted to the evolving environment. However, these trends remained unstable throughout 2021 as the emergence of COVID-19 variants caused case levels to fluctuate in certain areas of the U.S. In addition, commencing in the third quarter of 2021, we began to experience more incidents of supply chain disruptions that we believe are related to the continuing impact of COVID-19 pandemic, including reduced labor productivity due to higher-than-normal labor turnover and increased health related absenteeism, and raw material supply and transportation challenges that impacted the efficiency of our operations and our ability to fulfill customer orders for our products. These disruptions have resulted in higher commodity inflation and input costs that we were not able to fully pass through in 2021, due to the timing of price adjustments in our contracts with customers. These contractual restrictions relating to price adjustments could make it difficult for us to fully pass-through higher input costs caused by temporary volatility associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. We also experienced increased volatility in customer order patterns for certain products that we believe may be related to market supply and demand disruptions caused by the global pandemic, as well as some delays in our customers' ability to pick up orders due to transport shortages. Despite these disruptions, we have continued to prioritize our customer relationships, at the expense of higher production and transportation costs to maintain supply of our products.
Notwithstanding the volatility, disruptions and uncertainties associated with COVID-19 to date, in addition to incremental direct costs we have incurred to provide wage incentives and personal protection equipment for our plant employees, and to implement additional cleaning and disinfecting protocols at our facilities, the overall impact of the pandemic on our operations has not had a significant impact on our liquidity or capital resources. However, given the uncertainty about the duration and severity of the continuing pandemic, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs while managing our discretionary spending and capital expenditures as required.
Construction of New Plant-Based Beverage Facility
We are constructing a new 285,000 square foot plant-based beverage facility in Midlothian, Texas. The location of this facility will complement our existing network of beverage plants in California, Minnesota, and Pennsylvania. The facility will be occupied under a 15-year building operating lease, with extension options, which will commence after substantial completion of the building by the landlord. The aggregate base rent for the building will amount to approximately $46 million over the initial 15-year term of the lease, and payments will commence after completion of the building by the landlord, which is expected to occur in 2022. We expect to incur capital expenditures of approximately $118 million related to the build-out of the facility and the purchase of manufacturing equipment for the facility. We have secured $50 million of lease financing for the build-out of the facility and we expect to principally finance the manufacturing equipment under the existing $75 million delayed draw term loan of our asset-based credit facility (as described below under "Liquidity and Capital Resources".)
Exit from Fruit Ingredient Processing Facility
In July 2021, we completed the exit from our leased South Gate, California, fruit ingredient processing facility. In connection with this closure, we ceased production of fruit-based yogurt and bakery applications, while transferring the production of fruit-based toppings to other facilities. During 2021, we recognized charges of $5.5 million for asset impairments, severance benefits, and asset relocation costs incurred in connection with this exit activity.
SUNOPTA INC. 25 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Acquisition of Dream® and WestSoy® Brands
On April 15, 2021, we paid $31.7 million to acquire the Dream and WestSoy plant-based beverage brands and related private label products in North America from The Hain Celestial Group, Inc. for The Dream brand comprises shelf-stable, plant-based milks, including rice, soy, almond, coconut, and oat varieties, and the WestSoy brand comprises shelf-stable soy beverages that are organic certified. We currently produce approximately one-half of the Dream product line and all of the WestSoy products, and we intend to bring production of the remaining Dream products in-house, as we expand the capacity of our plant-based beverage network. These brands complement our core private label and co-manufacturing plant-based beverage business and provide a potential platform for marketing our own plant-based product innovations.
Sale of Tradin Organic
On December 30, 2020, we completed the sale of Tradin Organic, which included its global organic and non-GMO ingredient sourcing operations, together with its consumer-packaged premium juice co-manufacturing business, and ingredient processing facilities.
We received cash consideration from the sale of $373.7 million (€305.1 million), net of cash acquired and debt assumed by the purchaser, and subject to post-closing adjustments, and realized a cash loss in 2020 of $12.7 million on a foreign currency forward contract that was entered into in order to economically hedge the euro-denominated cash consideration. We recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $111.8 million, which is included in the earnings from discontinued operations for the year ended January 2, 2021.
Proceeds from the divestiture of Tradin were initially used to repay approximately $355 million of outstanding debt on December 31, 2020, including the redemption and retirement of the $223.5 million outstanding principal amount of our 9.5% senior secured second lien notes due October 2022.
Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020
SUNOPTA INC. 26 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
(1) When assessing the financial performance of our operating segments, we use an internal measure of operating income/loss that excludes other income/expense items determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This measure is the basis on which management, including the CEO, assesses the underlying performance of our operating segments.
We believe that disclosing this non-GAAP measure assists investors in comparing financial performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that are not indicative of our operating performance. However, the non-GAAP measure of operating income/loss should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss to "earnings/loss from continuing operations before the following," which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
We believe that investors' understanding of our financial performance is enhanced by disclosing the specific items that we exclude from segment operating income/loss. However, any measure of operating income/loss excluding any or all of these items is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for operating income/loss prepared under U.S. GAAP. These items are presented solely to allow investors to more fully understand how we assess financial performance.
(2) When assessing our financial performance, we use an internal measure of net earnings/loss determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP that excludes specific items recognized in other income/expense, asset impairment losses, and other unusual items that are identified and evaluated on an individual basis, which due to their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis. We believe that the identification of these excluded items enhances the analysis of the financial performance of our business when comparing those operating results between periods, as we do not consider these items to be reflective of normal business operations. The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted earnings/loss from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
(a) Represents third-party costs associated with business development activities, including costs related to the evaluation, execution, and integration of external acquisitions and divestitures, and internal expansion projects and other strategic initiatives. For 2021, these costs included the transition and integration of the acquired Dream and WestSoy brands, project development activities related to our new plant-based beverage facility under construction in Texas, and the exploration of other potential strategic opportunities, which were recorded in cost of goods sold ($0.6 million) and SG&A expenses ($4.9 million), as well as the assessment of post-closing adjustments related to the divestiture of Tradin Organic, which were recorded in other expense ($0.7 million).
(b) For 2021, reflects closure costs related to the exit from our fruit ingredient processing facility, including long-lived asset impairment charges ($3.0 million), equipment relocation costs ($0.8 million) and employee termination costs ($1.1 million) recorded in other expense, and inventory write-offs of $0.6 million recorded in cost of goods sold.
SUNOPTA INC. 27 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
(c) For 2021, represents costs to complete the exit from our Santa Maria, California, frozen fruit processing facility, which were recorded in other expense. For 2020, reflects professional fees of $1.0 million and employee retention costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and long-lived asset impairment and facility closure costs of $6.4 million, mainly related to the Santa Maria facility exit, together with employee termination costs of $2.8 million (offset by the reversal of $0.9 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), which were recorded in other expense.
(d) For 2021, mainly reflects costs related to the relocation of our executive office and innovation center into Eden Prairie, Minnesota, and the vacating of our former leased facility, which were recorded in other expense. For 2020, reflects the write-down of owned and right-of-use assets related to the consolidation of roasting lines at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility, which was recorded in other expense.
(e) Represents incremental direct costs incurred in connection with plant expansion projects and new product introductions before the project or product reaches normal production levels, including costs for the hiring and training of additional personnel, fees for outside services, travel costs, and plant- and production-related expenses. For 2021 and 2020, start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(f) For 2021, represents severance and related benefit charges related to workforce reduction actions in our frozen fruit operations to reduce overhead costs, which were recorded in other expense.
(g) For 2020, reflects a loss on a foreign currency forward contract to economically hedge the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, which was recorded in other expense.
(h) For 2020, reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which were recorded in non-operating expenses.
(i) For 2021, other includes a $0.5 million loss from the settlement of employment-related legal matter, partially offset by a gain related to a project cancellation, which were recorded in other expense/income. For 2020, other includes a loss of $2.4 million from the settlement of a customer claim related to the recall of certain sunflower products in 2016, net of gains of $2.2 million from the settlement of unrelated matters, and reversal of previously accrued costs related to the withdrawal of certain consumer-packaged products, which was recorded in other income/expense.
(j) Reflects the tax effect of the preceding adjustments to earnings calculated based on our estimated annual effective tax rate.
We believe that investors' understanding of our financial performance is enhanced by disclosing the specific items that we exclude to compute adjusted earnings/loss. However, adjusted earnings/loss is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for earnings prepared under U.S. GAAP. Adjusted earnings/loss is presented solely to allow investors to more fully understand how we assess our financial performance.
(3) We use a measure of adjusted EBITDA when assessing the performance of our operations, which we believe is useful to investors' understanding of our operating profitability because it excludes non-operating expenses, such as interest and income taxes, and non-cash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and asset impairment charges, as well as other unusual items that affect the comparability of operating performance. We also use this measure to assess operating performance in connection with our employee incentive programs. We define adjusted EBITDA as segment operating income/loss plus depreciation, amortization, and non-cash stock-based compensation, and excluding other unusual items as identified in the determination of adjusted earnings/loss (refer above to footnote (2)). The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income and adjusted EBITDA from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
(a) For 2020, reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which were recorded in non-operating expenses.
(b) For 2020, stock-based compensation of $12.6 million was recorded in SG&A expenses and the reversal of $0.9 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees was recognized in other income.
(c) For 2021, third-party business development costs reflected the transition and integration of the acquired Dream and WestSoy brands, project development activities related to our new plant-based beverage facility under construction in Texas, and the exploration of other potential strategic opportunities, which were recorded in cost of goods sold ($0.6 million) and SG&A expenses ($4.9 million).
(d) For 2021 and 2020, reflects start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(e) For 2021, reflects inventory write-offs related to the exit from our fruit ingredient processing facility, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(f) For 2020, reflects professional fees of $1.0 million and employee retention costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses.
Although we use adjusted EBITDA as a measure to assess the performance of our business and for the other purposes set forth above, this measure has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for an analysis of our results of operations as reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest payments on our indebtedness;
SUNOPTA INC. 28 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
adjusted EBITDA does not include the payment/recovery of taxes, which is a necessary element of our operations;
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
adjusted EBITDA does not include non-cash stock-based compensation, which is an important component of our total compensation program for employees and directors.
Because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing adjusted EBITDA in isolation, and specifically by using other U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP measures, such as revenues, gross profit, segment operating income/loss, earnings and adjusted earnings/loss to measure our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to our results of operations or cash flows from operations determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and our calculation of adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to the calculation of a similarly titled measure reported by other companies.
(4) In order to evaluate our results of operations, we use certain non-GAAP measures that we believe enhance an investor's ability to derive meaningful period-over-period comparisons and trends from our results of operations. In particular, we evaluate our revenues on a basis that excludes the effects of fluctuations in commodity pricing and the impacts of business acquisitions and divestitures. In addition, we exclude specific items from our reported results that due to their nature or size, we do not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis. These items are identified above under footnote (2), and in the discussion of our results of operations below. These non-GAAP measures are presented solely to allow investors to more fully assess our results of operations and should not be considered in isolation of, or as substitutes for an analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP.
Revenues for the year ended January 1, 2022 increased by 3.0% to $812.6 million from $789.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Excluding the impact of incremental revenues from changes in commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $14.8 million) and the acquisition of the Dream and WestSoy brands (an increase in revenues of $13.4 million), partially offset by the impact of the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (a decrease in revenues of $6.2 million), revenues increased by 0.2% in 2021, compared with 2020.
For the year ended January 1, 2022, Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment revenues increased by 13.4% to $470.8 million from $415.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The increase in plant-based product revenues reflected strong sales growth for our oat-based product offerings and teas, and incremental revenues from the acquisition of the Dream and WestSoy brands, together with increased foodservice demand for plant-based beverages due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions, and higher sales of birdfeed and raw sunflower kernels, partially offset by softer volumes for certain other non-dairy beverage varieties and everyday broths. In addition, as described above under "Impact of COVID-19," due to supply chain disruptions experienced in the second half of 2021, we were unable to meet some customer demand for our plant-based products, and transport shortages prevented certain customers from picking up their orders prior to year-end.
For the year ended January 1, 2022, Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment revenues decreased by 8.6% to $341.9 million from $374.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The decrease in fruit-based product revenues reflected lower volumes of retail frozen fruit due to the rationalization of marginally profitable customers and products, including custom fruit preparations for industrial use, and the impact of supply constraints for certain fruit varieties on blended frozen fruit offerings. These declines were partially offset by the effect of pass-through customer pricing actions taken during the second half of 2021 for frozen fruit, with the full benefit of these actions expected to be realized in 2022, together with volume growth for fruit snacks and increased foodservice demand for fruit-based ingredients.
Gross profit decreased $11.0 million, or 10.1%, to $98.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $109.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit for the year ended January 1, 2022 was 12.1% compared to 13.8% for the year ended January 2, 2021, a decrease of 170 basis points.
Gross profit for the Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment decreased $4.2 million to $76.3 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues decreased to 16.2% in 2021 from 19.4% in 2020. The 320-basis point decrease in the gross profit percentage reflected the impact of lower plant utilization and manufacturing inefficiencies in our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, due to reduced labor productivity and logistical challenges, together with increased manufacturing plant spend, including inflationary increases in transportation and utility rates, and wage incentives paid to retain employees, as well as increased depreciation expense related to new production equipment ($4.3 million or 0.9% gross margin impact). These factors were partially offset by the effects of higher sunflower pricing and improved margin performance in our sunflower and roasting operations, together with lower start-up costs related to capital expansion projects in our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations (2021 - $0.5 million or 0.1% gross margin impact; 2020 - $1.9 million or 0.4% gross margin impact). In response to the inflationary cost increases we absorbed in our gross margin in 2021, we are implementing certain pricing actions with customers in the first quarter of 2022.
SUNOPTA INC. 29 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Gross profit for the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment decreased $6.8 million to $21.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues decreased to 6.4% in 2021 from 7.6% in 2020. The 120-basis point decrease in the gross profit percentage reflected the impacts to our frozen fruit operations of higher strawberry commodity prices and a higher cost of fruit inventory from Mexico due to the impact of a strengthening Mexican peso (approximately $4.6 million or 1.0% gross margin impact), together with higher fruit inventory losses due to excess spoilage during handling, and increased transportation costs. In addition, we experienced higher raw material and transportation costs in our fruit snacks operations, together with start-up production costs for smoothie bowls ($0.2 million or 0.1% gross margin impact). These factors were partially offset by the effects of pass-through sales pricing actions in the second half of 2021 and portfolio rationalizations for frozen fruit, together with manufacturing cost structure savings and productivity improvements in our frozen fruit operations.
For the year ended January 1, 2022, we realized total segment operating income of $10.1 million, compared with $12.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The $2.2 million decrease in total segment operating income mainly reflected lower gross profit, as described above, together with a $2.8 million year-over-year unfavorable foreign exchange impact related to the remeasurement of our Mexican operations into U.S. dollars and lower gains on Mexican peso hedging activities, and $1.0 million of incremental amortization expense related to the acquired Dream and WestSoy brand name intangible assets, partially offset by a $12.6 million decrease in SG&A expenses. The SG&A savings primarily reflected lower incentive compensation, based on financial performance, together with reduced reserves for credit losses due to improving economic conditions within the foodservice sector and lower employee compensation costs related to headcount reductions in our frozen fruit operations, partially offset by $4.9 million of incremental costs related to business development activities, including the transition and integration of the recently acquired Dream and WestSoy brands and project costs related to our new plant-based beverage facility under construction in Texas.
Further details on revenue, gross profit and segment operating income/loss variances are provided below under "Segmented Operations Information."
Other expense of $8.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, mainly reflected asset impairment charges and other closure costs related to the exit from our fruit ingredient processing facility in July 2021, together with costs to complete the exit from our Santa Maria, California, frozen fruit processing facility in the first quarter of 2021. Other expense of $23.4 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, mainly reflected a loss on the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, together with employee termination and facility closure costs, and asset impairments, related to the exit from our Santa Maria facility.
Net interest expense decreased by $21.2 million to $8.8 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with $30.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which mainly reflected reduced cash interest payments as a result of a reduction in outstanding debt following the divestiture of Tradin Organic in December 2020, including the redemption in full of the $223.5 million outstanding principal amount of our 9.5% second lien notes. In 2020, we recorded a $8.9 million loss on the retirement of the second lien notes, including a premium paid of $5.3 million and write-off of the remaining $3.6 million of debt issuance costs.
We recognized an income tax benefit of $3.4 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with a benefit of $2.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Excluding the impact of non-deductible stock-based and executive compensation from pre-tax earnings, together with a change in the amount of valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets and benefits recognized in 2020 related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act, our effective tax rate was 26.9% in 2021, compared with 26.7% in 2020.
Loss from continuing operations for the year ended January 1, 2022 was $4.1 million, compared with a loss of $47.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Diluted loss per share from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders (after dividends and accretion on preferred stock) was $0.08 for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with a loss per share $0.65 for the year ended January 2, 2021.
Earnings from the discontinued operations of Tradin Organic were $124.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which included a pre-tax gain on sale of $111.8 million.
On a consolidated basis, we realized a loss attributable to common shareholders of $8.3 million (diluted loss per share of $0.08) for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with earnings attributable to common shareholders of $67.2 million (diluted earnings per share of $0.75) for the year ended January 2, 2021. The amounts attributable to common shareholders for 2021 and 2020 reflected dividends and accretion on preferred stock of $4.2 million and $10.3 million, respectively. The decline in preferred stock dividends and accretion reflected the exchange of all of the shares of Series A preferred stock for shares of our common stock in February 2021. Outstanding preferred stock during the remainder of 2021 consisted of our Series B-1 preferred stock.
SUNOPTA INC. 30 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
For the year ended January 1, 2022, adjusted earnings were $1.5 million, or $0.01 per diluted share, compared with an adjusted loss of $21.5 million, or $0.24 per diluted share for the year ended January 2, 2021. Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended January 1, 2022 was $60.7 million, compared with $58.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Adjusted earnings/loss and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See footnotes (2) and (3) to the table above for a reconciliation of adjusted earnings/loss and adjusted EBITDA from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
Segmented Operations Information
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $470.8 million in revenues for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $415.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, an increase of $55.6 million, or 13.4%. Excluding the impact on revenues of incremental revenues from the acquisition of the Dream and WestSoy brands (an increase in revenues of $13.4 million) and changes in sunflower commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $2.6 million), partially offset by the impact of the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (a decrease in revenues of $3.6 million), Plant-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 10.5%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $415,164
Growth in sales of oat-based product offerings and teas, together with increased foodservice demand for plant-based beverages due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions, partially offset by softer volumes for certain other non-dairy beverage varieties and everyday broths 33,752
Incremental Dream and WestSoy revenues 13,362
Higher sales of birdfeed and raw sunflower kernel, partially offset by lower volumes of ready-to-eat snacks and roasted ingredients 5,888
Increased commodity pricing for sunflower 2,588
Revenues for the year ended January 1, 2022 $470,754
Gross profit in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $4.2 million to $76.3 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, and the gross profit percentage decreased by 320 basis points to 16.2%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage reflected the impact of lower plant utilization and manufacturing inefficiencies in our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, due to reduced labor productivity and logistical challenges, together with increased manufacturing plant spend, including inflationary increases in transportation and utility rates, and wage incentives paid to retain employees, as well as increased depreciation expense related to new production equipment ($4.3 million or 0.9% gross margin impact). These factors were partially offset by the effects of higher sunflower pricing and improved margin performance in our sunflower and roasting operations, together with lower start-up costs related to capital expansion projects in our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations (2021 - $0.5 million or 0.1% gross margin impact; 2020 - $1.9 million or 0.4% gross margin impact). The table below explains the decrease in gross profit:
SUNOPTA INC. 31 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $80,497
Impact of lower plant utilization and manufacturing inefficiencies in our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, due to reduced labor productivity and logistical challenges, together with increased manufacturing plant spend, including inflationary increases in transportation and utility rates, and wage incentives paid to retain employees, as well as increased depreciation expense related to new production equipment, partially offset by higher sales volumes of plant-based beverages and ingredients, including the incremental contribution from the Dream and WestSoy brands, and lower start-up costs related to capital expansion projects (7,930)
Increased volumes and pricing for birdfeed and raw sunflower kernel, together with improved plant utilization and cost reductions within our sunflower and roasting operations 3,769
Gross profit for the year ended January 1, 2022 $76,336
Operating income in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $13.8 million to $37.0 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $50.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The table below explains the decrease in operating income:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Income Changes
Operating income for the year ended January 2, 2021 $50,780
Increase in corporate cost allocations, reflecting higher revenues and headcount within our plant-based operations, together with reallocation of management fees previously charged to Tradin Organic (5,170)
Incremental third-party costs related to the transition and integration of the acquired Dream and WestSoy brands and amortization of the related brand name intangible assets, together with higher employee compensation costs related to new product development and sales and marketing positions (4,468)
Decrease in gross profit, as explained above (4,161)
Operating income for the year ended January 1, 2022 $36,981
Looking forward, assuming current supply chain challenges and conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic do not significantly worsen, we anticipate gross margin improvement in our plant-based operations in 2022, compared with 2021, due to the anticipated benefit of pass-through customer pricing taking effect in the first quarter of 2022 to offset the price inflation experienced in second half of 2021. However, we expect to incur approximately $10 million of start-up costs in cost of goods sold related to our capital expansion projects in 2022, mainly related to the hiring and training of new plant managers and technical employees for our Midlothian, Texas, facility, and the ramp-up of commercial production on new equipment. Key projects for 2022 include the commercialization of added processing capacity at our Allentown, Pennsylvania, facility commencing in the first quarter of 2022, and the addition of a new high-speed filling line and processor upgrade at our Modesto, California, facility targeted for completion in the fourth quarter of 2022, together with the construction of our new beverage facility in Midlothian, Texas, currently on track for completion in 2022. The successful execution of our capital expansion plans is critical to our growth plans for 2022 and beyond. The statements in this paragraph are forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" above. Several factors could adversely impact our ability to meet these forward-looking expectations, including the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; our ability to pass through price increases to our customers; uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of supply chain disruptions and potential inflationary impacts; our ability to successfully execute on all of our capital expansion projects and the viability of those projects; and other factors described above under "Forward-Looking Statements."
SUNOPTA INC. 32 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $341.9 million in revenues for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $374.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, a decrease of $32.2 million, or 8.6%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in raw fruit commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $12.2 million), partially offset by the impact of the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (a decrease in revenues of $2.6 million), Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages revenues decreased approximately 11.3%. The table below explains the decrease in reported revenues:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $374,049
Lower retail volumes of frozen fruit due to the rationalization of marginally profitable customers and products, including custom fruit preparations for industrial use, and the impact of supply constraints for certain fruit varieties on blended frozen fruit offerings, partially offset by the effect of pass-through customer pricing actions taken in the second half of 2021 for frozen fruit, and increased foodservice demand for fruit-based ingredients (58,219)
Higher sales volumes of fruit snacks products, driven by returning consumer demand for portable snacks and new business development 13,795
Increased commodity pricing for raw fruit 12,245
Revenues for the year ended January 1, 2022 $341,870
Gross profit in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $6.8 million to $21.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, and the gross profit percentage decreased by 120 basis points to 6.4%. The decrease in the gross profit percentage reflected the impacts to our frozen fruit operations of higher strawberry commodity prices and a higher cost of fruit inventory from Mexico due to the impact of a strengthening Mexican peso (approximately $4.6 million or 1.0% gross margin impact), together with higher fruit inventory losses due to excess spoilage during handling, and increased transportation costs. In addition, we experienced higher raw material and transportation costs in our fruit snacks operations, together with start-up production costs for smoothie bowls ($0.2 million or 0.1% gross margin impact). These factors were partially offset by the effects of pass-through sales pricing actions in the second half of 2021 and portfolio rationalizations for frozen fruit, together with manufacturing cost structure savings and productivity improvements in our frozen fruit operations. The table below explains the decrease in gross profit:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $28,580
Lower sales volumes of retail frozen fruit, together with higher strawberry commodity prices, a higher cost of fruit inventory from Mexico due to the impact of a strengthening Mexican peso, inventory losses, and increased transportation costs, partially offset by the effects of pass-through customer pricing actions and portfolio rationalizations for frozen fruit and fruit ingredients, together with lower manufacturing costs and productivity improvements in our frozen fruit operations (8,452)
Sales volume growth for fruit snacks, partially offset by higher raw material and transportation costs, together with incremental start-up costs for smoothie bowls 1,621
Gross profit for the year ended January 1, 2022 $21,749
SUNOPTA INC. 33 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Operating loss in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $2.0 million to $9.3 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $7.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The table below explains the increase in operating loss:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(7,321)
Decrease in gross profit, as explained above (6,831)
Lower employee compensation costs following headcount reductions in August 2021 and lower reserve levels for credit losses due to improved economic conditions within the foodservice sector, partially offset by higher foreign exchange losses within our frozen fruit operations in Mexico 4,284
Decrease in corporate cost allocations, reflecting lower revenues and headcount within our fruit-based operations, partially offset by the reallocation of management fees previously charged to Tradin Organic 548
Operating loss for the year ended January 1, 2022 $(9,320)
Looking forward, assuming current supply chain challenges and conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic do not significantly worsen, we expect that pass-through customer pricing actions on frozen fruit and fruit snacks, together with the full-year benefit of the manufacturing network consolidation and workforce reduction actions taken in our frozen fruit operations in 2021, will result in gross margin improvement in our fruit-based operations in 2022, compared with 2021. In addition, we expect to produce and sell higher volumes of blended frozen fruit offerings in 2022, compared with 2021, due to the recent easing of supply constraints for certain fruit varieties. The statements in this paragraph are forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements" above. Several factors could adversely impact our ability to meet these forward-looking expectations, including the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of supply chain disruptions and potential inflationary impacts; the outcome of pricing actions with customers, including a potential softening of consumer demand due to higher prices; the extent of cost savings to be realized from our manufacturing network and workforce optimization initiatives; our expectation regarding the availability of fruit supply, and potential impacts on our revenues; and other factors described above under "Forward-Looking Statements."
Operating loss at Corporate Services decreased by $13.6 million to $17.5 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to a loss of $31.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The table below explains the decrease in operating loss:
Corporate Services Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(31,151)
Lower employee-related variable compensation related to our short-term incentive plan, based on financial performance, partially offset by higher business development costs, and reduced gains on Mexican peso hedging activities 5,547
Increase in corporate cost allocations to SunOpta operating segments, as a result of the reallocation of management fees previously charged to Tradin Organic 4,622
Lower variable stock-based compensation related to the equity component of our short-term incentive plan, based on financial performance 3,470
Operating loss for the year ended January 1, 2022 $(17,512)
Corporate cost allocations mainly consist of salaries of corporate personnel who directly support the operating segments, as well as costs related to the enterprise resource management system. These expenses are allocated to the operating segments based on (1) specific identification of allocable costs that represent a service provided to each segment and (2) a proportionate distribution of costs based on a weighting of factors such as revenue contribution and the number of people employed within each segment.
SUNOPTA INC. 34 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
(1) Reflects the operating results of our former soy and corn business prior to the sale of the business on February 22, 2019.
(2) The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss to "earnings/loss from continuing operations before the following," which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure (refer to footnote (1) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020" table regarding the use of this non-GAAP measure).
(3) The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted loss from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure (refer to footnote (2) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020" table regarding the use of this non-GAAP measure).
SUNOPTA INC. 35 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
(a) For 2020, reflects a loss on a foreign currency forward contract to economically hedge the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, which was recorded in other expense.
(b) For 2020, reflects professional fees of $1.0 million and employee retention costs of $0.6 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and long-lived asset impairment and facility closure costs of $6.4 million, mainly related to the exit from our Santa Maria, California, frozen fruit facility, together with employee termination costs of $2.8 million (offset by the reversal of $0.9 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), which were recorded in other expense. For 2019, reflects employee retention and relocation costs of $2.2 million, and professional fees of $1.4 million recorded in SG&A expenses; and employee termination costs of $8.4 million (offset by the reversal of $4.1 million of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees), CEO and CFO recruitment costs of $1.3 million, and facility closure costs of $0.3 million, which was recorded in other expense.
(c) For 2020, reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which was recorded in non-operating expenses.
(d) For 2020, reflects the write-down of owned and right-of-use assets related to the consolidation of roasting lines at our Crookston, Minnesota, facility, which was recorded in other expense.
(e) For 2020 and 2019, reflects start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
(f) For 2019, reflects a gain on sale of the soy and corn business, which was recorded in other income.
(g) For 2020, other includes a loss of $2.4 million from the settlement of a customer claim related to the recall of certain sunflower products in 2016, net of gains of $2.2 million from the settlement of unrelated matters, and reversal of previously accrued costs related to the withdrawal of certain consumer-packaged products, which was recorded in other income/expense. For 2019, other includes gains from the settlement of certain legal matters and a project cancellation, partially offset by losses on disposal of assets, which were recorded in other income/expense.
(h) Reflects the tax effect of the preceding adjustments to earnings calculated based on our estimated annual effective tax rate.
(4) The following table presents a reconciliation of segment operating income/loss and adjusted EBITDA from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
(a) For 2020, reflects the premium paid ($5.3 million) and write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs ($3.6 million) on the redemption and retirement of our second lien notes, which was recorded in non-operating expenses.
(b) For 2020 and 2019, consolidated stock-based compensation of $12.6 million and $10.5 million, respectively, was recorded in SG&A expenses, and the reversal of $0.9 million and $4.1 million, respectively, of previously recognized stock-based compensation related to forfeited awards previously granted to terminated employees was recognized in other income.
(c) For 2020, reflects professional fees of $1.0 million (2019 - $1.4 million) and employee retention costs of $0.6 million (2019 - $2.2 million) recorded in SG&A expenses.
(d) For 2020 and 2019, reflects start-up costs related to expansion projects within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, which were recorded in cost of goods sold.
SUNOPTA INC. 36 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
(5) Refer to footnote (4) to the "Consolidated Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020" table regarding the use of certain other non-GAAP measures in the discussion of results of operations below.
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 increased by 9.4% to $789.2 million from $721.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $12.4 million) and the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $6.2 million), partially offset by the sale of the soy and corn business (a decrease in revenues of $10.3 million), revenues increased by 8.1% in 2020, compared with 2019. The increase in revenues on an adjusted basis reflected the expansion of plant-based beverage and broth offerings for retail customers, growth in plant-based ingredient volumes, and increased retail volumes of frozen fruit, partially offset by lower volumes of plant-based beverage, frozen fruit and fruit ingredient products sold into the foodservice channel.
Gross profit increased $43.6 million, or 66.5%, to $109.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $65.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. As a percentage of revenues, gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 was 13.8% compared to 9.1% for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of 470 basis points.
Gross profit for the Plant-Based Foods and Beverages segment increased $21.7 million to $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 19.4% in 2020 from 16.3% in 2019. The 310-basis point increase in the gross profit percentage on an adjusted basis reflected higher sales and production volumes of plant-based beverages, broths and plant-based ingredients, and improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings, partially offset by higher start-up costs related to capital expansion projects (2020 - $1.9 million or 0.4% gross margin impact; 2019 - $0.3 million or 0.1% gross margin impact).
Gross profit for the Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages segment increased $22.1 million to $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 7.6% in 2020 from 1.9% in 2019. The increase in gross profit and 570-basis point increase in gross profit percentage reflected increased sales pricing and a favorable mix of higher-margin retail sales of frozen fruit, and lower processing costs and productivity improvements for frozen fruit, together with increased sales and production volumes, and plant utilization for fruit snacks.
For the year ended January 2, 2021, we realized total segment operating income of $12.3 million, compared with a total segment operating loss of $24.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The $36.4 million increase in total segment operating income reflected higher gross profit, as described above, together with a year-over-year favorable foreign exchange impact of $1.5 million, mainly related to gains on Mexican peso hedging activities, partially offset by an $8.9 million increase in SG&A expenses mainly due to higher incentive compensation, based on performance, and increased employee benefit costs, together with higher reserves for credit losses due to a weaker economic outlook, partially offset by the benefit from headcount reductions and other cost savings measures taken in 2019, together with lower travel costs due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Further details on revenue, gross profit and segment operating income/loss variances are provided below under "Segmented Operations Information."
Other expense of $23.4 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, mainly reflected a loss on the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic, together with employee termination and facility closure costs, and asset impairments related to the exit from our Santa Maria, California, frozen fruit processing facility. Other income of $40.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, mainly reflected a pre-tax gain on sale of the soy and corn business of $44.0 million, partially offset by employee termination and recruitment costs.
Net interest expense decreased by $2.8 million to $30.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with $32.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, which reflected lower average borrowings and weighted-average interest rates under our revolving credit facilities, together with interest income received on a tax refund in the first quarter of 2020.
In 2020, we recognized an $8.9 million loss on the retirement of our second lien notes, including a premium paid of $5.3 million and the write-off of the remaining $3.6 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
We recognized income tax benefit of $2.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with a benefit of $3.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Excluding the impact of non-deductible stock-based and executive compensation from pre-tax earnings, together with a change in the amount of valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets and benefits recognized in 2020 related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act, our effective tax rate was 26.7% in 2020, compared with 31.3% in 2019.
SUNOPTA INC. 37 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Loss from continuing operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $47.3 million, compared with a loss of $13.1 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Diluted loss per share from continuing operations attributable to common shareholders (after dividends and accretion on preferred stock) was $0.65 for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with a loss per share $0.24 for the year ended December 28, 2019.
Earnings from the discontinued operations of Tradin Organic were $124.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, inclusive of a pre-tax gain on sale of $111.8 million, compared with earnings of $12.3 million for the year ended December 28, 2019.
On a consolidated basis, we realized earnings attributable to common shareholders of $67.2 million (diluted earnings per share of $0.75) for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with loss attributable to common shareholders of $8.8 million (diluted loss per share of $0.10) for the year ended December 28, 2019.
For the year ended January 2, 2021, adjusted loss was $21.5 million, or $0.24 per diluted share, compared with an adjusted loss of $45.5 million, or $0.52 per diluted share, for the year ended December 28, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $58.7 million, compared with $19.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. Adjusted loss and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See footnotes (3) and (4) to the table above for a reconciliation of adjusted loss and adjusted EBITDA from loss from continuing operations, which we consider to be the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure.
Segmented Operations Information
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $415.2 million in revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $361.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of $53.8 million, or 14.9%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in sunflower commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $5.1 million) and the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $3.6 million), Plant-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 12.5%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $361,398
Higher retail sales volumes of plant-based beverages and everyday broth offerings, including output from additional aseptic processing capacity that came on-line in the third quarter of 2019, as well as increased sales of plant-based ingredients, partially offset by reduced sales volumes of plant-based beverage products to foodservice customers 51,222
Increased commodity pricing for sunflower 5,111
Lower volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel, and roasted ingredients, partially offset by higher volumes of birdfeed and roasted snacks (2,567)
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $415,164
Gross profit in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $21.7 million to $80.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $58.8 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and the gross profit percentage increased by 310 basis points to 19.4%. The increase in the gross profit percentage reflected strong production volumes, improved plant utilization and productivity-driven cost savings within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, and improved margin performance within our sunflower and roasting operations, partially offset by higher start-up costs related to capital expansion projects. The table below explains the increase in gross profit:
SUNOPTA INC. 38 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $58,812
Higher sales volumes, plant utilization and productivity improvements within our plant-based beverage and ingredient operations, partially offset by higher start-up costs related to capital expansion projects 20,646
Higher sales volumes of birdfeed and roasted snacks and improved plant utilization within our sunflower and roasting operations, partially offset by lower volumes of sunflower inshell and kernel, and roasted ingredients 1,039
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $80,497
Operating income in Plant-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $21.3 million to $50.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $29.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the increase in operating income:
Plant-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Income Changes
Operating income for the year ended December 28, 2019 $29,476
Increase in gross profit, as explained above 21,685
Lower employee compensation costs due to headcount reductions and reduced travel costs, partially offset by higher product development and sales and marketing spending, and higher incentive compensation, based on performance 302
Increase in corporate cost allocations (683)
Operating income for the year ended January 2, 2021 $50,780
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages contributed $374.0 million in revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $349.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase of $24.2 million, or 6.9%. Excluding the impact on revenues of changes in raw fruit commodity-related pricing (an increase in revenues of $9.0 million) and the impact of the 53rd week of sales in fiscal 2020 (an increase in revenues of $2.6 million), Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages revenues increased approximately 3.6%. The table below explains the increase in reported revenues:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Revenue Changes
Revenues for the year ended December 28, 2019 $349,852
Increased volumes of frozen fruit into the retail channel, partially offset by lower demand for frozen fruit and fruit preparations from foodservice customers, together with sales volume constraints due to a short supply of frozen strawberries from California, as a larger portion of the 2020 crop went to the fresh market to meet COVID-19-driven demand 10,002
Increased commodity pricing for raw fruit 9,040
Higher sales volumes of fruit snacks products 5,155
Revenues for the year ended January 2, 2021 $374,049
SUNOPTA INC. 39 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Gross profit in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages increased by $22.1 million to $28.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $6.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, and the gross profit percentage increased by 570 basis points to 7.6%. The increase in the gross profit percentage reflected increased sales pricing and a favorable mix of higher-margin retail sales of frozen fruit. In addition, automation and productivity initiatives in our frozen fruit manufacturing facilities generated higher yields and throughput, while allowing these facilities to operate at a lower cost and with fewer seasonal workers. The increase in the gross profit percentage also reflected strong fruit snack production volumes and plant utilization. These positive factors were partially offset by lower production volumes and plant utilization within our fruit ingredient operations. The table below explains the increase in gross profit:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Gross Profit Changes
Gross profit for the year ended December 28, 2019 $6,499
Higher sales volumes and pricing for frozen fruit, including a favorable mix of higher-margin retail versus foodservice sales, together with lower processing costs and productivity improvements for frozen fruit, partially offset by lower sales volumes and plant utilization for fruit ingredients 20,297
Sales volume growth for fruit snacks, together with increased production volumes and plant utilization 1,784
Gross profit for the year ended January 2, 2021 $28,580
Operating loss in Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages decreased by $19.6 million to $7.3 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to $26.9 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the decrease in operating loss:
Fruit-Based Foods and Beverages Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,873)
Increase in gross profit, as explained above 22,081
Decrease in corporate cost allocations 1,840
Impact of increased reserves for credit losses due to weaker economic conditions and increased employee compensation related to new management hires and higher incentive compensation, based on performance, together with higher sales and marketing support for new products and unfavorable foreign exchange impact on our frozen fruit operations in Mexico (4,369)
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(7,321)
Operating loss at Corporate Services increased by $4.7 million to $31.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared to a loss of $26.5 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. The table below explains the increase in operating loss:
SUNOPTA INC. 40 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Corporate Services Operating Loss Changes
Operating loss for the year ended December 28, 2019 $(26,471)
Increased stock-based compensation costs related to short-term and long-term incentive plans for certain employees (2,099)
Higher incentive compensation, based on performance, and increased employee benefit costs, together with higher professional fees, partially offset by the impact of headcount reductions and lower employee retention and travel costs, together with realized and unrealized mark-to-market gains on Mexican peso hedging activities (1,424)
Decrease in corporate cost allocations to SunOpta operating segments, as a result of lower corporate headcount and overhead costs (1,157)
Operating loss for the year ended January 2, 2021 $(31,151)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2020, we entered into a five-year credit agreement, as amended, for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in the maximum aggregate principal amount of $250 million, subject to borrowing base capacity. As at January 1, 2022, we had outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility of $153.3 million (January 2, 2021 - $47.3 million), including the FILO term loan discussed below, and available borrowing capacity of approximately $67 million (January 2, 2021 - $116 million). The $106.0 million increase in outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility during 2021, mainly reflected higher working capital levels, due to the replenishment of frozen fruit inventories following a shortfall in 2020 and higher commodity prices in 2021, together with financing for certain capital expansion projects, the acquisition of the Dream and WestSoy brands, and the settlement of accrued transaction costs incurred in connection with the divestiture of Tradin Organic.
On April 15, 2021, we financed a portion of the purchase price of the Dream and WestSoy brands with a $20 million FILO term loan. Amortization payments on the aggregate principal amount of the FILO term loan are equal to $2.5 million, payable at the end of each fiscal quarter, commencing with the first quarter of 2023, with the remaining amount payable at the maturity thereof on April 15, 2024.
The credit agreement also provides a five-year, $75 million delayed draw term loan, to be used for capital expenditures, which may be drawn upon up to March 31, 2023. As at January 1, 2022, we had $11.6 million drawn on the term loan facility to partially finance the purchase of equipment for our new plant-based beverage facility under construction in Midlothian, Texas. Commencing in March 2023, the term loan facility is repayable in monthly installments equal to 1/84th of the then-outstanding principal amount of the term loan facility, with the remaining amount payable at the maturity thereof on December 31, 2025.
The weighted-average interest rate on all outstanding borrowings under our asset-based credit facilities was 2.36% in 2021. For fiscal 2022, the estimated amount of interest payments we expect to make on borrowings under our asset-based credit facilities, together with commitment fees on the expected undrawn portion of these facilities, is approximately $6 million.
For more information on our asset-based credit facilities and other long-term debt, including maturity dates, see note 14 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
During 2021, we recognized additional finance lease liabilities of $29.9 million in the aggregate related to the addition of new plant-based beverage and ingredient extraction processing and packaging equipment. These leases have implicit interest rates of 8.08% to 8.85% and lease terms of five years.
For more information on our operating and finance lease obligations, including maturity dates, see note 10 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
On February 22, 2021, all shares of Series A preferred stock issued by our subsidiary, SunOpta Food Inc. ("SunOpta Foods") were exchanged by the holders for 12,633,427 shares of our common stock, representing 12.3% of our issued and outstanding common shares on a post-exchange basis. The exchange of the Series A preferred stock for common shares ended our obligation to pay the 8.0% per year dividend on the Series A preferred stock, representing approximately $7.1 million of annual dividend savings.
SUNOPTA INC. 41 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
On April 24, 2020, SunOpta Foods issued 30,000 shares of Series B-1 preferred stock for $30.0 million. The Series B-1 preferred stock currently has a liquidation preference of approximately $1,015 per share and is exchangeable into shares of our common stock at an exchange price of $2.50 per share. Cumulative preferred dividends accrue daily on the Series B-1 preferred stock at an annualized rate of 8.0% of the liquidation preference prior to September 30, 2029, which presently equates to quarterly dividend distributions of approximately $0.6 million, and 10.0% of the liquidation preference thereafter.
For more information on the Series A and Series B-1 preferred stock, see note 15 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
As at January 1, 2022, we had approximately $134 million of purchase commitments related to inventories to be used in our production processes over the next 12 months, which we intend to fund through operating cash flows, supplemented with seasonal borrowings under our revolving credit facility to finance crop inventory builds.
Our estimated capital expenditures for 2022 are approximately $110 million to $115 million, including approximately $85 million allocated for manufacturing equipment and build-out related to the Midlothian, Texas, facility, together with remaining expenditures related to our newly opened executive office and innovation center located in Eden Prairie, Minnesota, and other discretionary investments in growth and productivity projects in our plant-based and fruit snacks operations, as well as approximately $10 million of non-discretionary maintenance projects. We intend to fund our capital expenditure plans using our term loan facility (as described above) and committed lease financing, together with additional lease financing (as available), our revolving credit facility, and operating cash flows.
For information regarding our finance lease and plant acquisition commitments, see note 23 to the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.
We believe that our operating cash flows, together with our revolving and term loan credit facilities, and access to lease financing, will be adequate to meet our operating, investing, and financing needs for the foreseeable future including the 12-month period following the issuance of our financial statements. However, in order to finance significant investments in our existing businesses, or significant business acquisitions, if any, that may arise in the future, we may need additional sources of cash that we could attempt to obtain through a combination of additional bank or subordinated financing, a private or public offering of debt or equity securities, or the issuance of common stock. There can be no assurance that these types of financing would be available at all or, if so, on terms that are acceptable to us. In addition, we may explore the sale of selected operations or assets from time to time to improve our profitability, reduce our indebtedness, and/or improve our position to obtain additional financing.
Cash Flows
Summarized cash flow information for the years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019 is as follows:
Operating Activities of Continuing Operations
Cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was $21.4 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with cash provided of $52.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, an increase in cash used of $74.1 million, which mainly reflected increases in fruit purchases, due to a shortfall in frozen strawberry supply in 2020 related to COVID-19-driven demand for fresh fruit, together with the impacts of higher commodity prices and lower retail sales demand for frozen fruit in 2021. In addition, the increase in inventories reflects higher finished goods related to the acquired Dream and WestSoy brands and the build-up of plant-based raw materials and packaging to support growth. These factors were partially offset by our efforts to improve working capital efficiency through the extension of payment terms with certain suppliers.
SUNOPTA INC. 42 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $52.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with cash used of $17.0 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in cash provided of $69.7 million, which reflected improved operating results in 2020, compared with 2019, together with lower working capital levels in 2020, including reduced inventories of frozen strawberries due to the shortfall in supply.
Investing Activities of Continuing Operations
Additions to property, plant and equipment were $58.3 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, net of proceeds of $2.3 million from the disposal of assets from our exited fruit processing facilities, compared with additions of $24.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Capital expenditures in 2021 were mainly related to capacity expansion projects within our plant-based operations, together with expenditures related to the construction of our Midlothian, Texas, facility and our new executive office and innovation center. Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations in 2021 also included $25.1 million related to the acquired Dream and WestSoy brand name intangible assets.
Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations related to capital expenditures was $24.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which reflected spending on the plant-based beverage and ingredient expansion projects, together with the addition of new automation at our frozen fruit facilities, compared with capital expenditures of $28.4 million for the year ended December 28, 2019. In 2020, we paid $12.7 million to settle the foreign currency economic hedge of the cash consideration from the sale of Tradin Organic. Net proceeds from the sale of our soy and corn business were $63.3 million in 2019.
Financing Activities of Continuing Operations
Cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations was $116.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared with cash used of $386.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The year-over-year increase in cash provided of $502.7 million, mainly reflected increases in revolver and term loan borrowings under our asset-based credit facilities to finance inventory purchases, capital expenditures, and the acquisition of the Dream and WestSoy brands in 2021, compared to the use of the proceeds from the sale of Tradin Organic to repay approximately $355 million of indebtedness in 2020. In addition, revolver borrowings in 2021 were used to settle the Tradin Organic transaction costs and the payment of tax withholdings on certain vested stock-based awards.
Cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $386.6 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, compared with cash used of $18.6 million for the year ended December 28, 2019, an increase in cash used of $368.0 million, which reflected debt repayments following the sale of Tradin Organic, together with other reductions in revolver borrowings through cash generated from operations and use of the net proceeds of $26.8 million from the issuance of Series B-1 preferred stock in 2020.
Cash Flows from Discontinued Operations
Cash used in investing activities of discontinued operations of $13.4 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, was related to the settlement of accrued transaction costs related to the sale of Tradin Organic.
Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $369.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, mainly reflected the cash consideration received from the sale of Tradin Organic.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related revenues and expenses, and disclosure of gain and loss contingencies at the date of the financial statements. The estimates and assumptions made require us to exercise our judgment and are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We continually evaluate the information that forms the basis of our estimates and assumptions as our business and the business environment generally changes. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout our financial statements. The following are the accounting estimates which we believe to be most significant to our business.
SUNOPTA INC. 43 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Inventory
Inventory is our largest current asset and consists primarily of raw materials and finished goods held for sale. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and estimated net realizable value. In order to determine the value of inventory at the balance sheet date, we evaluate a number of factors to determine the adequacy of provisions for inventory, including the age of inventory, the amount of inventory held by type, expected future demand for our products, and the expected future selling price we expect to realize by selling the inventory. Our estimates are judgmental in nature and are made at a point in time, using available information, including expected business plans and market conditions. As a result, the actual amount received on sale could differ from our estimated value of inventory. Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K provides a summary of the movements in the inventory reserve.
Intangible Assets
We evaluate amortizable intangible assets acquired through business combinations for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of these assets may not be recoverable. Our evaluation is based on an assessment of potential indicators of impairment, such as an adverse change in the business climate that could affect the value of an asset, the loss of a significant customer, current or forecasted operating or cash flow losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of an asset, the introduction of a competing product that results in a significant loss of market share, and a current expectation that, more likely than not, an intangible asset will be disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life, such as a plan to exit a product line or business in the near term.
Impairment exists when the carrying amount of an amortizable intangible asset is not recoverable through undiscounted future cash flows and its carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value. A discounted cash flow analysis is typically used to determine fair value using estimates and assumptions that market participants would apply. Some of the estimates and assumptions inherent in a discounted cash flow model include the amount and timing of the projected future cash flows, and the discount rate used to reflect the risks inherent in the future cash flows. A change in any of these estimates and assumptions could produce a different fair value, which could have a material impact on our results of operations. In addition, an intangible asset's expected useful life can increase estimation risk, as longer-lived assets necessarily require longer-term cash flow forecasts, which for some of our long-lived assets can be up to 20 years. In connection with an impairment evaluation, we also reassess the remaining useful life of the intangible asset and modify it, as appropriate.
As at January 1, 2022, our frozen fruit operations included property, plant and equipment of $42.0 million and customer relationship intangible assets of $120.0 million. The intangible assets have a weighted-average remaining useful life of approximately 15 years. Our frozen fruit operations have incurred operating losses in each of the last three fiscal years, due to a number of factors including rising commodity prices and input costs that we were unable to fully pass through to our customers, together with an inability to meet certain customer demand due to crop shortfalls for certain fruit varieties. We consider this history of operating losses to be an indicator that the carrying amount of the long-lived assets of the frozen fruit operations may not be recoverable. Accordingly, each annual reporting period, we perform a quantitative assessment to determine the recoverability of the long-lived assets, based on the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the frozen fruit operations over the remaining useful life of the assets. We update our annual assessment each interim reporting period based on an analysis of business performance and other qualitative factors arising in each period. Our annual assessment as of January 1, 2022, indicated that the aggregate carrying value of the frozen fruit long-lived assets was recoverable. Our recoverability assessment requires that we estimate cash flows for an extended period of time, involving a high degree of judgment and subjectivity. We believe the assumptions we apply in our projections are reasonable in light of the historical performance of the frozen fruit operations and appropriately reflect our current plans and expectations for the business, including the expected benefits from pricing actions and cost savings measures that we have implemented to improve the gross margin performance of the business. However, a significant change in any of our assumptions, including expectations around sales volumes, customer attrition, and gross margins, could result in a determination that the long-lived assets are not recoverable, and a heightened risk that a material impairment exists.
Contingencies
We make estimates for payments that are contingent on the outcome of uncertain future events. These contingencies include accrued but unpaid bonuses, tax-related matters, and claims or litigation. In establishing our estimates, we consider historical experience with similar contingencies and the progress of each contingency, as well as the recommendations of internal and external advisors and legal counsel. We re-evaluate all contingencies as additional information becomes available; however, given the inherent uncertainties, the ultimate amount paid could differ from our estimates.
SUNOPTA INC. 44 January 1, 2022 Form 10-K
Income Taxes
We are liable for income taxes in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate and will vary from year to year primarily as a result of numerous permanent differences, investment and other tax credits, the provision for income taxes at different rates in foreign and other provincial jurisdictions, enacted statutory tax rate increases or reductions in the year, changes due to foreign exchange, changes in valuation allowance based on our recoverability assessments of deferred tax assets, and favorable or unfavorable resolution of various tax examinations.
In making an estimate of our income tax liability, we first assess which items of income and expense are taxable in a particular jurisdiction. This process involves a determination of the amount of taxes currently payable as well as the assessment of the effect of temporary timing differences resulting from different treatment of items for accounting and tax purposes. These differences in the timing of the recognition of income or the deductibility of expenses result in deferred income tax balances that are recorded as assets or liabilities as the case may be on our balance sheet. We also estimate the amount of valuation allowance to maintain relating to loss carry forwards and other balances that can be used to reduce future taxes payable. This judgment is based on forecasted results in the jurisdiction and certain tax planning strategies and as a result actual results may differ from forecasts. We assess the likelihood of the ultimate realization of these tax assets by looking at the relative size of the tax assets in relation to the profitability of the businesses and the jurisdiction to which they can be applied, the number of years based on management's estimate it will take to use the tax assets and any other special circumstances. If different judgments had been used, our income tax liability could have been different from the amount recorded. In addition, the taxing authorities of those jurisdictions upon audit may not agree with our assessment. Note 19 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K provides an analysis of the changes in the valuation allowance and the components of our deferred tax assets.
While we believe we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted by taxing authorities could differ from our accrued position. Accordingly, additional provisions on federal, provincial, state and foreign tax-related matters could be recorded in the future as revised estimates are made or the underlying matters are settled or otherwise resolved.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is provided in note 1 of the consolidated financial statements at Item 15 of this Form 10-K.