ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our historical performance and financial condition together with Part II, Item 6. “Selected Financial Data,” the description of the business appearing in Part I, Item 1. “Business,” and the consolidated financial statements and the related notes in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report.
This discussion may contain forward-looking statements that are based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements as a result of various risk factors, including those that may not be in the control of management. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We were formed to own and acquire Royalties in oil and natural gas properties in North America, substantially all of which are located in the Eagle Ford Shale. These Royalties entitle the holder to a portion of the production of oil and natural gas from the underlying acreage at the sales price received by the operator, net of any applicable post-production expenses and taxes. The holder of these interests has no obligation to fund exploration and development costs, lease operating expenses or plugging and abandonment costs at the end of a well’s productive life, which we believe results in low breakeven costs. As such, we have historically operated with high cash margins, converting a large percentage of revenue to free cash flow, the majority of which can be distributed to our stockholders.
Recent Developments
On January 11, 2022, Falcon, Merger Sub and Desert Peak entered into the Merger Agreement, pursuant to which, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions in the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub will merge with and into Desert Peak, with Desert Peak continuing as the surviving entity in the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of OpCo.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement and subject to the conditions therein, at the Merger Effective Time, the DPM Membership Units issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time will be converted into the right to receive an aggregate of (a) 235,000,000 shares of Class C common stock, (b) 235,000,000 OpCo Common Units and (c) additional shares of Falcon Class C common stock (and a corresponding number of OpCo Common Units) equal to (i) the sum of (x) the difference between $140,000,000 and the Sierra Net Debt plus (y) the amount by which the Indebtedness for borrowed money of Falcon and its subsidiaries exceeds $45,000,000 as of immediately prior to the Merger Effective Time divided by (ii) $5.15.
Completion of the Merger is subject to certain customary conditions, including, among others, the following: (a) the affirmative vote of the holders of at least (i) a majority of the votes cast at the Falcon Stockholder Meeting on the approval of the issuance of the Merger Consideration and (ii) a majority of the voting power of the outstanding capital stock of Falcon entitled to vote on the approval of the Falcon Reverse Stock Split; (b) there being no law or injunction prohibiting consummation of the Transactions; (c) approval for listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market of the Class A common stock issuable upon exchange of the Merger Consideration; (d) the expiration or termination of all applicable waiting periods (and any extensions thereof) under the HSR Act, applicable to the Transactions, and any commitment to, or agreement (including any timing agreement) with, any government entity to delay the consummation of, or not to close before a certain date, the Transactions; (e) the effectiveness of the Falcon Reverse Stock Split and the adoption of a reverse unit split of the OpCo Common Units prior to the Merger Effective Time, at a ratio of four to one; (f) subject to specified materiality standards, the accuracy of certain representations and warranties of each party; (g) compliance by each party in all material respects with its covenants included in the Merger Agreement; (h) each of the Registration Rights Agreement and the Director Designation Agreement being in full force and effect; and (i) the Available Liquidity is no less than $65,000,000 and the Sierra Net Debt is not in excess of $140,000,000.
Factors Impacting the Comparability of Our Financial Results
COVID-19 Pandemic. The outbreak of COVID-19 caused a continuing disruption to the oil and natural gas industry and to our business by, among other things, contributing to a significant decrease in global crude oil demand and the price for oil in 2020. This disruption has somewhat been alleviated in 2021. However, the current price environment remains uncertain as responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and newly emerging variants of the virus continue to evolve. Given the dynamic nature of these events, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the period of time that the COVID-19 pandemic and related market conditions will persist. The decline in commodity prices adversely affected the revenues we received for our mineral and royalty interests and could impact our ability to access capital markets on terms favorable to us. Market volatility has continued, and we expect it will continue for the foreseeable future. Additionally, many operators of our mineral and royalty interests announced reductions to their capital budgets for 2021 and beyond, which has and will adversely affect the near-term development pace of our properties. However, many operators have resumed or increased drilling and completion activities compared to activity levels in 2020 in connection with the increase in commodity prices in late 2020 and 2021. In connection with the market and commodity price challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, our acquisition activity saw a significant decline in 2020 as we experienced a meaningful difference in sellers’ pricing expectations and the
prices we were willing to offer for assets. We cannot predict the extent and potential duration of these and other impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, efforts to fight the pandemic and other market events.
Sources of Our Revenue
Our revenues were derived from royalty payments we received from our operators based on the sale of crude oil, natural gas, natural gas liquids that are extracted from natural gas during processing, and lease bonuses. As of December 31, 2021, our Royalties represented the right to receive an average of 1.25% from the producing wells on the underlying acreage at the sales price received by our operators net of any applicable post-production expenses and taxes. Our revenues may vary significantly from period to period as a result of changes in volumes of production sold or changes in commodity prices. Oil, NGLs and natural gas prices have historically been volatile therefore, from time to time, we have entered into derivative instruments to partially mitigate the impact of commodity price volatility on our cash generated from operations. Such instruments may include variable-to-fixed-price swaps, fixed price contracts, costless collars, and other contractual agreements. The impact of these derivative instruments could affect the amount of revenue we ultimately realize. We intend to continuously monitor the production from our assets and the commodity price environment, and will, from time to time, add additional hedges in the future. We do not enter into derivative instruments for speculative purposes. Our open commodity derivative contracts as of December 31, 2021 are detailed in “Note 4-Commodity Derivative Financial Instruments” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the West Texas Intermediate average monthly posted prices ranged from $52.10 to $81.22 per Bbl for crude oil and the average monthly Henry Hub settlement price of natural gas ranged from $2.47 to $6.20 per MMBtu for natural gas. During the year ended December 31, 2020, West Texas Intermediate average monthly posted prices ranged from $16.70 to $57.86 per Bbl for crude oil and the average monthly Henry Hub settlement price of natural gas ranged from $1.50 to $3.00 per MMBtu. During the year ended December 31, 2019, West Texas Intermediate average monthly posted prices ranged from $51.55 to $63.87 per Bbl for crude oil and the average monthly Henry Hub settlement price of natural gas ranged from $2.14 to $3.64 per MMBtu.
The following table presents the breakdown of our revenue for the following periods:
Commodity prices are inherently volatile, and changes in such prices have historically had an impact on our revenue. Lower prices may not only decrease our revenues, but also potentially the amount of oil and natural gas that our operators can produce economically. Lower oil and natural gas prices may also result in a reduction in the borrowing base under our credit agreement, which may be redetermined at the discretion of our lenders.
The following table sets forth the average realized prices for oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Principal Components of Our Cost Structure
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes
Production taxes are paid on produced oil and natural gas based on a percentage of revenues from products sold at fixed rates established by federal, state, and local taxing authorities. Where available, we have historically benefited from tax credits and exemptions in our various taxing jurisdictions. We also directly paid ad valorem taxes in the counties where our production was located. Ad valorem taxes were generally based on the state government’s appraisal of our oil and natural gas properties.
Marketing and Transportation
Marketing and transportation expenses include the costs to process and transport our production to applicable sales points. Generally, the terms of the lease governing the development of our properties permit the operator to pass through these expenses to us by deducting a pro rata portion of such expenses from our production revenues.
Amortization
Our Royalties are recorded at cost and capitalized as tangible assets. Acquisition costs related to proved properties are amortized on a units of production basis over the life of the proved reserves.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses are costs not directly associated with the production of oil, natural gas and NGLs and include the cost of executives and employees and related benefits (including stock-based compensation expenses), office expenses and fees for professional services. In addition, we incur incremental G&A expenses relating to expenses associated with SEC reporting requirements, including annual and quarterly reports to shareholders, tax return preparation and dividend expenses, Sarbanes-Oxley Act compliance expenses, expenses associated with listing our securities, independent auditor fees, legal expenses, and investor relations expenses.
Interest Expense
We finance a portion of our working capital requirements and acquisitions with borrowings under our credit facility. As a result, we incur interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. We reflect interest paid to the lenders under our credit facility in interest expense on our statement of operations. Please read “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness” for further details of our credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
Income taxes reflect the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently payable plus deferred income taxes related to certain income and expenses recognized in different periods for financial and income tax reporting purposes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax return consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when assets are recovered or settled. Deferred income taxes are also recognized for tax credits that are available to offset future income taxes. Deferred income taxes are measured by applying current tax rates to the differences between financial statement and income tax reporting. In assessing the realization of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. We consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, available taxes in carryback periods, projected future taxable income based on proved and risk adjusted unproved oil and gas reserves and forecasted commodity pricing, and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. We will continue to evaluate whether the valuation allowance is needed in future reporting periods. We are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions, and the calculation of our income tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex income tax laws and regulations in various taxing jurisdictions. We recognize certain income tax positions that meet a more-likely-than not recognition threshold. If we ultimately determine that the payment of these liabilities will be unnecessary, we will reverse the liability and recognize an income tax benefit during the period in which we determine the liability no longer applies.
Overview of Our Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our revenue and expenses and production data for the periods indicated (in thousands, except production data).
(1)
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. For additional information regarding our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA as well as a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA, please see “Overview of Our Results of Operations-Adjusted EBITDA” below.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2021 to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Oil and Gas Revenues
Oil and gas revenues increased $32.8 million, or 82%, to $72.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $40.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in oil and gas revenues was attributable to an 85% increase in realized oil prices and a 79% increase in realized natural gas prices partially offset by a 3% decrease in production. We received an average price of $66.39 per Bbl of oil and $3.59 per Mcf of gas sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $35.84 per Bbl of oil and $2.01 per Mcf of gas sold during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company also had an increase of $2.0 million in lease bonus revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to same period during 2020. In addition, the Company recognized a $3.6 million increase in its loss from our commodity derivative instruments as compared to our realized loss during 2020.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes
Production and ad valorem taxes increased $1.1 million, or 40%, to $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of oil and gas revenues, production and ad valorem taxes were 5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease, as a percentage of revenues, was partially due to the approximately 85% and 79% increase, respectively, in the average realized price of oil and natural gas as compared to 2020.
Marketing and Transportation Expense
Marketing and transportation expense decreased $0.2 million or 12%, to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenues, marketing and transportation expense was 2% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 5% for the prior year. The decrease in marketing and transportation expense as a percentage of revenues during 2021 was attributable to fixed transportation costs incurred under our leases that do not increase along with the realized price on the sale of oil and natural gas.
Amortization of Royalty Interests in Oil and Natural Gas Properties Expense
Amortization of royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties expense increased $1.1 million, or 8%, to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in amortization of royalty interests in oil and gas properties expense was primarily attributable to the impact of higher depletion rates which was partially offset by lower production. The higher depletion rates were primarily driven by decreases in estimated proved developed producing reserve quantities in the Eagle Ford as adjusted in our 2021 year-end reserve reports.
General, Administrative, and Other Expense
General, administrative, and other expense increased by $2.1 million, or 18%, to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general, administrative, and other expense was
attributable to an increase of $2.2 million of transaction expenses related to the Desert Peak Minerals transaction, an increase of $2.5 million of payroll expense and other expenses associated with the departure of the Company’s former CEO and $0.2 million attributable to the restatement of the Company’s financial statements included in its 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. This increase was partially offset by a $3.2 million decrease in stock based compensation expense associated with forfeitures.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of warrant liability decreased by $4.7 million, or 91% to a $0.5 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2021, from a $5.1 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in the fair value of the warrant liability was primarily attributable to the increase in the Company’s stock price and the decrease in the remaining term used as inputs in determining the fair value of the Private Placement Warrant liability.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.3 million, or 12%, to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was attributable to lower average outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility as well as lower average interest rates.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense increased to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income taxes was attributed to an increase in taxable income during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period during 2020 attributable to higher average realized prices during 2021.
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2020 to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Oil and Gas Revenues
Oil and gas revenues decreased $28.4 million, or 41%, to $40.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $68.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in oil and gas revenues was attributable to a decrease in oil and natural gas production in addition to a 40% decrease in realized oil and a 23% decrease in realized natural gas prices. We received an average price of $35.84 per Bbl of oil and $2.01 per Mcf of gas sold during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $59.85 per Bbl of oil and $2.62 per Mcf of gas sold during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company also had a decrease of $1.9 million in lease bonus revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, during 2020, we recognized a $1.2 million loss from our commodity derivative instruments. We did not enter into any commodity derivative instruments during 2019.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes
Production and ad valorem taxes decreased $1.5 million, or 34%, to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in production and ad valorem taxes was attributable to the decrease in production. As a percentage of oil and gas revenues, production and ad valorem taxes were 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 6% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase, as a percentage of revenues, was partially due to the approximately 40% and 23% decrease, respectively, in the average realized price of oil and natural gas as compared to 2019.
Marketing and Transportation Expense
Marketing and transportation expense decreased $0.4 million or 17%, to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of revenues, marketing and transportation expense was 5% during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 4% for the prior year. The increase in marketing and transportation expense as a percentage of revenues during 2020 was attributable to fixed transportation costs incurred under our leases that do not decrease along with the realized price on the sale of oil and natural gas.
Amortization of Royalty Interests in Oil and Natural Gas Properties Expense
Amortization of royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties expense increased $1.4 million, or 11%, to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in amortization of royalty interests in oil and gas properties expense was primarily attributable to the impact of higher depletion rates which was partially offset by lower production. The higher depletion rates were primarily driven by decreases in estimated proved developed producing reserve quantities in the Eagle Ford as adjusted in our 2020 year-end reserve reports.
General, Administrative, and Other Expense
General, administrative, and other expense increased by $0.1 million, or 1%, to $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general, administrative, and other expense was attributable to $0.8 million of expenses incurred as a part of the strategic review process which management had begun during the third
quarter of 2020 and an increase of $0.9 million in stock-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by cost cutting measures implemented by management during the first quarter of 2020 due to the effects of the pandemic.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of warrant liability decreased by $0.9 million, or 16% to $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the fair value of the warrant liability is attributable to the decrease in the Company’s stock price that was used in determining the fair value of the warrant liability.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.3 million, or 12%, to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest expense was attributable to lower average outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility as well as lower average interest rates.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense decreased to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income taxes was attributed to a decrease in taxable income during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period during 2019 attributable to lower production and lower average realized prices during 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful because it allows us to evaluate our performance and compare the results of our operations period to period without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. In addition, management uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate cash flow available to pay dividends to our common stockholders.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest expense, net, depletion expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation, unrealized gains and losses on commodity derivative instruments, non-cash gains and losses on revaluation of warrant liability, and non-cash equity-based compensation. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of net income as determined by GAAP. We exclude the items listed above from net income in arriving at Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts can vary substantially from company to company within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are components of Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income, royalty income, cash flow from operating activities or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA, our most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for the periods indicated (in thousands).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity have historically been cash flows from operations and equity and debt financings, and our primary uses of cash are for dividends and for the acquisition of additional Royalties. We intend to finance potential future acquisitions through a combination of cash on hand, borrowings under our Credit Facility and, subject to market conditions and other factors, proceeds from one or more capital market transactions, which may include debt or equity offerings. Our ability to generate cash is subject to a number
of factors, some of which are beyond our control, including commodity prices and general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other factors, including weather.
Our shareholders agreement does not require us to distribute any of the cash we generate from operations. Cash dividends are made to the common stockholders of record on the applicable record date, generally within 60 days after the end of each quarter. Available cash for each quarter’s dividend is determined by the Board of Directors following the end of such quarter. Available cash for each quarter generally equals Adjusted EBITDA reduced for cash needed for debt service, income tax requirements and other contractual obligations and fixed charges that the Board of Directors deems necessary or appropriate, if any.
The effects of the COVID-19 outbreak and recent oil price volatility could have significant adverse consequences for general economic, financial and business conditions, as well as for our business and financial position and the business and financial position of the operators of our mineral interests and may, among other things, impact our ability to generate cash flows from operations, access the capital markets on acceptable terms or at all, and affect our future need or ability to borrow under our Credit Facility. In addition to our potential sources of funding, the effects of such global events may impact our liquidity or need to alter our allocation or sources of capital, implement further cost reduction measures, and change our financial strategy. Although the COVID-19 outbreak and recent oil price volatility could have a broad range of effects on our sources and uses of liquidity, the ultimate effect thereon, if any, will depend on future developments, which cannot be predicted at this time.
The following table presents cash distributions approved by the Board of Directors of our general partner for the periods presented.
Indebtedness
Falcon Credit Facility
On the Closing Date, OpCo entered into a credit facility with Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent and collateral agent for the lenders from time-to-time party thereto (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility provides for a maximum credit amount of $500.0 million and a borrowing base based on our oil and natural gas reserves and other factors of $70.0 million, subject to scheduled semi-annual and other borrowing base redeterminations and matures on the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date. As of December 31, 2021, OpCo had borrowings of $40.0 million under the Credit Facility at an interest rate of 2.60% and $30.0 million available for future borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Principal amounts borrowed are payable on the maturity date. OpCo has a choice of borrowing at the base rate or LIBOR, with such borrowings bearing interest, payable quarterly in arrears for base rate loans and one month, two-month, three month or six-month periods for LIBOR loans. LIBOR loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the rate appearing on the Reuters Reference LIBOR01 or LIBOR02 page as the LIBOR, for deposits in dollars at 12:00 noon (London, England time) for one, two, three, or six months plus an applicable margin ranging from 200 to 300 basis points. Base rate loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the greatest of (i) the agent bank’s reference rate, (ii) the federal funds effective rate plus 50 basis points and (iii) the rate for one-month LIBOR loans plus 1%, plus an applicable margin ranging from 100 to 200 basis points. The scheduled redeterminations of OpCo’s borrowing base take place on April 1st and October 1st of each year.
Obligations under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by OpCo and each of our existing and future, direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries (the “Credit Parties”) and are secured by all of the present and future assets of the Credit Parties, subject to customary carve-outs.
The Credit Facility contains certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative covenants, negative covenants, and events of default. As of December 31, 2021, OpCo was in compliance with such covenants. The negative covenants include restrictions
on the Company’s ability to incur additional indebtedness, acquire and sell assets, create liens, enter into certain lease agreements, make investments, and make distributions.
Cash Flows
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
A summary of the changes in cash flow data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are set forth in the following table (in thousands, except percentages):
Cash Flow from Operating Activities. Our operating cash flow has historically been sensitive to many variables, the most significant of which is the volatility of prices for the oil and natural gas for which we receive royalty revenue. Prices for these commodities are determined primarily by prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather and other substantially variable factors influence market conditions for these products. These factors are beyond our control and are difficult to predict.
The increase in cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to an 85% increase in realized oil prices, and a 79% increase in natural gas realized prices partially offset by a 9% decrease in oil production period over period. In addition, the Company experienced a decrease in working capital primarily driven by the timing of collection of accounts receivables and the timing of payments of accounts payable and accrued expenses as well as additional accrued severance expenses.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities. Investing activities are primarily related to the acquisition and disposition of oil and natural gas interests. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.3 million and was related to the acquisition of certain royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.4 million and the majority of which was related to the acquisition of certain royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $41.7 million, primarily related to dividends and distributions totaling $41.6 million and a net increase in borrowings under our Credit Facility of $0.2 million. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $24.8 million, primarily related to dividends and distributions totaling $21.9 million and a net decrease in borrowings under our Credit Facility of $2.7 million. Repayment of the borrowings under our Credit Facility was paid from cash flow generated by our operations during the period.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
A summary of the changes in cash flow data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are set forth in the following table (in thousands, except percentages):
Cash Flow from Operating Activities. Our operating cash flow has historically been sensitive to many variables, the most significant of which is the volatility of prices for the oil and natural gas for which we receive royalty revenue. Prices for these commodities are determined primarily by prevailing market conditions. Regional and worldwide economic activity, weather and other substantially variable factors influence market conditions for these products. These factors are beyond our control and are difficult to predict.
The decrease in cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to a 5% decrease in oil production, a 2% decrease in natural gas production coupled with a 40% decrease in realized oil prices and a 23% decrease in realized natural gas prices period over period. In addition, the Company experienced a decrease in working capital primarily driven by the timing of collection of accounts receivables and the timing of payments of accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities. Investing activities are primarily related to the acquisition and disposition of oil and natural gas interests. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.4 million and the majority was related to
the acquisition of certain royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $23.4 million and the majority was related to the acquisition of certain royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $24.8 million, primarily related to dividends and distributions totaling $21.9 million and a net decrease in borrowings under our Credit Facility of $2.7 million. The repayment of borrowings under our Credit Facility was paid from cash flow generated by our operations during the period. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $36.7 million, primarily related to dividends and distributions totaling $58.0 million partially offset by a net increase in borrowings under our Credit Facility of $21.5 million. The borrowings under our Credit Facility were primarily used to fund the acquisition of certain royalty interests in oil and gas properties during the period.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations that are required to be settled in cash. Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 were as follows (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements that will affect us, see “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The more significant areas requiring the use of management estimates and assumptions relate to amortization calculations, and estimates of fair value for long-lived assets, and reserves for contingencies and litigation. Management based its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that were believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Royalty Interests in Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Royalty interests include acquired interests in production, development, and exploration stage properties. We follow the successful efforts method of accounting. Under this method, costs to acquire mineral and royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties are capitalized when incurred.
Acquisition costs of proven royalty interests are amortized using the units of production method over the life of the property, which is estimated using proven reserves. Acquisition costs of royalty interests on exploration stage properties, where there are no proven reserves, are not amortized. At such time as the associated unproved interests are converted to proven reserves, the cost basis is amortized using the units of production methodology over the life of the property, using proven reserves. For purposes of amortization, interests in oil and natural gas properties are grouped in a reasonable aggregation of properties with common geological structural features or stratigraphic condition.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserve Quantities
Our independent engineers and technical staff prepare our estimates of oil and natural gas reserves and associated future net cash flows. The SEC has defined proved reserves as the estimated quantities of oil and natural gas that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. The process of estimating oil and natural gas reserves is complex, requiring significant decisions in the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering, and economic data. The data for a given property may also change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and a continual reassessment of the viability of production under changing economic conditions. As a result, material revisions to existing reserve estimates occur from time
to time. Although every reasonable effort is made to ensure that reserve estimates reported represent the most accurate assessments possible, the subjective decisions and variances in available data for various properties increase the likelihood of significant changes in these estimates. If such changes are material, they could significantly affect future amortization of capitalized costs and result in impairment of assets that may be material.
There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of proved oil and natural gas reserves. Oil and natural gas reserve engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot be precisely measured and the accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. Results of drilling, testing and production subsequent to the date of the estimate may justify revision of such estimate. Accordingly, reserve estimates are often different from the quantities of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered.
Impairment of Royalty Interests in Oil and Natural Gas Properties
We review and evaluate our royalty interests in oil and natural gas properties for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we estimate the undiscounted future cash flows expected in connection with the properties and compare such future cash flows to the carrying amounts of the properties to determine if the carrying amounts are recoverable. If the carrying value of the properties is determined to not be recoverable based on the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by comparing the carrying value to the estimated fair value of the properties. The factors used to determine fair value include, but are not limited to, estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves, future commodity prices, the timing of future production and a discount rate commensurate with the risk reflective of the lives remaining for the respective oil and gas properties. No such impairment expense was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Commodity Derivative Financial Instruments
Our ongoing operations expose us to changes in the market price for oil and natural gas. To mitigate the price risk associated with our operations, we, use commodity derivative financial instruments. From time to time, such instruments may include variable-to-fixed price swaps, costless collars, fixed-price contracts, and other contractual arrangements. We do not enter into derivative instruments for speculative purposes. The impact of these derivative instruments could affect the amount of revenue we ultimately record.
Derivative instruments are recognized at fair value. If a right of offset exists under master netting arrangements and certain other criteria are met, derivative assets and liabilities with the same counterparty are netted on the consolidated balance sheets. Gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of derivatives are recognized on a net basis in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations within gain (loss) on commodity derivative instruments. Although these derivative instruments may expose us to credit risk, we mitigate that risk by monitoring the creditworthiness of our counterparties.
Warrant Liability
We account for the Warrants issued in connection with our IPO and private placement in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants was estimated utilizing a binomial lattice model.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues from our Royalties represent the right to receive revenues from oil, natural gas and NGL sales obtained by the operator of the wells in which the Company owns a royalty interest. Royalty income is recognized at the point control of the product is transferred to the purchaser. Virtually all of the pricing provisions in the Company’s contracts are tied to a market index. Royalty interest and revenue recognition related accounting policies are defined and described more fully in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.