Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, the “Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” Item 1A entitled “Risk Factors,” and the other information appearing elsewhere, or incorporated by reference, in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Background
Strategic Education, Inc. (“SEI,” “we”, “us” or “our”) is an education services company that provides access to high-quality education through campus-based and online post-secondary education offerings, as well as through programs to develop job-ready skills for high-demand markets. We operate primarily through our wholly-owned subsidiaries Strayer University and Capella University, both accredited post-secondary institutions of higher education located in the United States, as well as Torrens University, an accredited post-secondary institution of higher education located in Australia. Our operations emphasize relationships through our Education Technology Services segment (formerly called the Alternative Learning segment) with employers to build employee education benefits programs that provide employees with access to affordable and industry relevant training, certificate, and degree programs.
Company Response to COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant volatility and disruption to the United States and international economies. SEI took early action to protect the health and well-being of our students and employees in accordance with government mandates and informed by guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Specifically, we instituted a work-from-home policy for the vast majority of our workforce, closed physical campus locations, moved our on-ground courses at Strayer University online, postponed large events such as graduation ceremonies, and prohibited non-essential employee travel. As guidance has evolved, we have begun to reopen campus and office locations and permit business travel, after instituting a mandatory vaccination policy for all employees who may be required to be on-site at a Company facility or at a Company-sponsored event, subject to medical and religious accommodations (any employee receiving an accommodation is required to test at least weekly before being on-site).
We have taken measures to provide financial relief to our students and employer partners negatively affected by the COVID-19 crisis, including payment flexibility, scholarship opportunities, and other pricing relief. We expect that these measures will enable more students to continue pursuing their education during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. In the third quarter of 2020, we began implementing a restructuring plan that included both voluntary and involuntary employee terminations in an effort to reduce ongoing operating costs to align with changes in enrollment. These headcount reductions resulted in an approximately 5% decrease to SEI's total workforce. During 2021, our restructuring efforts included the consolidation of underutilized facilities in response to changes in enrollment trends and as a result of our work-from-home policies.
As the pandemic has continued, we have seen sustained weakness in demand, especially in the United States, where total average enrollment in our U.S. Higher Education (“USHE”) segment decreased 11.0% in 2021 compared to 2020. Enrollment in ANZ also has been impacted by the pandemic and the related closure of international borders in Australia and New Zealand.
We believe our current financial position and expected operating results, and ability to further control costs are sufficient to support the ongoing operation of SEI in a manner that protects the health and well-being of our employees, students, and partners.
Acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand
On November 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand (“ANZ”), pursuant to the sale and purchase agreement dated July 29, 2020. ANZ includes Torrens University Australia, Think Education, and Media Design School, which together provide diversified student curricula to approximately 19,000 students across five industry verticals, including business, hospitality, health, education, creative technology and design. We believe ANZ represents an attractive portfolio of institutions with a similar focus on innovation, academic outcomes, improved affordability and career advancement as us. We also believe that ANZ provides an attractive platform for future growth, driven by Australia’s status as an attractive destination for international students.
Pursuant to the purchase agreement, the aggregate consideration paid was approximately $658.4 million in cash, which reflected the original agreed upon purchase price of $642.7 million, plus a $15.7 million adjustment reflecting $11.0 million of net cash at close, and $4.7 million related to higher net working capital. The aggregate consideration paid in the transaction was funded using cash on hand and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Our financial results for any periods ended prior to November 3, 2020 do not include the financial results of ANZ and are therefore not directly comparable.
Company Overview
In the first quarter of 2021, we changed the way management reports financial information relied on by the Chief Operating Decision Maker to evaluate performance and allocate the resources of the Company. Our revised organizational structure includes the following three operating and reportable segments: (1) USHE, which is primarily comprised of SEI's previous Strayer University and Capella University segments and is focused on providing flexible and affordable certificate and degree programs to working adults; (2) Education Technology Services, a new segment that is primarily focused on developing and maintaining relationships with employers to build employee education benefits programs; and (3) Australia/New Zealand, which provides certificate and degree programs in Australia and New Zealand. During the first three quarters of 2021, the Education Technology Services segment was called the Alternative Learning segment. The Australia/New Zealand segment was not changed as a result of the reorganization. We began reporting under the new segment structure in 2021, and we have restated the results for the prior periods to conform to the current period presentation.
U.S. Higher Education Segment
•The USHE segment provides flexible and affordable certificate and degree programs to working adults primarily through Strayer University and Capella University, including the Jack Welch Management Institute MBA, which is a unit of Strayer University. USHE also operates non-degree web and mobile application development courses through Hackbright Academy and Devmountain, which are units of Strayer University.
•Strayer University is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education and Capella University is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission, both higher education institutional accrediting agencies recognized by the Department of Education. The USHE segment provides academic offerings both online and in physical classrooms, helping working adult students develop specific competencies they can apply in their workplace.
•In 2021, USHE average total enrollment decreased 11.0% to 82,425 students compared to 92,637 students in 2020.
•Trailing 4-quarter student persistence within USHE was 86.9% in the third quarter of 2021 compared to 86.8% for the same period in 2020. Student persistence is calculated as the rate of students continuing from one quarter to the next, adjusted for graduates, on a trailing 4-quarter basis. Student persistence is reported one quarter in arrears. The table below summarizes USHE trailing 4-quarter student persistence for the past 8 quarters.
Education Technology Services Segment
•Our Education Technology Services segment is primarily focused on developing and maintaining relationships with employers to build employee education benefits programs that provide employees with access to affordable and industry relevant training, certificate, and degree programs. The employer relationships developed by the Education Technology Services division are an important source of student enrollment for Strayer University and Capella University, and the majority of the revenue attributed to the Education Technology Services division is driven by the volume of enrollment derived from these employer relationships. Enrollments attributed to the Education Technology Services segment are determined based on a student’s employment status and the existence of a corporate partnership arrangement with SEI. All enrollments attributed to the Education Technology Services division continue to be attributed to the division until the student graduates or withdraws, even if his or her employment status changes or if the partnership contract expires.
•In 2021, employer affiliated enrollment as a percentage of USHE enrollment was 21.0% compared to 17.8% in 2020.
•Education Technology Services also supports employer partners through Workforce Edge, a platform which provides employers a full-service education benefits administration solution, and Sophia Learning, which enables lower cost education benefits programs through the use of low-cost online general education courses recommended by the American Council on Education for credit at other colleges and universities.
Australia/New Zealand Segment
•Torrens University is the only investor-funded university in Australia. Torrens University offers undergraduate, graduate, higher degree by research, and specialized degree courses primarily in five fields of study: business, design and creative technology, health, hospitality, and education. Courses are offered both online and at physical campuses. Torrens University is registered with the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (“TEQSA”), the regulator for higher education providers and universities throughout Australia, as an Australian University that is authorized to self-accredit its courses.
•Think Education is a vocational registered training organization and accredited higher education provider in Australia. Think Education delivers education at several campuses in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, and Adelaide as well as through online study. Think Education and its colleges are accredited in Australia by the TEQSA and the Australian Skills Quality Authority, the regulator for vocational education and training organizations that operate in Australia.
•Media Design School is a private tertiary institution for creative and technology qualifications in New Zealand. Media Design School offers industry-endorsed courses in 3D animation and visual effects, game art, game programming, graphic and motion design, digital media artificial intelligence, and creative advertising. Media Design School is accredited in New Zealand by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority, the organization responsible for the quality assurance of non-university tertiary training providers.
•In 2021, Australia/New Zealand enrollment increased 1.5% to 19,350 compared to 19,069 for the same period in 2020.
We believe we have the right operating strategies in place to provide the most direct path between learning and employment for our students. We are constantly innovating to differentiate ourselves in our markets and drive growth by supporting student success, producing affordable degrees, optimizing our comprehensive marketing strategy, serving a broader set of our students’ professional needs, and establishing new growth platforms. The talent of our faculty and employees, supported by market leading technology, enable these strategies. We believe our strategy will allow us to continue to deliver high quality, affordable education, resulting in continued growth over the long-term. We will continue to invest in this strategy to strengthen the foundation and future of our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
“Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” discusses our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments related to its allowance for credit losses; income tax provisions; the useful lives of property and equipment and intangible assets; redemption rates for scholarship programs and valuation of contract liabilities; fair value of right-of-use lease assets for facilities that have been vacated; incremental borrowing rates; valuation of deferred tax assets, goodwill, and intangible assets; forfeiture rates and achievability of performance targets for stock-based compensation plans; and accrued expenses. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors and assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments regarding the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management regularly reviews its estimates and judgments for reasonableness and may modify them in the future. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes that the following critical accounting policies are its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition - Like many traditional institutions, Strayer University and Capella University offer educational programs primarily on a quarter system having four academic terms, which generally coincide with our quarterly financial reporting periods. Torrens University offers the majority of its education programs on a trimester system having three primary academic terms, which all occur within the calendar year. Approximately 96% of our revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of tuition revenue. Capella University offers monthly start options for new students, who then transition to a quarterly schedule. Capella University also offers its FlexPath program, which allows students to determine their 12-week billing session schedule after they complete their first course. Tuition revenue for all students is recognized ratably over the course of instruction as the universities provide academic services, whether delivered in person at a physical campus or online. Tuition revenue is shown net of any refunds, withdrawals, corporate discounts, scholarships, and employee tuition
discounts. The universities also derive revenue from other sources such as textbook-related income, certificate revenue, certain academic fees, licensing revenue, accommodation revenue, food and beverage fees, and other income, which are all recognized when earned. In accordance with ASC 606, materials provided to students in connection with their enrollment in a course are recognized as revenue when control of those materials transfers to the student. At the start of each academic term or program, a contract liability is recorded for academic services to be provided, and a tuition receivable is recorded for the portion of the tuition not paid in advance. Any cash received prior to the start of an academic term or program is recorded as a contract liability.
Students at Strayer University and Capella University finance their education in a variety of ways, and historically about 75% of our students have participated in one or more financial aid program provided through Title IV of the Higher Education Act. In addition, many of our working adult students finance their own education or receive full or partial tuition reimbursement from their employers. Those students who are veterans or active duty military personnel have access to various additional government-funded educational benefit programs.
In Australia, domestic students attending an ANZ institution finance their education themselves or by taking a loan through the government’s Higher Education Loan Program or Vocational Student Loan Program. In New Zealand, domestic students may utilize government loans to fund tuition, and in addition may be eligible for a period of “fees free” study funded by the government. International students attending an ANZ institution are not eligible for funding from the Australian or New Zealand government.
A typical class is offered in weekly increments over a six- to twelve-week period, depending on the university and course type, and is followed by an exam. Student attendance is based on physical presence in class for on-ground classes. For online classes, attendance consists of logging into one’s course shell and performing an academically-related activity (e.g., engaging in a discussion post or taking a quiz).
If a student withdraws from a course prior to completion, a portion of the tuition may be refundable depending on when the withdrawal occurs. We use the student’s withdrawal date or last date of attendance for this purpose. Our specific refund policies vary across the universities and non-degree programs. For students attending Strayer University, our refund policy typically permits students who complete less than half of a course to receive a partial refund of tuition for that course. For students attending Capella University, our refund policy varies based on course format. GuidedPath students are allowed a 100% refund through the first five days of the course, a 75% refund from six to twelve days, and 0% refund for the remainder of the period. FlexPath students receive a 100% refund through the 12th calendar day of the course for their first billing session only and a 0% refund after that date and for all subsequent billing sessions. For domestic students attending an ANZ institution, refunds are typically provided to students that withdraw within the first 20% of a course term. For international students attending an ANZ institution, refunds are provided to students that withdraw prior to the course commencement date. In limited circumstances refunds to student attending an ANZ institution may be granted after these cut-offs subject to an application for special consideration by the student and approval of that application by the institution. Refunds reduce the tuition revenue that otherwise would have been recognized for that student. Since the academic terms coincide with our financial reporting periods for most programs, nearly all refunds are processed and recorded in the same quarter as the corresponding revenue. For certain programs where courses may overlap a quarter-end date, we estimate a refund or withdrawal rate and do not recognize the related revenue until the uncertainty related to the refund is resolved. The portion of tuition revenue refundable to students may vary based on the student’s state of residence.
For students who withdraw from all their courses during the period of instruction, we reassess collectibility of tuition and fees for revenue recognition purposes. In addition, we cease revenue recognition when a student fully withdraws from all of his or her courses in the academic term. Tuition charges billed in accordance with our billing schedule may be greater than the pro rata revenue amount, but the additional amounts are not recognized as revenue unless they are collected in cash and the term is complete.
For U.S. students who receive funding under Title IV and withdraw, funds are subject to return provisions as defined by the Department of Education. The university is responsible for returning Title IV funds to the Department and then may seek payment from the withdrawn student of prorated tuition or other amounts charged to him or her. Loss of financial aid eligibility during an academic term is rare and would normally coincide with the student’s withdrawal from the institution. When a student withdraws from all of his or her courses, we consider it to be a contract modification and reassess collectibility at that time. As a result of this reassessment, we cease revenue recognition until tuition charges are collected in cash, as our historical experience has shown that amounts outstanding for this group of students are not collectible. In Australia and New Zealand, government funding for eligible students is provided directly to the institution on an estimated basis annually. The amount of government funding provided is based on a course-by-course forecast of enrollments that the institution submits for the upcoming calendar year. Using the enrollment forecast provided as well as the requesting institution's historical enrollment trends, the government approves a fixed amount, which is then funded to the institution evenly on a monthly basis. Periodic
reconciliation and true-ups are undertaken between the relevant government authority and the institution based on actual eligible enrollments, which may result in a net amount being due to or from the government.
Students at Strayer University registering in credit-bearing courses in any undergraduate program beginning in the summer 2013 term or graduate program beginning in the summer 2020 term (fiscal third quarter), and subsequent terms qualify for the Graduation Fund, whereby qualifying students earn tuition credits that are redeemable in the final year of a student’s course of study if he or she successfully remains in the program. Students must meet all of Strayer University’s admission requirements and not be eligible for any previously offered scholarship program. Our employees and their dependents are not eligible for the program. To maintain eligibility, students must be enrolled in a bachelor’s or master's degree program. Students who have more than one consecutive term of non-attendance lose any Graduation Fund credits earned to date, but may earn and accumulate new credits if the student is reinstated or readmitted by Strayer University in the future. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Strayer University temporarily allowed students to miss three consecutive terms without losing their Graduation Fund credits. In their final academic year, qualifying students will receive one free course for every three courses that the student successfully completed in prior years. Strayer University's performance obligation associated with free courses that may be redeemed in the future is valued based on a systematic and rational allocation of the cost of honoring the benefit earned to each of the underlying revenue transactions that result in progress by the student toward earning the benefit. The estimated value of awards under the Graduation Fund that will be recognized in the future is based on historical experience of students’ persistence in completing their course of study and earning a degree and the tuition rate in effect at the time it was associated with the transaction. Estimated redemption rates of eligible students vary based on their term of enrollment. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred $52.0 million for estimated redemptions earned under the Graduation Fund, as compared to $53.3 million at December 31, 2020. Each quarter, we assess our assumptions underlying our estimates for persistence and estimated redemptions based on actual experience. To date, any adjustments to our estimates have not been material. However, if actual persistence or redemption rates change, adjustments to the reserve may be necessary and could be material.
Tuition receivable - We record estimates for our allowance for credit losses related to tuition receivable from students primarily based on our historical collection rates by age of receivable and adjusted for reasonable expectations of future collection performance, net of recoveries. Our experience is that payment of outstanding balances is influenced by whether the student returns to the institution, as we require students to make payment arrangements for their outstanding balances prior to enrollment. Therefore, we monitor outstanding tuition receivable balances through subsequent terms, increasing the reserve on such balances over time as the likelihood of returning to the institution diminishes and our historical experience indicates collection is less likely. We periodically assess our methodologies for estimating credit losses in consideration of actual experience. If the financial condition of our students were to deteriorate based on current or expected future events resulting in evidence of impairment of their ability to make required payments for tuition payable to us, additional allowances or write-offs may be required. During 2021 and 2020, our bad debt expense was 3.8% and 4.8% of revenue, respectively. A change in our allowance for credit losses of 1% of gross tuition receivable as of December 31, 2021 would have changed our income from operations by approximately $1.0 million.
Business combinations - We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, the purchase price be allocated to all tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires many estimates and assumption with respect to the timing and amounts of cash flow projections, revenue growth rates, earnings before interest and taxes margins, student attrition rates, royalty rates, discount rates, and useful lives. These estimates are based on assumptions believed to be reasonable, and when appropriate, include assistance from independent third-party valuation firms. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with corresponding offsets to goodwill. We applied the acquisition method of accounting to our acquisition of ANZ in 2020. Refer to Note 3, Business Combinations, within the footnotes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Goodwill and intangible assets - Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the amount assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Indefinite-lived intangible assets, which include trade names, are recorded at fair market value on their acquisition date. At the time of acquisition, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are allocated to reporting units. Management identifies its reporting units by assessing whether the components of its operating segments constitute businesses for which discrete financial information is available and management regularly reviews the operating results of those components. We had significant additions to goodwill and tradename intangible assets related to our acquisition of ANZ in 2020.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed at least annually for impairment, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change between annual tests that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the respective
reporting unit below its carrying amount. In 2021, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment, consistent with ASC 350, of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets assigned to our reporting units to evaluate the recoverability of the related amounts. The qualitative factors considered included macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, and any other factors that have a significant bearing on fair value. No goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible asset impairments were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2021.
Finite-lived intangible assets that are acquired in business combinations are recorded at fair value on their acquisition dates and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Finite-lived intangible assets consist of student relationships. We review our finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If such assets are not recoverable, a potential impairment loss is recognized to the extent the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. No impairment charges related to finite-lived intangible assets were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2021.
Other estimates - We record estimates for certain of our accrued expenses and for income tax liabilities. We estimate the useful lives of our property and equipment and intangible assets and periodically review our assumed forfeiture rates and ability to achieve performance targets for stock-based awards and adjust them as necessary. Should actual results differ from our estimates, revisions to our accrued expenses, carrying amount of goodwill and intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, and income tax liabilities may be required.
Results of Operations
As discussed above, we completed our acquisition of ANZ on November 3, 2020. Our results of operations include the results of ANZ from the acquisition date. Periods prior to November 3, 2020 do not include the financial results of ANZ. Accordingly, the financial results of each period presented are not directly comparable.
In 2021, we generated $1,131.7 million in revenue compared to $1,027.7 million in 2020. Our income from operations decreased to $73.9 million in 2021 compared to $109.4 million in 2020, primarily due to lower earnings in the USHE segment and higher restructuring costs, partially offset by the inclusion of ANZ's income from operations and lower amortization expense related to intangible assets. Our net income in 2021 was $55.1 million compared to $86.3 million in 2020. Diluted earnings per share was $2.28 in 2021 compared to $3.77 in 2020.
In the accompanying analysis of financial information for 2021 and 2020, we use certain financial measures including Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted Total Costs and Expenses, Adjusted Income from Operations, Adjusted Operating Margin, Adjusted Income Before Income Taxes, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted Diluted Earnings per Share that are not required by or prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). These measures, which are considered “non-GAAP financial measures” under SEC rules, are defined by us to exclude the following:
•purchase accounting adjustments to record acquired contract liabilities at fair value as a result of our acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand, and amortization and depreciation expense related to intangible assets and software assets acquired through our merger with Capella Education Company and our acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand;
•transaction and integration expenses associated with our merger with Capella Education Company and our acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand;
•severance costs and right-of-use lease asset impairment charges associated with our restructuring;
•income from partnership and other investments that are not part of our core operations;
•discrete tax adjustments related to stock-based compensation and other adjustments; and
•foreign currency exchange impact related to translating foreign currency results at a constant exchange rate.
When considered together with GAAP financial results, we believe these measures provide management and investors with an additional understanding of our business and operating results, including underlying trends associated with our ongoing operations.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not defined in the same manner by all companies and may not be comparable with other similarly titled measures of other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures may be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for or superior to, GAAP results. A reconciliation of these measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures is provided below.
Adjusted income from operations was $165.3 million in 2021 compared to $211.1 million in 2020. Adjusted net income was $116.4 million in 2021 compared to $152.7 million in 2020, and adjusted diluted earnings per share was $4.82 in 2021 compared to $6.68 in 2020.
Reconciliation of Reported to Adjusted Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in thousands, except per share data)
Reconciliation of Reported to Adjusted Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands, except per share data)
Reconciliation of Reported to Adjusted Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands, except per share data)
___________________________________________________
(1)Reflects a purchase accounting adjustment to record acquired contract liabilities at fair value as a result of the Company's acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand, and amortization and depreciation expense of intangible assets and software assets acquired through the Company’s merger with Capella Education Company and the Company's acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand.
(2)Reflects transaction and integration expenses associated with the Company's merger with Capella Education Company, including premerger litigation settlement in principle, net of insurance recovery, and the Company's acquisition of Torrens University and associated assets in Australia and New Zealand.
(3)Reflects severance costs and right-of-use lease asset impairment charges associated with the Company's restructuring.
(4)Reflects income recognized from the Company's investments in partnership interests and other investments.
(5)Reflects tax impacts of the adjustments described above and discrete tax adjustments related to stock-based compensation and other adjustments, utilizing an adjusted annual effective tax rate of 28.5% for 2021 and 2020 and an adjusted effective tax rate of 27.8% for 2019.
(6)Reflects foreign currency exchange impact related to translating foreign currency results at a constant exchange rate of 0.743 Australian Dollars to U.S. Dollars, which is the 2021 budget rate.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared To Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues. Consolidated revenues increased to $1,131.7 million in 2021 compared to $1,027.7 million in the same period in the prior year, primarily due to the inclusion of ANZ for the full year. In the USHE segment for the year ended December 31, 2021, total average enrollment decreased 11.0% to 82,425 from 92,637 in the prior year. USHE segment revenues decreased 14.2% to $829.3 million compared to $966.6 million in 2020 as a result of declines in enrollment and revenue-per-student due to higher scholarships and discounts. Near term revenue in the USHE segment is expected to continue to be impacted negatively by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic with weaker demand for enrollments and higher scholarships and discounts. In the Education Technology Services segment, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 38.7% to $52.3 million, compared to $37.7 million in 2020 as a result of rapid growth in Sophia Learning and higher employer affiliated enrollment. In the Australia/New Zealand segment, revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $250.1 million, compared to $23.4 million in 2020, which only reflects activity after the completion of the ANZ acquisition in November 2020. ANZ revenue includes a $3.6 million and $11.3 million purchase accounting reduction in 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to contract liabilities acquired in the acquisition.
Instructional and support costs. Consolidated instructional and support costs increased to $608.3 million in 2021 compared to $532.7 million in 2020, principally due to the inclusion of $129.6 million of instructional and support costs related to ANZ in 2021, compared to $19.7 million in 2020, partially offset by cost savings implemented as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which included lower expenses associated with travel and facilities costs, as well as savings from the employee restructuring plan implemented in the third quarter of 2020. Consolidated instructional and support costs as a percentage of revenues increased to 53.7% in 2021, from 51.8% in 2020.
General and administration expenses. Consolidated general and administration expenses increased to $361.3 million in 2021 compared to $295.2 million in 2020, principally due to the inclusion of $84.6 million of general and administration expenses related to ANZ in 2021, compared to $17.0 million in 2020. Consolidated general and administration expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 31.9% in 2021 from 28.7% in 2020.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets decreased to $51.5 million in 2021 compared to $64.2 million in 2020, due to lower amortization expense associated with intangible assets acquired through the merger with Capella Education Company, offset by additional amortization expense of intangible assets acquired in the acquisition of ANZ in November 2020.
Merger and integration costs. Merger and integration costs decreased to $11.2 million in 2021 compared to $13.8 million in 2020, principally due to lower transaction and integration expenses associated with the acquisition of ANZ and lower integration support costs related to the merger with Capella Education Company, partially offset by a charge taken in 2021 related to a premerger litigation settlement in principle, net of insurance recovery.
Restructuring costs. Restructuring costs increased to $25.5 million in 2021 from $12.4 million in 2020, principally due to $21.6 million of right-of-use lease asset and fixed asset impairment charges associated with vacating leased space in 2021 based on an assessment of our real estate portfolio, partially offset by lower severance costs and a $2.7 million gain in 2021 from the sale of property and equipment of owned campuses that were closed in connection with the 2020 restructuring plan.
Income from operations. Consolidated income from operations decreased to $73.9 million in 2021 compared to $109.4 million in 2020, primarily due to lower earnings in the USHE segment and higher restructuring costs, partially offset by the inclusion of ANZ's income from operations and lower amortization expense related to intangible assets. USHE segment income from operations decreased 45.8% to $104.9 million in 2021, compared to $193.4 million in 2020, primarily due to declines in enrollment and revenue-per-student due to higher scholarships and discounts. Education Technology Services segment income from operations increased 8.5% to $21.3 million in 2021, compared to $19.6 million in 2020 as a result of rapid growth in Sophia Learning, partially offset by increased investment in outreach to corporate partners. Income from operations for the Australia/New Zealand segment was $35.9 million in 2021, compared to a loss from operations of $13.3 million in 2020, following our acquisition of ANZ in November 2020.
Other income. Other income decreased to $2.7 million in 2021 compared to $4.6 million in 2020, as a result of an increase in interest expense related to our revolving credit facility which was used to partially fund the ANZ acquisition in November 2020, partially offset by higher investment income from our limited partnerships and other investments in 2021. We incurred $3.6 million of interest expense in 2021 compared to $1.4 million in 2020.
Provision for income taxes. Income tax expense was $21.5 million in 2021 compared to $27.7 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate for 2021 was 28.1%, compared to 24.3% in 2020. The effective tax rate in 2020 included higher windfall tax benefits recognized through share-based payment arrangements. Our effective tax rate, excluding these and other discrete tax adjustments, was 28.5% for 2021.
Net income. Net income decreased to $55.1 million in 2021 compared to $86.3 million in 2020 due to the factors discussed above.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared To Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues. The increase in consolidated revenues compared to the same period in the prior year was primarily related to the acquisition of ANZ in November 2020. In the USHE segment for the year ended December 31, 2020, total average enrollment grew 2.3% to 92,637 from 90,598 in the prior year. USHE segment revenues increased 0.4% to $966.6 million compared to $963.1 million in 2019 as a result of enrollment growth, partially offset by a decline in revenue per student due to higher scholarships and discounts offered in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Education Technology Services segment revenues were $37.7 million in 2020 compared to $34.1 million in the prior year as a result of higher employer affiliated enrollment. Revenues for the Australia/New Zealand segment were $23.4 million, following our acquisition of ANZ in November 2020, and included an $11.3 million purchase accounting reduction related to contract liabilities acquired in the acquisition.
Instructional and support costs. Consolidated instructional and support costs increased to $532.7 million in 2020 compared to $530.6 million in 2019, principally due to the inclusion of $19.7 million of instructional and support costs related to ANZ, partially offset by significant savings from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which included lower expenses associated with travel, events, and facilities costs. Consolidated instructional and support costs as a percentage of revenues decreased to 51.8% in 2020, from 53.2% in 2019.
General and administration expenses. Consolidated general and administration expenses increased to $295.2 million in 2020 compared to $272.4 million in 2019, principally due to the inclusion of $17.0 million of general and administration expenses related to ANZ, as well as increased investments in branding initiatives and partnerships with brand ambassadors. Consolidated general and administration expenses as a percentage of revenues increased to 28.7% in 2020, from 27.3% in 2019.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets increased to $64.2 million in 2020 compared to $61.7 million in 2019, due to the additional amortization expense of intangible assets acquired in the acquisition of ANZ in November 2020.
Merger and integration costs. Merger and integration costs decreased to $13.8 million in 2020 compared to $21.9 million in 2019, as a result of lower expenses for integration support services and severance costs related to the merger with CEC, partially offset by transaction and integration expenses associated with the acquisition of ANZ.
Restructuring costs. Restructuring costs include severance and other personnel-related expenses from voluntary and involuntary employee terminations as well as early lease termination costs and impairments of right-of-use lease assets associated with vacating leased space in connection with a restructuring plan implemented in 2020.
Income from operations. Consolidated income from operations decreased to $109.4 million in 2020 compared to $110.5 million in 2019, principally due to the inclusion of ANZ, which generated a loss from operations following acquisition as well as restructuring costs incurred in 2020, partially offset by a decrease in merger and integration related costs. USHE segment income from operations increased 11.9% to $193.4 million in 2020, compared to $172.9 million in 2019, primarily due to expense savings related to campus closures during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as lower marketing expense. Education Technology Services segment income from operations decreased 7.5% to $19.6 million in 2020, compared to $21.2 million in 2019 as a result of increased investment in outreach to corporate partners. Loss from operations for the Australia/New Zealand segment was $13.3 million in 2020 following our acquisition of ANZ in November 2020.
Other income. Other income decreased to $4.6 million in 2020 compared to $13.2 million in 2019, as a result of lower yields on money markets and marketable securities due to reductions in interest rates as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in investment income from our limited partnerships and other investments. Other income is net of interest expense, which was $1.4 million and $0.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in interest expense in 2020 is due to borrowing $141.8 million on our revolving credit facility to partially fund the ANZ acquisition in November 2020.
Provision for income taxes. Income tax expense was $27.7 million in 2020 compared to $42.6 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate for 2020 was 24.3% compared to 34.4% in 2019. The tax rate in 2019 was unfavorably impacted by changes in previously deferred compensation arrangements, resulting in a discrete charge of $11.5 million to reduce the Company's deferred tax asset related to these arrangements. The tax rate for both periods reflects favorable discrete adjustments, primarily related to tax windfalls recognized through share-based payment arrangements. Our effective tax rate, excluding these and other discrete tax adjustments, was 28.5% in 2020.
Net income. Net income was $86.3 million in 2020 compared to $81.1 million in 2019 due to the factors discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $298.8 million compared to $225.3 million at December 31, 2020. Most of our cash was held in demand deposit accounts at high credit quality financial institutions.
On November 3, 2020, we entered into an amended credit facility ("Amended Credit Facility"), which provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”) in an aggregate principal amount of up to $350 million. The Amended Credit Facility provides us with an option, subject to obtaining additional loan commitments and satisfaction of certain conditions, to increase the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility or establish one or more incremental term loans (each, an “Incremental Facility”) in the future in an aggregate amount of up to the sum of (x) the greater of (A) $300 million and (B) 100% of the Company’s consolidated EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, and noncash charges, such as stock-based compensation) calculated on a trailing four-quarter basis and on a pro forma basis, and (y) if such Incremental Facility is incurred in connection with a permitted acquisition or other permitted investment, any amounts so long as the Company's leverage ratio (calculated on a trailing four-quarter basis) on a pro forma basis will be no greater than 1.75:1.00. In addition, the Amended Credit Facility provides for a subfacility for borrowings in certain foreign currencies in an amount equal to the U.S. dollar equivalent of $150 million. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a per annum rate equal to LIBOR or a base rate, plus a margin ranging from 1.50% to 2.00% depending on our leverage ratio. An unused commitment fee ranging from 0.20% to 0.30% per annum, depending on our leverage ratio, accrues on unused amounts. We were in compliance with all applicable covenants related to the Amended Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, we had $141.8 million and $141.6 million, respectively, outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, we paid $1.0 million and $2.7 million, respectively, of interest and unused commitment fees related to our Revolving Credit Facility.
Our net cash provided by operating activities increased in 2021 to $180.5 million, as compared to $142.9 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in net cash from operating activities was primarily driven by the inclusion of a full-year of ANZ operations, partially offset by lower earnings in the USHE segment.
Capital expenditures increased to $49.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $46.8 million for 2020, due to the inclusion of ANZ, partially offset by lower facilities investments.
The Board of Directors declared an annual cash dividend of $2.40 per common share, payable in equal parts quarterly. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid a total of $59.0 million in cash dividends on our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we invested $5.9 million to repurchase 76,969 shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had $250 million in repurchase authorization to use through December 31, 2022.
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operating activities, and if necessary, cash available under our Amended Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our requirements for at least the next 12 months. Currently, we maintain our cash primarily in demand deposit bank accounts and money market funds, which are included in cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 and 2020. We also hold marketable securities, which primarily include tax-exempt municipal securities and corporate debt securities. We earned interest income of $1.1 million, $4.0 million, and $10.6 million in each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Our material cash commitments include minimum lease payments required under our lease agreements, capital commitments related to our four limited partnership investments and commitment fees associated with our credit facility.
The table below sets forth our contractual cash commitments associated with lease liabilities as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we have a commitment to invest up to $2.9 million in our four limited partnership investments through 2031. Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with the limited partnership investments, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period in which such additional investments may take place.
Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future borrowings associated with our credit facility, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of any commitment fees charged on the unused portion of the credit facility. As of December 31, 2021, our maximum estimated commitment fee is $0.6 million per annum related to the unused portion of our credit facility.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, within the footnotes to the consolidated financial statements for recently issued accounting standards.