ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are an outsourced marketing solutions provider that sells branded products to customers. We purchase products and branding through various third-party manufacturers and decorators and resell the finished goods to customers.
In addition to selling branded products, we offer clients custom sourcing capabilities; a flexible and customizable e-commerce solution for promoting branded merchandise and other promotional products, managing promotional loyalty and incentives, print collateral, and event assets, order and inventory management, and designing and hosting online retail popup shops, fixed public retail online stores, and online business-to-business service offerings; creative and merchandising services; warehousing/fulfillment and distribution; print-on-demand; kitting; point of sale displays; and loyalty and incentive programs.
We earn the majority of our revenue from the sale of unique, quality promotional products for a wide variety of industries primarily to support marketing efforts. We also derive revenues from service fees from loyalty programs, event management, print services, fulfillment services, and technology services.
The majority of our revenue is derived from program business, although only a small percentage of our customers are considered programmatic. For the years 2020 and 2021, program clients accounted for 77.6% and 75.7% of total revenue, respectively. Less than 350 of our more than 2,000 active customers are considered to be program clients. Our active customers are any organizations, businesses, or divisions of a parent organization which have purchased directly or indirectly from us within the last two years, and include organizations that have bought from other organizations for which Stran acts as an established sub-contractor. With a larger sales force and other resources, we believe we can convert more of our customer base from transactional customers into program clients with much greater revenue potential. We define transactional customers as customers that place an order with us and do not have an agreement with us covering ongoing branding requirements. We define program clients as clients that have a contractual obligation for specific ongoing branding needs. Program offerings include ongoing inventory, use of technology platform, warehousing, creative services, and additional client support. Those program customers are geared towards longer-lasting relationships that helps secure recurring revenue well into the future.
Our sales increased 5.2% year-over-year in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher spending from existing clients as well as business from new customers. Additionally, we benefited from the acquisition of the Wildman Imprints assets in September 2020. We expect going forward that pent-up demand from more widespread immunity to the COVID-19 virus, the return of many significant in-person tradeshows and other industry-related opportunities, and societal reopening in general will help compensate for lower sales in prior periods. However, these trends will be partially offset by continued increases in expenses, especially higher freight charges, raw material costs and a more challenging supply chain such as port congestion. According to a global pricing index published by London-based Drewry Shipping Consultants Ltd, the average price worldwide to ship a 40-foot shipping container reached $9,180 for the week ended March 10, 2022, which is 83% higher than the same week in 2021. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Producer Price Index for final demand moved up 9.7 percent for the 12 months ended in January 2022. For the 12 months ended in January 2022, producer prices for final demand goods increased 13.1 percent while prices for final demand services increased 7.7 percent.
We have also noted that some of our customers have indicated that a greater number of their employees work from home than in past periods. We believe this increase may be partially a result of the relatively new risk to office work from the COVID-19 pandemic, and that this trend may continue due to the more contagious Omicron variant of the COVID-19 virus. As a result, we have been, and expect to continue to, drop-ship more materials directly to people at their homes than in periods before the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that this trend will continue to yield increased freight service fees and fulfillment revenue as well as associated costs.
For additional discussion, see “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” below.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $51.2 million of total assets with $41.6 million of total shareholder equity.
Recent Developments
G.A.P. Promotions Acquisition
On January 21, 2022, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with G.A.P. Promotions, LLC, a Massachusetts limited liability company (the “Seller”), Gayle Piraino (“Piraino”) and Stephen Piraino (together with Piraino, the “Members”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to acquire substantially all of the assets of the Seller used in the Seller’s branding, marketing and promotional products and services business (the “Business”), for an aggregate purchase price of (a) $500,000 in cash, subject to adjustment as set forth in the Purchase Agreement (the “Closing Cash Payment”); (b) a certain amount of restricted shares of the Company’s common stock; (c) installment payments equal to (i) $180,000 on the first anniversary of the date of the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement (the “Closing Date”) and (ii) $300,000 on the second anniversary of the Closing Date; (d) an amount equal to the amount paid by the Seller (at cost) for all of the Seller’s Inventory (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) that is on hand as of the Closing Date; and (e) the Earn Out Payments, as defined below.
The Seller is entitled to receive the following payments (each, an “Earn Out Payment” and together, the “Earn Out Payments”) to the extent the Business achieves the applicable Gross Profit (as defined below) targets:
1. An Earn Out Payment equal to 70% of annual Gross Profit of the Business to the extent Gross Profit is above $1,500,000 for the trailing 12-month period from the first anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Initial Earn Out Period”); and
2. An Earn Out Payment equal to 70% of annual Gross Profit of the Business to the extent Gross Profit is above $1,500,000 for the trailing 12-month period from the second anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Second Earn Out Period”).
In the event that any Inventory included in the Purchased Assets (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) is not purchased during the Initial Earn Out Period, or any Accounts Receivables (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) included in the Purchased Assets are not paid during the Initial Earn Out Period (the “Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount”), then such Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount will be deducted from the Earn Out Payment due following the Initial Earn Out Period, or if such Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount exceeds the Earn Out Payment due following the Initial Earn Out Period, then such amounts will be deducted from the Earn Out Payment due following the Second Earn Out Period. If any Unpurchased/Unpaid Amounts are subsequently sold or paid, the Seller will be entitled to receive such amounts in full.
To the extent the Seller is entitled to all or a portion of an Earn Out Payment, the applicable Earn Out Payment (or portion thereof) will be paid on the date that is 30 days from the date on which it is determined the Seller is entitled to such Earn Out Payment.
“Gross Profit” means (i) the amount invoiced to customers less (ii) expenses charged by any third party (except the Company and its affiliates) directly related to that job or account. Such expenses shall include but not be limited to cost of goods sold, decoration, setup fees, third-party warehousing and fulfillment charges, inbound and outbound shipping, duties/taxes and credit card fees.
On January 31, 2022, the Company, the Seller and the Members entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Amendment”) to amend certain terms of the Purchase Agreement. Following entry into the Amendment, closing of the acquisition of the Business was completed on the same day.
Pursuant to the Amendment, the number of the Buyer Shares was changed to be the number of restricted shares of the Company’s common stock in an amount equal to the quotient of $100,000 divided by the closing price of the Company’s common stock at the close of the last trading date prior to the date of the Amendment. Pursuant to these terms, based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on January 28, 2022, the last trading date prior to the date of the Amendment, the Company issued 46,083 shares of common stock to Piraino. As previously agreed under the Purchase Agreement, the Buyer Shares were required to be issued under a separate restricted stock grant agreement and will vest over a one (1) year period (1/4 per quarter) beginning the first quarter after the Closing Date. The Buyer Shares were issued and sold as restricted securities (as defined in Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended) pursuant to the exemptions from registration provided by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D of the Securities Act and in reliance on similar exemptions under applicable state laws. Piraino represented that she is an accredited investor within the meaning of Rule 501(a) of Regulation D, and was acquiring the securities for investment only and not with a view towards, or for resale in connection with, the public sale or distribution thereof. The securities were offered without any general solicitation by the Company or its representatives. The Buyer Shares carry no registration rights that require or permit the filing of any registration statement in connection with their issuance.
The foregoing summary of the terms and conditions of the Purchase Agreement and the Amendment does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the agreements attached hereto as Exhibits 2.1 and 2.2, which are incorporated herein by reference.
Appointment of Chief Operating Officer
Effective as of March 11, 2022, our Board of Directors appointed Sheila Johnshoy to serve as our Chief Operating Officer. Effective the same date, the Compensation Committee of the Board approved the terms of Ms. Johnshoy’s compensation under the employment offer letter dated as of the same date between us and Ms. Johnshoy, as described in further detail below.
In connection with Ms. Johnshoy’s appointment, we entered into an employment offer letter with Ms. Johnshoy that governs the current terms of Ms. Johnshoy’s employment with us. The employment offer letter provides that Ms. Johnshoy will receive an annual base salary of $250,000 and potential salary and annual bonus increases in future years based on the successful achievement of personal and business-related goals. Ms. Johnshoy is eligible to receive annual performance cash bonuses with a target bonus percentage ranging from 25% to 100% of base salary based on the occurrence of specified business revenue amounts or the discretionary approval of our Chief Executive Officer, subject in each case to final approval by the Compensation Committee. Pursuant to the employment letter agreement, we agreed to grant Ms. Johnshoy a signing bonus of 5,000 restricted shares and an option to purchase 5,000 shares of our common stock, which will be subject to a six-month lockup provision. In addition, Ms. Johnshoy is eligible to receive up to 35,000 additional shares of common stock and an option to purchase up to an aggregate of 35,000 additional shares of common stock upon the occurrence of specified business revenue amounts or at the discretionary approval of our Chief Executive Officer, subject in each case to final approval by the Compensation Committee. Consistent with such obligations, the Compensation Committee approved the grant of an option to purchase a total of 40,000 shares of common stock to Ms. Johnshoy at an exercise price per share of $1.60, which was the closing price of our common stock on March 11, 2022, the date that the employment letter agreement was countersigned by Ms. Johnshoy, and 5,000 shares of restricted common stock, with the transfer restrictions and performance-based vesting terms described above. Additionally, under the employment letter agreement, if specified trailing twelve-month revenues occur within 3.5 years of Ms. Johnshoy’s start of employment, she will earn an additional bonus of 100,000 shares of common stock. After the first year of employment, all bonus compensation terms will be subject to review. In addition, Ms. Johnshoy is entitled to severance benefits equal to four months’ salary if terminated without Cause (as defined in the employment letter agreement) during the first year of employment and four months’ salary if terminated during the second year of employment. Ms. Johnshoy will be eligible to receive certain health care, dental, life insurance, disability, and retirement benefits after three months’ employment. Ms. Johnshoy will receive unlimited vacation days encompassing vacation, personal and sick days, subject to two weeks’ notice and approval whenever possible. Under the employment letter agreement, Ms. Johnshoy is required to sign a standard nondisclosure and non-solicitation agreement that will not restrict Ms. Johnshoy from working within the promotional industry, but will require Ms. Johnshoy to maintain confidentiality and refrain from soliciting current clients or employees that were existing or obtained during Ms. Johnshoy’s employment with us.
The foregoing summary of the employment offer letter with Ms. Johnshoy is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the employment offer letter, a copy of which is filed with this Annual Report on Form 10-K as Exhibit 10.44.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The current global pandemic of a novel strain of coronavirus, or COVID-19, and the global measures taken to combat it, have had, and may in the future continue to have, an adverse effect on our business. Public health authorities and governments at local, national and international levels have announced various measures to respond to the pandemic. Some measures that directly or indirectly impact our business include voluntary or mandatory quarantines, restrictions on travel and limiting gatherings of people in public places.
We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted Stran’s operational and financial performance and will likely continue to do so. Sales of personal protective equipment totaled $4.2 million for 2020 compared to less than $250,000 for 2021. Although we were able to capitalize on pandemic demand for personal protective equipment in 2020 such as masks, hand sanitizer, and gowns, these sales did not significantly offset the overall decreased demand for promotional products in 2021 and are not expected to do so in the foreseeable future. Additionally, as was typical for other firms in the promotional products industry, from March 2020 through the end of 2021, we believe that our revenues were adversely affected by the economic impact of the pandemic, including decreased demand for promotional products and services such as ours due to a lack of in-person events, businesses not being fully reopened and staffed, and customers’ decreased marketing budgets. Likewise, we believe the pandemic’s effects on the economy caused us to experience higher costs of supplies of product materials due to continued pandemic on expenses, especially higher freight charges and raw material costs, and a more challenging supply chain from issues such as port congestion. We expect these effects to continue in 2022.
We have responded to the challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic by developing a clear company-wide strategy and sticking to our hardworking culture and core value of delivering creative merchandise solutions that effectively promote brands. We continue to focus on our core group of customers while providing additional value-added services, including our e-commerce platform for order processing, warehousing and fulfillment functions, and propose alternative product offerings based on their unique needs. We also continue to solicit and market ourselves to long-term prospects that have shown interest in Stran. We have remained committed to being a high-touch customer-focused company that provides our customers with more than just products. Below are some of the specific ways we have responded to the current pandemic:
● Adhered to all state and federal social distancing requirements while prioritizing health and safety for our employees. We allow team members to work remotely, allowing us to continue providing uninterrupted sales and service to our customers throughout the year.
● Emphasized and established cost savings initiatives, cost control processes, and cash conservation to preserve liquidity.
● Explored acquisition opportunities and executed the acquisitions of the customer base of Wildman Imprints with historical revenue exceeding $10 million annually in September 2020 and the promotional products business of G.A.P. Promotions with 2021 revenue of approximately $7.2 million in January 2022.
● Retained key customers through constant communication, making proactive product or program suggestions, driving program efficiencies, and delivering value-added solutions to help them market themselves more effectively.
● Concentrated and succeeded in earning business from clients in specific verticals that have spent more during the pandemic including customers in the entertainment, beverage, retail, consumer packaged goods, and cannabis industries.
● Retained key employees by continuing to provide them with competitive compensation and the tools required to be successful in their jobs.
● Successfully applied for and received PPP loans and government assistance.
● Refocused our marketing activities on more client-specific revenue generating activities that reduced spend while remaining effective.
We believe that we have seen encouraging signs of recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. There has been a significant increase in the amount of requests for proposal and other customer inquiries since the beginning of 2021, which leads us to believe that companies are starting to prepare to spend at previous or increased levels. We expect going forward that pent-up demand from more widespread immunity to the COVID-19 virus and societal reopening will help compensate for lower sales in prior periods.
We believe that we have fully complied with all state and local requirements relating to COVID-19. As described above, we have undertaken various measures in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including encouraging employees to work remotely if possible. We also have enacted business continuity plans, which may make maintaining our normal level of corporate operations, quality controls and internal controls difficult. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic may cause temporary or long-term disruptions in our supply chains and/or delays in the delivery of our inventory. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigation efforts may also adversely affect our customers’ financial condition, resulting in reduced spending for the products we sell.
As events are rapidly changing, we do not know how long the COVID-19 pandemic and the measures that have been introduced to respond to it will disrupt our operations or the full extent of that disruption. Further, once we are able to restart normal business hours and operations doing so may take time and will involve costs and uncertainty. We also cannot predict how long the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the efforts to contain it could continue to impact our business after the pandemic is under control. Governments could take additional restrictive measures to combat the pandemic that could further impact our business or the economy in the geographies in which we operate. We believe it is also possible that the impact of the pandemic and response on our suppliers, customers and markets will persist for some time after governments ease their restrictions. These measures have negatively impacted, and may continue to impact, our business and financial condition as the responses to control COVID-19 continue.
The extent to which the pandemic may continue to impact our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted as of the date of this report, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the pandemic and steps taken to contain the pandemic or treat its impact, among others. Nevertheless, the pandemic and the current financial, economic and capital markets environment, and future developments in the global supply chain and other areas present material uncertainty and risk with respect to our performance, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
● have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
● submit certain executive compensation matters to stockholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
● disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering, (ii) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues are $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our operating results are primarily affected by the following factors:
● our ability to acquire new customers or retain existing customers;
● our ability to offer competitive product pricing;
● our ability to broaden product offerings;
● industry demand and competition;
● our ability to leverage technology and use and develop efficient processes;
● our ability to attract and retain talented employees; and
● market conditions and our market position.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, both in dollars and as a percentage of our revenues.
Sales
Sales consist primarily of the selling price of the merchandise, service or outbound shipping and handling charges, less discounts, coupons redeemed, returns and credits.
Our 2020 revenues include nonrecurring revenues representing 27.1% of our overall revenues for 2020, as a subcontractor for the 2020 U.S. Census. The customer that engaged us in this regard will not renew their engagement with us due to the U.S. Census only occurring once every ten years. As a result, these nonrecurring revenue increases have not recurred, are not expected to recur, and do not represent our long-term growth expectations.
Our sales increased 5.2% from $37.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $39.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher spending from existing clients as well as business from new customers. Additionally, we benefited from the acquisition of the Wildman Imprints assets in September 2020. However, these increases in sales were partially offset by the completion of the U.S. Census program in 2020, market saturation of personal protective equipment in 2021, a lack of in-person events, and businesses still not being fully reopened throughout 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The September 2020 acquisition of the Wildman Imprints assets generated $8.3 million of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.2 million of sales in the year ended December 31, 2020. Our recurring organic sales, defined as those sales excluding the U.S. Census program, revenue from the Wildman Imprints asset acquisition, and personal protective equipment, increased 49.5%, or $10.3 million, from $20.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $31.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. However, these increases in recurring organic sales were entirely offset by the nonrecurrence of our work on the U.S. Census program during the year ended December 31, 2021, which contributed $10.5 million of sales, or 27.1% of total sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to less than $2,000 of sales, or 0.0% of total sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the increases in recurring organic sales were partially offset by the nonrecurrence of sales of personal protective equipment totaling $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to less than $250,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of the costs of purchasing inventory and freight charges. Our total cost of sales increased 6.1% from $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of sales, cost of sales increased from 69.6% in 2020 to 70.2% in 2021. More specifically, cost of purchases decreased from $24.2 million in 2020 to $24.0 million in 2021, or 0.8%. As a percentage of sales, cost of purchases increased from 64.0% in 2020 to 60.4% in 2021. However, freight costs increased from $2.1 million in 2020 to $3.9 million in 2021, or 85.5%. As a percentage of sales, freight costs increased from 5.6% in 2020 to 9.8% in 2021. The decrease in cost of purchases was primarily due to improvements in sourcing capabilities and buying power, while the increase in freight costs was primarily due to a general increase in freight costs, both domestic and international, as well as a shift to shipping to individual locations (households) we believe as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consists of general and administrative expenses. Our operating expenses increased 22.8%, or $2.3 million, to $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of sales, operating expenses increased from 26.5% in 2020 to 30.9% in 2021. This increase was due to an increase in general and administrative expenses of $2.3 million, or 22.8%, which in turn was primarily due to additional expenses related to the acquisition of the Wildman Imprints assets, the implementation of a new ERP system on Oracle’s NetSuite platform, the recently completed initial public offering and ongoing public company expenses, and organic growth in our business.
Other Income and Expense
Other income and expense consist of interest expense, interest income, other expense, other income and PPP loan forgiveness income. Our interest expense increased $87,204 from $49,457 in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $136,661 in the year ended December 31, 2021, or 176.3%. This increase was primarily due to an increase in borrowings on our bank’s line of credit. Our other expense increased $83,148 from none in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $83,148 in the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to earn-out payments for the Wildman Imprints asset purchase exceeding gross profit expectations in accordance with the acquisition agreement. Our other income increased $5,366 from $10,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $15,336 in the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to interest forgiveness related to our PPP loan. Our PPP loan forgiveness income increased $770,062 from none in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $770,062 in the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was due to the forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan.
Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate was 4.3% and 29.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our effective income tax rate was 4.3% and (17.2)% for current and deferred taxes, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our effective tax rate was 29.1% and 0% for current taxes and deferred taxes, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was driven by a decrease from 20.9% to 0% in our effective federal income tax rate and a decrease from 8.2% to 4.3% in our effective state income tax rate. For further discussion of changes in the effective tax rate, refer to Notes A.14. and A.15. to our Financial Statements.
Net Earnings
Our 2020 net earnings include nonrecurring revenues representing 27.1% of our overall revenues for 2020, as a subcontractor for the 2020 U.S. Census. The customer that engaged us in this regard will not renew their engagement with us due to the U.S. Census only occurring once every ten years. As a result, these nonrecurring revenue increases have not recurred, are not expected to recur, and do not represent our long-term growth expectations.
Our net earnings decreased 77.1% from $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to the nonrecurrence of sales of $10.5 million from our work on the U.S. Census program in 2020 and the nonrecurrence of sales of $4.0 million from our work on personal protective equipment in 2020; increased expenses in 2021 than in 2020 related to our initial public offering; and higher freight expenses in 2021 compared to 2020. These factors were only partially offset by the increase in sales from 2020 to 2021 of $6.0 million from our September 2020 Wildman Imprints asset purchase and the increase of $10.3 million from recurring organic sales from 2020 to 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $32.2 million. Prior to our initial public offering, we financed our operations primarily through revenue generated from operations and bank borrowings, including a $3.5 million line of credit held with Bank of America during the year ended December 31, 2019 and the period from January 1, 2020 to November 22, 2021. Our line of credit agreement with Bank of America was terminated on November 22, 2021 and on the same date was replaced with a secured revolving demand line of credit with Salem Five Cents Savings Bank for aggregate loans of up to $7.0 million, subject to a number of asset-related and other financial requirements and other covenants, terms and conditions as described in detail below under “- Debt”.
We believe that our current levels of cash will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for our operations and cash payment obligations for both the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 and in the long-term beyond this period, including our anticipated costs associated with being a public reporting company. We may, however, in the future require additional cash resources due to changing business conditions, implementation of our strategy to expand our business, or other investments or acquisitions we may decide to pursue. If our own financial resources are insufficient to satisfy our capital requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain additional credit facilities. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our shareholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that would restrict our operations. Financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Any failure by us to raise additional funds on terms favorable to us, or at all, could limit our ability to expand our business operations and could harm our overall business prospects.
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow for the period indicated:
Cash Flow
Net cash used in operating activities was $5,833,887 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $1,990,467 for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, increases in accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable were the primary drivers of the net cash used in operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in accounts receivable and decreases in accounts payable and rewards program liability were the primary drivers of the net cash used in operating activities. The increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 occurred in the normal course of business due to growth in organic business as well as the integration of the Wildman Imprints assets.
Net cash used in investing activities was $388,948 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $176,465 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily for additions to software-related property and equipment in both years. The increase in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 occurred due to additional required technology investments related to an increase in overall business as well as additional personnel needed to operate the business.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37,802,268 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $375,907 for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted primarily of net proceeds received from our initial public offering and private placement, and was partially offset by borrowings and reductions on our bank line of credit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of PPP and EIDL Program loans under the CARES Act, and was partially offset by borrowings and reductions on our bank line of credit.
On April 15, 2020, we received loan proceeds from Bank of America in the amount of approximately $770,062 under the PPP. The PPP, established as part of the CARES Act, provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times the average qualifying monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels.
We received forgiveness by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) of the PPP loan in full, effective June 24, 2021.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately $149,900 was due under our EIDL Program loan. It was due in monthly installments of $731 including interest to April 2051. The amount was fully repaid during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Initial Public Offering
On November 12, 2021, we completed our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 4,337,349 units, at a price to the public of $4.15 per unit, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock, before underwriting discounts and commissions. Each whole share of common stock exercisable pursuant to the warrants initially had an exercise price per share of $5.1875, equal to 125% of the initial public offering price per unit in the IPO. Due to our subsequent private placement of common stock and common stock purchase warrants at a purchase price of $4.97 for one share and 1.25 warrants combined, after attributing a warrant value of $0.125, the exercise price per share of the IPO warrants was reduced to $4.81375 as of December 10, 2021. The warrants are immediately exercisable and expire on the fifth anniversary of the original issuance date. We also granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 650,602 shares of common stock and/or warrants to purchase up to 650,602 shares of common stock at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts, representing fifteen percent (15%) of the units sold in the IPO.
At the closing of the IPO, the representative of the underwriters fully exercised its option to purchase an additional 650,602 shares of common stock and 650,602 warrants. Therefore, we sold 4,987,951 shares of common stock and 4,987,951 warrants for total gross proceeds of $20,699,997. After deducting underwriter commissions, discounts and non-accountable expenses of $1,759,500 and other offering expenses of approximately $995,845, we received net proceeds of approximately $17,944,652.
The IPO was made pursuant to our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-260109), which was filed with the SEC, and became effective on November 8, 2021, and our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-260880), which was filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which was effective immediately upon filing on November 8, 2021. EF Hutton, division of Benchmark Investments, LLC, acted as lead book-running manager and the representative of the underwriters, and US Tiger Securities, Inc. acted as joint book-running manager.
From November 8, 2021 to December 31, 2021, the following is our reasonable estimate of the uses of the proceeds from the IPO:
● None was used for construction of plant, building and facilities;
● None was used for the purchase and installation of machinery and equipment;
● None was used for purchases of real estate;
● None was used for the acquisition of other businesses;
● $3.5 million was used for the repayment of indebtedness;
● $4.9 million was used for working capital; and
● None was used for temporary investments.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not yet used approximately $9.5 million of the proceeds of the IPO.
None of the proceeds of the IPO have been used to make any direct or indirect payments to any of our directors or officers, any of their associates, any persons owning ten percent or more of any class of our equity securities, or any of our affiliates, or any others.
There has not been, and we do not expect, any material change in the planned use of proceeds from the IPO as described in the prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) under the Securities Act on November 10, 2021.
Private Placement
On December 10, 2021, the Company completed a private placement with several investors, wherein a total of 4,371,926 shares of the Company’s common stock were issued at a purchase price of $4.97 per share, with each investor also receiving a warrant to purchase up to a number of shares of common stock equal to 125% of the number of shares of common stock purchased by such investor in the private placement, at an exercise price of $4.97 per share, for a total purchase price of approximately $21.7 million. The private placement warrants were immediately exercisable on the date of issuance, expire five years from the date of issuance and have certain downward pricing adjustment mechanisms, including with respect to any subsequent equity sale that is deemed a dilutive issuance, in which case the warrants will be subject to a floor price of $4.80 per share before shareholder approval is obtained, and after shareholder approval is obtained, such floor price will be reduced to $1.00 per share, as set forth in the private placement warrants. On December 10, 2021, the holders of shares of common stock entitled to vote approximately 65.4% of our outstanding voting stock on December 10, 2021 approved the Company’s entry into the private placement. We filed preliminary and definitive information statements on Schedule 14C with the SEC on December 29, 2021 and January 11, 2022, and delivered copies of the definitive information statement to shareholders January 12, 2022. On January 31, 2022, the stockholders’ consent became effective pursuant to Rule 14c-2 under the Exchange Act. As a result, the exercise price of the private placement warrants may be reduced to as low as $1.00 per share if their downward-pricing adjustment mechanisms become applicable.
The private placement raised net cash proceeds of approximately $19.8 million (after deducting the placement agent fee and expenses of the private placement). The Company intends to use the net cash proceeds from the private placement for acquisitions and partnerships, investments in technology and expanding corporate infrastructure, expansion of its sales team and marketing efforts and for general working capital and administrative purposes.
The Company engaged EF Hutton, division of Benchmark Investments, LLC (“EF Hutton”) as the Company’s placement agent for the private placement pursuant to a Placement Agency Agreement (the “PAA”) dated as of December 8, 2021. Pursuant to the PAA, the Company agreed to pay EF Hutton a cash placement fee equal to 8.0% of the gross proceeds of the Offering, an additional cash fee equal to 0.5% of the gross proceeds raised by the Company in the offering for non-accountable expenses, and also agreed to reimburse EF Hutton up to $100,000 for accountable expenses. In addition, EF Hutton’s designees received warrants to purchase an aggregate of 131,158 shares of common stock, which is equal to 3.0% of the total number of shares issued in the private placement, at an exercise price of $4.97 per share (the “Placement Agent Warrants”).
In connection with the private placement, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Private Placement Purchase Agreement”) with investors containing customary representations and warranties. The Company and investors also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company was required to file a resale registration statement (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC to register for resale the shares of common stock and the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the private placement warrants and Representative Warrants, promptly following the closing date but in no event later than 15 calendar days after the effective date of the Registration Rights Agreement, and to have such Registration Statement declared effective by the Effectiveness Date (as defined in the Registration Rights Agreement). The Company will be obligated to pay certain liquidated damages to the investors if the Company fails to file the Registration Statement when required, fails to file or cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective by the SEC when required, or fails to maintain the effectiveness of the Registration Statement pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement. On December 23, 2021, the Company filed the Registration Statement with the SEC (File No. 333-261883) and it was declared effective on January 5, 2022.
The private placement was exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) pursuant to the exemption for transactions by an issuer not involving any public offering under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D of the Securities Act and in reliance on similar exemptions under applicable state laws. Each of the Purchasers represented that it is an accredited investor within the meaning of Rule 501(a) of Regulation D, and was acquiring the securities for investment only and not with a view towards, or for resale in connection with, the public sale or distribution thereof. The securities were offered without any general solicitation by the Company or its representatives.
The foregoing description of each of the Private Placement Purchase Agreement, PAA, Registration Rights Agreement, form of private placement warrant and form of Placement Agent Warrant is qualified in its entirety by reference to the forms of such documents which are filed hereto as Exhibits 10.39, 10.40, 10.41, 10.42, and 10.43, respectively.
Debt
On November 22, 2021, we entered into a Revolving Demand Line of Credit Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”), with Salem Five Cents Savings Bank (the “Lender”), for aggregate loans of up to $7 million (the “Loan” or “Line of Credit”), evidenced by a Revolving Demand Line of Credit Note, also dated November 22, 2021 (the “Note”). The Line of Credit and Note are secured by a first priority security interest in all assets and property of the Company, as more fully described in the Security Agreement, also dated November 22, 2021, between the Lender and the Borrower (the “Security Agreement” and together with the Loan Agreement and the Note, the “Loan Documents”).
The amount available under the Line of Credit is the lesser of $7.0 million or the sum of (x) eighty percent (80%) of the then-outstanding amount of Eligible Accounts (as defined below), plus (y) fifty percent (50%) of Eligible Inventory (as defined below); minus one hundred (100%) percent of the aggregate amount then drawn under the Line of Credit for the account of the Company. In addition, advances based upon Eligible Inventory must be capped at all times at $2,000,000. “Eligible Accounts” are defined as accounts that meet a number of requirements, including, unless otherwise approved by the Lender, being less than ninety (90) days from the date of invoice not subject to any prior assignment, claim, lien, or security interest, not subject to set-off, credit, allowance or adjustment by the account debtor, arose in the ordinary course of the Company’s business, not an intercompany obligation, not subject to notice of bankruptcy or insolvency of the account debtor, not owed by an account debtor whose principal place of business is outside the United States of America, not a government account, not be evidenced by promissory notes, and not one of the accounts owed by an account debtor 25% or more of whose accounts are 90 or more days past invoice date; or otherwise not deemed acceptable by the Lender in accordance with its normal credit policies. “Eligible Inventory” means all finished goods, work in progress and raw materials and component parts of inventory owned by the Company. It does not include any inventory held on consignment or not otherwise owned by the Company; any inventory which has been returned by a customer or is damaged or subject to any legal encumbrances other than a first priority security interest held by the Company; any inventory which is not in the possession of the Company; any inventory which is held by the Company on property leased by the Company unless the Lender has received a Landlord’s Waiver and Consent from the lessor of such property satisfactory to the Lender; any inventory which is not located within the United States; any inventory which the Lender reasonably deems to be obsolete or non-marketable; and any inventory not subject to a first priority fully perfected lien held by the Lender.
The Loan is subject to interest at the prime rate plus 0.5% per annum. The Company must repay interest on Loan proceeds on a monthly basis. The Loan is expected to continue for 12 months, subject to the Lender’s demand rights and the Company’s ongoing affirmative and other obligations under the Loan Documents, as summarized below.
The Company may freely drawn upon the Loan subject to the Lender’s right to demand complete repayment of the Loan at any time. Late payments are subject to a late payment charge of 5%. In the event of failure to repay the loan after the Lender makes demand for full repayment, the interest rate will increase by 10%. The Note may be prepaid at any time without penalty. The Lender may assign the Note without the Company’s consent.
Under the Security Agreement and the other Loan Documents, the Company granted the Lender a first priority security interest in all of its assets, both owned now and in the future, as collateral for full repayment of the Loan. The Lender may file Uniform Commercial Code financing statements with any jurisdiction and with sufficient descriptions of the property to perfect its security interest in all of the Company’s current and future assets. Upon default of the Loan, the Lender may accelerate repayment of the Loan, take possession of the Company’s assets, assign a receiver over the Company’s assets, and enforce other rights as to the Company’s assets as secured creditor. The Company must pay for all of the Lender’s reasonable legal fees and expenses incurred to enforce its rights under the Loan Documents.
Under the Loan Agreement, the Company is required to continue its current business of outsourced marketing solutions and without the prior consent of the Lender will not acquire in whole or in part any other company or business and shall not engage in any other business or open any other locations, and will use the proceeds of the Loan only in connection with the general and ordinary operations of its business and for the following purpose: general working capital for accounts receivable and inventory purchases.
The Loan is also subject to ongoing affirmative obligations of the Company, including punctual repayment of the Loan amount, maintaining proper accounting books and records in accordance with the opinion of LMHS, P.C. or another a Certified Public Accountant acceptable to the Lender, allowing the Lender to inspect its accounting books and records, furnishing audited, quarterly, monthly and other financial statements to the Lender, payment of Lender’s reasonable expenses for a field exam in 2022, allow the Lender to communicate with its accountants; maintain its properties in good repair subject to ordinary wear and tear; and obtain replacement-cost insurance for its property with the Lender as Mortgagee/Loss Payee; and management contracts for the Company’s properties must be subordinated to the rights of the Lender and there shall be no change of management company without the prior written consent of the Lender.
The Loan is further subject to the following financial requirements: (a) Debt Service Coverage Ratio: Cash flow to be calculated on an annual basis of at least 1.20 times EBITDA less cash taxes, distributions, dividends, shareholder withdrawals in any form, and unfinanced CAPEX divided by all scheduled principal payments on all debt plus cash interest payments made on all debt; (b) Minimum Net Worth: The Company will be required to meet the following minimum net worth thresholds: $2,000,000 at December 31, 2021; $2,750,000 at December 31, 2022; and $3,500,000 at December 31, 2023.
The Company may also not incur any additional indebtedness, secured or unsecured, except in the ordinary course of business; make loans or advances to others or guarantee others’ obligations except for certain ordinary advances to employees or ordinary customer credit terms; make investments; acquire any business; make capital expenditures except in the ordinary course of business; sell any material assets except in the ordinary course of business; grant any security interests or mortgages in its properties or assets.
The foregoing summary of the Loan Agreement, the Note, and the Security Agreement is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Loan Agreement, the Note, and the Security Agreement, copies of which are attached as Exhibits 10.30, 10.31 and 10.32 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and are incorporated herein by reference.
In connection with the Loan Agreement, on November 22, 2021, the Company, the Lender and Harte Hanks Response Management/ Boston, Inc. (the “Warehouse Provider”), the lessor of certain warehouse facilities to the Company, executed a Warehouseman’s Waiver in favor of the Lender (the “Warehouseman’s Waiver”). Under the Warehouseman’s Waiver, the Warehouse Provider disclaimed any interest in the property of the Company stored on the premises (the “Collateral”), and agreed not to interfere with the Lender’s enforcement of its rights in the Collateral. The Warehouse Provider further agreed to provide notice to the Lender of any default by the Company of its obligations as to the Warehouse Provider, and to give the Lender at least 30 days to exercise its rights, which period may be extended by the Lender up to 60 days upon its payment of the per-diem rental amount. After that period, unless the default has been cured by the Lender, the Warehouse Provider may dispose of such Collateral as it deems fit. Upon the receipt of written notice from the Lender and until such notice is rescinded, the Warehouse Provider shall only honor instructions from the Lender with respect to the Collateral, including, any direction from the Lender to dispose of all or any portion of the Collateral at any time, without any further consent or instruction from Company.
The foregoing summary of the Warehouseman’s Waiver is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Warehouseman’s Waiver, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 10.33 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not drawn any funds from the Loan under the Loan Agreement.
Executive Chairman Loans
We have also borrowed funds from our Executive Chairman, Andrew Stranberg, during periods when Mr. Stranberg did not already owe funds to us. The loans are unsecured, non-interest bearing, and there is no formal repayment plan. In September 2021, Mr. Stranberg loaned us $500,000 on an unsecured basis, accruing interest at 5% compounding monthly with no formal repayment plan. The total amount owed, including principal of $500,000 and interest of $4,740, was repaid to Mr. Stranberg on November 22, 2021. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, no amounts were due to Mr. Stranberg.
Contractual Obligations
Wildman Imprints Acquisition
On August 24, 2020, we entered into an asset purchase agreement to acquire the inventory, select fixed assets, and a customer list of the Wildman Imprints division of Wildman Business Group, LLC, or WBG. In connection with the asset acquisition, the customer list was purchased using a contingent earn-out calculation. The purchase price is equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the gross profit earned from the sale of product to the customer list for year 1 and thirty percent (30%) for years 2 and 3. Payments are due on the anniversary date of the purchase. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 the current portion of the earn-out liability amounted to $665,855 and $402,730, respectively. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the long-term portion of the earn-out liability amounted to $976,078 and $1,850,960, respectively.
In connection with the asset acquisition, we also had an amount due to the seller under a note in the amount of $162,358 as of December 31, 2021 for the inventory and property and equipment purchased. This amount accrues no interest, and is to be paid “as used” on a quarterly basis through the three-year earn-out period. We anticipate that the note will be paid in full in 2022, accordingly the note payable has been classified as current on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. We expect no deficiencies in our ability to make the payments required under the asset purchase agreements. The aggregate purchase price was $2,937,222, as follows:
Fair Value of Identifiable Assets Acquired:
Consideration Paid:
For further discussion see Notes J, M and N to our financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Property Leases
The following is a schedule by years of future minimum property lease payments at December 31, 2021:
Rent expense for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2021 totaled $388,769 and $406,806, respectively. We anticipate no deficiencies in our ability to make these payments.
G.A.P. Promotions Acquisition
On January 21, 2022, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with G.A.P. Promotions, LLC, a Massachusetts limited liability company (the “Seller”), Gayle Piraino (“Piraino”) and Stephen Piraino (together with Piraino, the “Members”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to acquire substantially all of the assets of the Seller used in the Seller’s branding, marketing and promotional products and services business (the “Business”), for an aggregate purchase price of (a) $500,000 in cash, subject to adjustment as set forth in the Purchase Agreement (the “Closing Cash Payment”); (b) a certain amount of restricted shares of the Company’s common stock; (c) installment payments equal to (i) $180,000 on the first anniversary of the date of the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Purchase Agreement (the “Closing Date”) and (ii) $300,000 on the second anniversary of the Closing Date; (d) an amount equal to the amount paid by the Seller (at cost) for all of the Seller’s Inventory (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) that is on hand as of the Closing Date; and (e) the Earn Out Payments, as defined below.
The Seller is entitled to receive the following payments (each, an “Earn Out Payment” and together, the “Earn Out Payments”) to the extent the Business achieves the applicable Gross Profit (as defined below) targets:
1. An Earn Out Payment equal to 70% of annual Gross Profit of the Business to the extent Gross Profit is above $1,500,000 for the trailing 12-month period from the first anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Initial Earn Out Period”); and
2. An Earn Out Payment equal to 70% of annual Gross Profit of the Business to the extent Gross Profit is above $1,500,000 for the trailing 12-month period from the second anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Second Earn Out Period”).
In the event that any Inventory included in the Purchased Assets (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) is not purchased during the Initial Earn Out Period, or any Accounts Receivables (as defined in the Purchase Agreement) included in the Purchased Assets are not paid during the Initial Earn Out Period (the “Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount”), then such Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount will be deducted from the Earn Out Payment due following the Initial Earn Out Period, or if such Unpurchased/Unpaid Amount exceeds the Earn Out Payment due following the Initial Earn Out Period, then such amounts will be deducted from the Earn Out Payment due following the Second Earn Out Period. If any Unpurchased/Unpaid Amounts are subsequently sold or paid, the Seller will be entitled to receive such amounts in full.
To the extent the Seller is entitled to all or a portion of an Earn Out Payment, the applicable Earn Out Payment (or portion thereof) will be paid on the date that is 30 days from the date on which it is determined the Seller is entitled to such Earn Out Payment.
“Gross Profit” means (i) the amount invoiced to customers less (ii) expenses charged by any third party (except the Company and its affiliates) directly related to that job or account. Such expenses shall include but not be limited to cost of goods sold, decoration, setup fees, third-party warehousing and fulfillment charges, inbound and outbound shipping, duties/taxes and credit card fees.
On January 31, 2022, the Company, the Seller and the Members entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Amendment”) to amend certain terms of the Purchase Agreement. Following entry into the Amendment, closing of the acquisition of the Business was completed on the same day.
Pursuant to the Amendment, the number of the Buyer Shares was changed to be the number of restricted shares of the Company’s common stock in an amount equal to the quotient of $100,000 divided by the closing price of the Company’s common stock at the close of the last trading date prior to the date of the Amendment. Pursuant to these terms, based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on January 28, 2022, the last trading date prior to the date of the Amendment, the Company issued 46,083 shares of common stock to Piraino. As previously agreed under the Purchase Agreement, the Buyer Shares were required to be issued under a separate restricted stock grant agreement and will vest over a one (1) year period (1/4 per quarter) beginning the first quarter after the Closing Date. The Buyer Shares were issued and sold as restricted securities (as defined in Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended) pursuant to the exemptions from registration provided by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and Rule 506 of Regulation D of the Securities Act and in reliance on similar exemptions under applicable state laws. Piraino represented that she is an accredited investor within the meaning of Rule 501(a) of Regulation D, and was acquiring the securities for investment only and not with a view towards, or for resale in connection with, the public sale or distribution thereof. The securities were offered without any general solicitation by the Company or its representatives. The Buyer Shares carry no registration rights that require or permit the filing of any registration statement in connection with their issuance.
We did not record a related contingency during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 or 2021 because the acquisition occurred after these periods.
Other Cash Obligations
Our other principal cash payment obligations have consisted principally of obligations under the loans described above. As stated above, as of December 31, 2021, we had not drawn any funds from the Loan under the Loan Agreement, and no amount was owed to our Executive Chairman and largest shareholder Andrew Stranberg.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion relates to critical accounting policies for our company. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Method of Accounting
The financial statements are prepared using the accrual method of accounting whereby revenues are recognized when earned and expenses are recognized when incurred. This method of accounting conforms to generally accepted accounting principles.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s unaudited consolidated financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
For purposes of the statement of cash flows, the Company considers all highly liquid investments with an initial maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of accounts receivable and deposits in excess of federally insured limits. These risks are managed by performing ongoing credit evaluations of customers’ financial condition and by maintaining all deposits in high quality financial institutions.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods (branded products) and goods in process (un-branded products awaiting decoration). All inventory is stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or market value.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred whereas major betterments are capitalized. Depreciation is provided using straight-line and accelerated methods over five years.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and notes payable. The recorded values of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and notes payable approximate their fair values based on their short-term nature.
Intangible Asset - Customer List
The Company accounts for intangible assets under the provision of ASC 350-20 “Accounting for Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.” The provision establishes standards for valuation and amortization of unidentifiable assets.
Under ASC 350-20-35-1, the cost of unidentifiable intangible assets is measured by the excess cost over the fair value of net assets acquired. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives shall not be amortized until its useful life is determined to be no longer infinite. The intangible assets are evaluated when a triggering event occurs, at least annually, for potential impairment.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASU 2014-09”), which is aimed at creating common revenue recognition guidance for GAAP and the International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS”). This new guidance provides a comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue guidance issued by the FASB. ASU 2014-09 also requires both qualitative and quantitative disclosures, including descriptions of performance obligations.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09 and all related amendments (“ASC 606”) and applied its provisions to all uncompleted contracts using the modified retrospective basis. The application of this new revenue recognition standard resulted in no adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings.
Performance Obligations
Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized when, or as, the Company satisfies its performance obligations by transferring goods or services to customers. A good or service is transferred to a customer when, or as, the customer obtains control of that good or service. A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time that the Company determines the customer has obtained control over the promised good or service. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration of which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for the promised goods or services.
The following provides detailed information on the recognition of the Company’s revenue from contracts with customers:
Product Sales - The Company is engaged in the development and sale of promotional programs and products. Revenue on the sale of these products is recognized after orders are shipped.
Reward Card Program - The Company facilitates a reward card program for a customer and receives a transaction fee when the customer issues or replenishes a new reward card. Revenue is recognized when cards are issued or replenished.
All performance obligations are satisfied at a point in time.
Product Sales
The Company is engaged in the development and sale of promotional programs and products. Revenue on the sale of these products is recognized after orders are shipped.
The following table disaggregates the Company’s revenue based on the timing of satisfaction of performance obligations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021:
Freight
The Company includes freight charges as a component of cost of goods sold.
Uncertainty in Income and Other Taxes
The Company adopted the standards for Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (income, sales, use, and payroll), which required the Company to report any uncertain tax positions and to adjust its financial statements for the impact thereof. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company determined that it had no tax positions that did not meet the “more likely than not” threshold of being sustained by the applicable tax authority. The Company files tax and information returns in the United States Federal, Massachusetts, and other state jurisdictions. These returns are generally subject to examination by tax authorities for the last three years.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes. Deferred taxes are provided for differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statements and income tax purposes. The Company has historically utilized accelerated tax depreciation to minimize federal income taxes.
Sales Tax
Sales tax collected from customers is recorded as a liability, pending remittance to the taxing jurisdiction. Consequently, sales taxes have been excluded from revenues and costs. The Company remits sales, use, and goods and services taxes to Massachusetts, other state jurisdictions, and Canada, respectively.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of FASB ASC Topic 340-10-S99-1, “Other Assets and Deferred Costs - SEC Materials” (“ASC 340-10-S99”) and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A, “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs were $2,755,344 consisting principally of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses that are directly related to our initial public offering and charged to shareholders’ equity upon the completion of our initial public offering.
Earnings/ Loss per Share
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) is computed based on the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. Diluted EPS is computed based on the weighted average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential shares of common stock outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include the issuance of potential shares of common stock for outstanding stock options and warrants.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect certain reported amounts and disclosures. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation costs under the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense related to the fair value of stock-based compensation awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Stock based compensation expense recognized includes the compensation cost for all stock-based payments granted to employees, officers, and directors based on the grant date fair value estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718. ASC 718 is also applied to awards modified, repurchased, or cancelled during the periods reported. Stock-based compensation is recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite vesting period and over the nonemployee’s period of providing goods or services.
Stock Option and Warrant Valuation
Stock option and warrant valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions. The fair value of stock-based payment awards was estimated using the Black-Scholes option model with a volatility figure derived from an index of historical stock prices for comparable entities. For warrants and stock options issued to non- employees, the Company accounts for the expected life based on the contractual life of the warrants and stock options. For employees, the Company accounts for the expected life of options in accordance with the “simplified” method, which is used for “plain-vanilla” options, as defined in the accounting standards codification. The risk-free interest rate was determined from the implied yields of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with a remaining life consistent with the expected term of the options.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) and July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases and ASU 2018-11, Targeted Improvements (collectively “Topic 842”). Topic 842 establishes a new lease model, referred to as the right-of-use model that brings substantially all leases onto the balance sheet. This standard requires lessees to recognize leased assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclose key information about the leasing arrangements in their financial statements. Leases are classified as finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern and classification of expense recognition in the income statement. The Company adopted Topic 842 effective on January 1, 2019 using the modified retrospective transition approach that allows a reporting entity to use the effective date as its date of initial application and not restate the comparative periods in the period of adoption when transitioning to the new standard. Consequently, the requisite financial information and disclosures under the new standard are excluded for dates and periods prior to January 1, 2019. In addition, the Company elected to use a number of optional simplification and practical expedients (reliefs) permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, including allowing the Company to combine fixed lease and non-lease components, apply the short-term lease exception to all leases of one year or less, and utilize the “package of practical expedients”, which permits the Company to not reassess prior accounting conclusions with respect to lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs under Topic 842. Adoption of this new standard resulted in the recognition of $1,094,778 of operating lease liabilities ($310,095 in current liabilities and $784,683 in long-term liabilities) which represented the present value of the remaining lease payments of $1,342,275, discounted using the Company’s lease discount rate of 3% and $1,094,778 of operating lease right-of-use assets. Refer to Note O to our financial statements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 for the impact to our financial statements as of December 31, 2021.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, “Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment.” ASU 2017-04 eliminates the two-step process that required identification of potential impairment and a separate measure of the actual impairment. Goodwill impairment charges, if any, would be determined by the difference between a reporting unit’s carrying value and its fair value (impairment loss is limited to the carrying value). This standard is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company’s adoption of this standard on January 1, 2020 did not have a material impact on its financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, “Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract.” The update aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. The update also requires an entity to expense the capitalized implementation costs of a hosting arrangement over the term of the hosting arrangement. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and may be applied prospectively or retrospectively. On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted this standard on a prospective basis. The Company’s adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on its financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting of Income Taxes”, which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. This update is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company’s adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on its financial statements.