ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth previously under the caption “Risk Factors.” This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Star Equity has operated as a multi-industry holding company since the acquisition of ATRM Holdings, Inc. (“ATRM”) in September 2019. With that merger, we added two construction businesses and one investment business to what historically had been a pure-play healthcare company. Today, Star Equity is a diversified holding company with operating businesses in two key industry sectors of the economy, Healthcare and Construction.
Our Healthcare division, which operates as Digirad Health, Inc., (“Digirad Health”) provides products and services in the area of nuclear medical imaging with a focus on cardiac health. Digirad Health operates across the United States. The Healthcare business comprises two businesses, Diagnostic Services, which offers imaging services to healthcare providers using a fleet of our proprietary solid-state gamma cameras and Diagnostic Imaging, which manufactures, distributes, and maintains our proprietary solid-state gamma cameras.
Our Construction division is made up of three operating businesses, KBS Builders, Inc. (“KBS”), EdgeBuilder, Inc., and Glenbrook Building Supply, Inc-with the latter two managed together and referred to jointly as “EBGL”. KBS is based in Maine and manufactures modular buildings for installation principally in the New England market. EBGL is based in the Minneapolis-Saint Paul area and principally serves the Upper Midwest. Together, the EBGL businesses manufacture and deliver structural wall panels and other engineered wood-based products as well as distribute building materials primarily to professional builder customers.
Currently, our Investments division is an internally focused unit directly supervised by Star Equity management. This entity currently holds our corporate-owned real estate, which currently includes our three manufacturing facilities in Maine that are leased to KBS, as well as any minority investments we make in public and private companies.
Current Market Conditions
Since the second quarter of 2020, navigating the COVID-19 pandemic has proved to be challenging for the vast majority of businesses across many sectors of the economy. As the vaccine rollout expanded through the second quarter of 2021, we have seen our businesses return substantially to pre-COVID levels. We believe the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic decreased as we are through the fourth quarter of 2021. On the Healthcare side, we see imaging volume increase due to an increase in camera sales, we expect that we will continue to recover from the impact of COVID. In Construction, we expect that continued recovery in employment and a strong housing market will underpin a period of secular growth.
The target market for our Healthcare products and services is comprised of cardiologists, internal medicine physicians, family practice physicians, hospitals, integrated delivery networks, and federal institutions in the United States that perform or could perform a diagnostic imaging procedure or have interest in purchasing diagnostic imaging products. Our diagnostic services businesses currently operate in approximately 25 states. The overriding challenge during 2020 was the drop in imaging volume due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we have seen a return to a more normal pre-COVID volume of imaging.
The target customers for our Construction division include professional home builders, general contractors, project owners, developers, and design firms. While housing demand and home improvement activity continues to be very strong, supply chain disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic led to a historic increase in building materials prices during the first half of 2021. While our revenues have benefited from both the robust activity in the housing sector and from price increases that we have implemented, our bottom line was negatively impacted in 2021 by this rapid and historic price increase in building materials. While our price increases and changes made to our contract terms began to have a positive impact to our bottom line in the second half of 2021, we believe they will have a significantly positive effect on our profitability in 2022.
Trends and Drivers
The market for diagnostic services and products is highly competitive. Our business, which is focused primarily on the private practice and hospital sectors, continues to face uncertainty in the demand for diagnostic services and imaging equipment, which we believe is due in part to the impact of the Deficit Reduction Act on the reimbursement environment and the 2010 Healthcare Reform laws, as well as general uncertainty in overall healthcare and legislative changes in healthcare, such as the Affordable Care Act. These challenges have impacted, and will likely continue to impact, our operations. We believe that the principal competitive factors in our market include budget availability for our capital equipment, qualifications for reimbursement, pricing, ease-of-use, reliability, and mobility. We have addressed, and will continue to address, these market pressures by modifying our healthcare business models, and by assisting our Healthcare customers in complying with new regulations and requirements.
In our Construction division, we continue to see a greater adoption of offsite or prefab construction in single-family and multi-family residential building projects in our target market. Our modular units and structural wall panels offer builders a number of benefits over traditional onsite or “stick built” construction. These include shorter time to market, higher quality, reduced waste, and potential cost savings, among others. 3D BIM software modeling and developments in engineered wood products offers greater design flexibility for higher-end applications. The need for more affordable housing solutions also presents a great opportunity for the continued growth of factory built housing.
Risks arising from global economic instability and conflicts, wars, and health crises could impact our business. In addition the inflation caused by such events may impact demand for our products and services and our cost to provide products and services.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to sustain recovery from the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had a $9.3 million increase in Healthcare division revenue, and a $19.1 million increase in Construction division revenue, as compared to the same period of the prior year. The Healthcare division continued to rebound to more normal levels versus last year with revenue increasing 18.9% for the twelve months ended 2021. Our Construction division grew revenue by 66.2% due to increased output at both KBS and EBGL coupled with pricing increases associated with higher raw materials costs. Nevertheless, the current COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact worldwide economic activity, and the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Discontinued Operations
The DMS Sale Transaction was completed on March 31, 2021, for $18.75 million in cash. After certain adjustments, including a working capital adjustment, we received an immaterial net escrow settlement in January, 2022. Additionally, Mobile Healthcare’s assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2020 are separately presented as held for sale on the audited Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Goodwill and long-lived asset valuation
We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, and when events or changes in circumstances indicate that a reduction in the carrying value may not be recoverable. We elected to by-pass the qualitative assessment for all reporting units to estimate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. We performed an impairment analysis by quantitatively comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. An impairment charge for goodwill is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value and such loss should not exceed the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
We also review long-lived assets for impairment, when events or changes in circumstances indicate that a reduction in the carrying value may not be recoverable. There are numerous factors that may cause the fair value of a reporting unit to fall below its carrying amount and/or that may cause the value of long-lived assets to not be recoverable, which could lead to the measurement and recognition of long-lived asset impairment charges. These factors include, but are not limited to, significant negative variances between actual and expected financial results, lowered expectations of future financial results, failure to realize anticipated synergies from acquisitions, adverse changes in the business climate, and the loss of key personnel. As of December 31, 2021, we performed qualitative trigger events analysis and concluded that if we are not able to achieve projected performance levels, future impairments could be possible, which could negatively impact our earnings. Based on the results of this qualitative assessment, we determined that it is more likely than not that long-lived assets were not impaired.
See Note 7. Goodwill, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
2021 Financial Highlights
Revenues were $106.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This is an increase of $28.4 million, or 36.3%, compared to the prior year due to the following:
•The increase was mainly due to $19.1 million revenue generated by the Construction division and $9.3 million by the Healthcare division.
•Diagnostic Imaging segment revenue increased $4.8 million, or 48.4%, primarily due to an increase in the number of cameras sold, reflecting the continuation of the division’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic-related downturn.
•Diagnostic Services segment revenue increased $4.5 million, or 11.5%, primarily due to an increase in scanning service performed, reflecting the continuation of the division’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic-related downturn.
Gross profit increased by $1.3 million, or 9.0%, compared to the prior year, mainly due to a $2.3 million increase in the Healthcare division as a result of the continuation of the division’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic-related downturn, offset by a $1.0 million decrease in Construction division gross profit due to an adverse impact of a rapid and historic rise in raw materials costs in the first half of the year. For the Construction division, we significantly increased pricing levels during 2021 to offset these higher input costs and expect to continue to see further benefit from these increases on our margins in 2022.
Total operating expenses increased $5.6 million, or 26.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to additional $4.0 million sales, marketing and general and administrative expenses. Additionally, there was a $2.9 million increase related to an impairment of goodwill from the Construction division, which was offset by a $0.8 million gain on the sale of MDOS.
Loss from continuing operations, net of income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $8.9 million, which is an increase of $3.6 million compared to our loss from continuing operations, net of income taxes of $5.3 million during the prior year. This was predominately driven by an additional net loss in the Construction division and increased corporate expenses primarily related to increases in IT, outside services, and an impairment of goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Diagnostic Services operated 81 nuclear gamma cameras and 46 ultrasound imaging systems. We measure efficiency by tracking system utilization, which is based on the percentage of days that our cameras, equipment and imaging systems are used to deliver services to customers out of the total number of days that they are available to deliver such services. System utilization for Diagnostic Services for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 57% compared to 59% of the prior year.
Use of EBITDA (Non-GAAP measure)
Management believes earnings before taxes, interest, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”) is a meaningful indicator of the Company’s performance that provides useful information to investors regarding the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. EBITDA is also considered by management as an indicator of operating performance and the most comparable measure across the regions in which we operate. Management also uses this measurement to evaluate capital needs and working capital requirements. EBITDA is a non-Generally Accepted Accounting Principals (“non-GAAP”) financial measure that is not intended to be considered in isolation from, as substitute for, or as superior to, the corresponding financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP or as a measure of the Company’s profitability. Because of these and other limitations, EBITDA should be considered along with GAAP based financial performance measures, including operating income or net income prepared in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA is derived from net (loss) income adjusted for the provision for (benefit from) income taxes, interest expense (income), and depreciation and amortization.
The reconciliation of EBITDA from continuing operations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is provided in the table below:
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results from operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
N/M - Not meaningful
*Percentage may not add due to rounding
Revenues
Healthcare
Healthcare revenue by segment is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Diagnostic Services revenue increased 11.5% compared to the prior year same period due to an increase in revenue from several large select contracts. Healthcare providers have reopened for onsite visits and more normal operations.
The 48.4% increase in Diagnostic Imaging revenue is due to higher number of cameras sold compared to the prior year same period.
Construction
Construction revenue is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The 66.2% increase in revenue for the Construction division was predominately due to increased pricing and number of contracts sold in both residential and commercial projects at KBS and EBGL businesses.
Investments
Investments revenue is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The decrease in investments revenue was due to the wind down of investment vehicles from Lone Star Value Management, LLC (“LSVM”).
Gross Profit
Healthcare Gross Profit
Healthcare gross profit is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The slight decrease in Diagnostic Services gross margin percentage was mainly due to an increase in raw materials costs.
The increase in Diagnostic Imaging gross margin percentage was mainly due to favorable product mix of new and used cameras sold throughout the year, compared to the prior year.
Construction Gross Profit
Construction gross profit is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The decrease in Construction gross profit and gross profit percentage were predominately due to the adverse impact of a rapid and historic rise in raw materials costs. We have significantly increased prices during 2021 to offset these higher input costs. Our backlog and sales pipeline remain at record levels.
Investments Gross Loss
Investments gross loss is summarized as follows (in thousands):
The gross loss relates to depreciation expense associated with the three manufacturing facilities acquired in April 2019.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are summarized as follows (in thousands):
N/M - Not meaningful
On a consolidated basis, there was a $4.0 million increase in sales, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”). Most of the increase was primarily associated with a $1.1 million increase in headcount at corporate, a $1.7 million increase in the Construction headcounts and commissions, and $1.3 million directly associated with a write-off of capitalized software implementation costs. However, SG&A as a percentage of revenue decreased to 21.2% of revenue, versus 23.8% in the prior year period.
Goodwill non-cash impairment charges increased by $2.9 million compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of an impairment recorded during the fourth quarter of 2021 in our KBS reporting unit. See Note 7. Goodwill, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are predominantly comprised of $4.2 million and $2.5 million, respectively, in Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness from the Healthcare and Construction businesses.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Intraperiod allocation rules require us to allocate our provision for income taxes between continuing operations and other categories or comprehensive income (loss) such as discontinued operations. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, a tax provision of $0.1 million and $0.1 million were recorded, in both years respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a tax expense of $79 thousand to discontinued operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a benefit of $22 thousand to discontinued operations.
See Note 12. Income Taxes, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Loss from Discontinued Operations
As described in Note 3. Discontinued Operations, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements, the results of our Mobile Healthcare reportable segment have been reported as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $6.5 million, as compared to $5.0 million in 2020, resulting in an increase in net cash used in operating activities of $1.5 million. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was attributable to net loss from operations and negative impact on net working capital changes.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $17.8 million, as compared to $1.3 million of net cash used by investing activities in 2020. The $19.1 million increase in net cash provided by investing activities was attributable to the proceeds from the sale of discontinued operations of $18.8 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $10.0 million, as compared to net cash generated from financing activities of $8.1 million in 2020, resulting in a decrease in net cash generated from financing activities of $18.0 million. The decrease was attributable to a net reduction in principal on existing debt of $11.7 million, payment of dividends of $4.4 million, partially offset by proceeds received related to the Private Placement of $2.1 million.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table shows cash flow information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Sources of Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, availability on our revolving lines of credit from our credit facility with Sterling, our three credit facilities with Gerber, one credit facility with Premier and cash raised from equity financing. As of December 31, 2021, we had $4.5 million of cash and cash equivalents, as well as approximately $2.5 million in undrawn available capacity on our SNB revolving line of credit. The Gerber facilities directly support our Construction businesses. As of December 31, 2021, we were fully drawn in terms of available capacity at $3.1 million on the KBS revolver and $1.7 million on the EBGL revolver. However, those facilities have loan limits of $4.0 million and $3.0 million, respectively, and we expect to be able to use more of that availability as our borrowing base increases with higher production levels. In January, 2022, we successfully completed the Offering with net proceeds of $12.8 million.
Going Concern
We require capital, principally for capital expenditures, acquisition activity, dividend payments and to finance accounts receivable and inventory. Our working capital requirements vary from period to period depending on inventory requirements, the timing of deliveries, and the payment cycles of our customers. Our capital expenditures consist of medical imaging and diagnostic devices utilized in the provision of our services, as well as vehicles and information technology hardware and software. In addition, we are putting in place capital expenditure programs in the Construction business in order to improve operations and expand our production output. Generally, this business is not capital intensive, although we had to augment working capital significantly in 2021, especially at KBS, to support higher production levels.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of obligations in the normal course of business. We incurred losses from continuing operations of approximately $8.9 million and $5.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have an accumulated deficit of $128.0 million and $125.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in operations was $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in operations of $5.0 million for the year ended 2020. The Company will need to secure additional future financing to accomplish its business plan over the next several years and that there can be no assurance on the availability or terms upon which such financing and capital might be available in the future.
At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $12.9 million in outstanding debt, all of which is classified as short-term and is explained in more detail in Note 8. Debt, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statement. The $7.0 million SNB debt primarily supports our Healthcare business and matures in 2024, but GAAP rules require that the outstanding balance be classified as short-term debt, due to the automatic sweep feature embedded in the traditional lockbox arrangement along with a subjective acceleration clause in the SNB Loan Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants related to our Healthcare division.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $4.8 million outstanding on our two Construction division revolvers with Gerber. As of that date, we were not in compliance with our bi-annual covenants on these Gerber facilities, but obtained waivers from Gerber for the bi-annual measurement period ended December 31, 2021. While Gerber has historically provided us with waivers, there is no assurance that we will be able to receive waivers for covenant violations in the future, or that we will meet compliance with covenants in the future.
As of December 31, 2021, we also have $1.1 million outstanding on the Star Loan, on which we have been making timely payments and are in compliance with all covenants. Related party notes of $2.3 million that were outstanding as of December 31, 2020 were fully paid off on April 1, 2021, using proceeds from the DMS Sale Transaction. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $4.5 million.
We are currently forecasting a covenant breach on our SNB Loan Agreement within twelve months after the date these financial statements have been issued. Upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an event of default under the SNB Loan Agreement, SNB may, among other things, declare the loans and all other obligations under the SNB Loan Agreement
immediately due and payable and increase the interest rate at which loans and obligations under the SNB Loan Agreement bear interest. Therefore, management concludes that this forecasted violation raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within twelve months after the date that financial statements are issued if we are not able to restructure those agreements or receive a waiver for non-compliance with our covenants. Our financial statements do not reflect any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Management is taking a number of steps to avoid these breaches and/or restructure the covenants within these agreements. These steps include improving our operations, considering additional or alternative financing arrangements, and negotiating with current lenders to amend our covenants. While we believe that we maintain strong transparency and relationships with our lenders, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in these efforts.
On January 24, 2022, we closed an underwritten public offering (the “Offering”) pursuant to an underwriting agreement with Maxim Group LLC, as representative of the underwriters. The Offering was for 9,500,000 shares of common stock (or pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of common stock in lieu thereof) and warrants to purchase up to 9,500,000 shares of common stock (the “common warrants”). Each share of common stock (or pre-funded warrant in lieu thereof) was sold together with one common warrant to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $1.50 per share and common warrant. Gross proceeds, before deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses and excluding any proceeds we may receive upon exercise of the common warrants, were $14.3 million and net proceeds were $12.8 million.
Common Stock Offerings
On May 28, 2020, we closed a public offering (the “2020 Offering”) of 2,225,000 shares of our common stock, and 2,225,000 warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase up to 1,112,500 additional shares of our common stock. The 2020 Offering price was $2.24 per share of common stock and $0.01 per accompanying Warrant (for a combined 2020 Offering price of $2.25), initially raising $5.0 million in gross proceeds before underwriter discounts and offering-related expenses.
The net proceeds to the Company from the 2020 Offering and Warrant exercises in 2020 were approximately $5.2 million (inclusive of the exercise of the over-allotment option), after deducting underwriter fees and offering-related expenses estimated at $0.8 million. We used a significant portion of the net proceeds from the 2020 Offering to fund working capital needs at our Construction businesses, particularly related to modular housing projects which we produced at KBS Boston-area projects. The remainder of the net proceeds was used for working capital and for other general corporate purposes.
On January 24, 2022, we closed an underwritten public offering (the “Offering”) pursuant to an underwriting agreement with Maxim Group LLC, as representative of the underwriters. The Offering was for 9,500,000 shares of common stock (or pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of common stock in lieu thereof) and warrants to purchase up to 9,500,000 shares of common stock (the “common warrants”). Each share of common stock (or pre-funded warrant in lieu thereof) was sold together with one common warrant to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $1.50 per share and common warrant. Gross proceeds, before deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses and excluding any proceeds we may receive upon exercise of the common warrants, were $14.3 million and net proceeds were $12.8 million.
We currently intend to use the net proceeds to pursue growth initiatives and fund potential acquisitions, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes. We will have broad discretion in determining how the proceeds of the Offering will be used, and our discretion is not limited by the aforementioned possible uses.
Credit Facilities
Sterling Credit Facility
On March 29, 2019, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “SNB Loan Agreement”) by and among certain subsidiaries of the Company, as borrowers (collectively, the “SNB Borrowers”); the Company, as guarantor; and Sterling National Bank.
The SNB Loan Agreement is a five-year credit facility maturing in March 2024, with a maximum credit amount of $20.0 million for revolving loans. Under the SNB Credit Facility, the SNB Borrowers can request the issuance of letters of credit in an aggregate amount not to exceed $0.5 million at any one time outstanding. The borrowings under the SNB Loan Agreement were classified as short-term obligations under GAAP as the agreement contained a subjective acceleration clause and required a lockbox arrangement whereby all receipts are swept daily to reduce borrowings outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $0.1 million of letters of credit outstanding and had additional borrowing capacity of $2.5 million.
At the SNB Borrowers’ option, the SNB Credit Facility will bear interest at either (i) a Floating LIBOR Rate, as defined in the SNB Loan Agreement, plus a margin of 2.50% per annum; or (ii) a Fixed LIBOR Rate, as defined in the SNB Loan Agreement, plus a margin of 2.25% per annum. Our floating rate on this facility at the end of 2021 was 2.60%.
On February 1, 2021, in connection with the closing of the sale of MDOS, we entered into a First Amendment to the SNB Loan Agreement pursuant to which SNB consented to the sale of MDOS and the Company’s name change from Digirad Corporation to Star Equity Holdings, Inc.
On March 31, 2021, in connection with completing the sale of DMS Health, we entered into a Second Amendment to the SNB Loan Agreement pursuant to which SNB consented to the sale of DMS Health and its subsidiaries and required the principal to be paid down to $7.0 million.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company was in compliance with all covenants.
Construction Loan Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, the Construction division had outstanding revolving lines of credit of approximately $4.8 million. Our Construction debt primarily included (i) $3.1 million principal outstanding on KBS’s $4.0 million revolving credit facility under the KBS Loan Agreement, with Gerber and (ii) $1.7 million principal outstanding on EBGL’s $3.0 million revolving credit facility, which was increased from $3.0 million to $4.0 million on July 30, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Construction division was at the maximum borrowing capacity under both revolving lines of credit, based on the inventory and accounts receivable on that day which fluctuates weekly.
KBS Loan Agreement
On February 23, 2016, ATRM, KBS and Main Modular Haulers, Inc. entered into the KBS Loan Agreement with Gerber. The KBS Loan Agreement provides KBS with a revolving line of credit with borrowing availability of up to $4.0 million. Availability under the line of credit is based on a formula tied to KBS’s eligible accounts receivable, inventory and other collateral. The KBS Loan Agreement, which was scheduled to expire on February 22, 2018, has been automatically extended for successive one (1) year periods in accordance with its terms and is now scheduled to expire on February 22, 2023. The KBS Loan Agreement will be automatically extended for another one (1) year period unless a party thereto provides prior written notice of termination. As of December 31, 2021, neither party has provided notice of termination. Upon the final expiration of the term of the KBS Loan Agreement, the outstanding principal balance is payable in full. Borrowings bear interest at the prime rate plus 2.75%, equating to 6.00% at December 31, 2021, with interest payable monthly. The KBS Loan Agreement also provides for certain fees payable to Gerber during its term, including a 1.5% annual facilities fee and a 0.10% monthly collateral monitoring fee. KBS’s obligations under the KBS Loan Agreement are secured by all of its assets and are guaranteed by the Company. Financial covenants required that KBS maintain a post-tax net income (as defined in the KBS Loan Agreement) at least equal to (a) $385 thousand for the trailing 6-month period ending June 30, 2021 and $500 thousand for the trailing fiscal year end December 31, 2021 and a minimum EBITDA (as defined in the KBS Loan Agreement) at (a) June 30, 2021 to be more than $880 thousand or (b) fiscal year end December 31, 2021 to be more than $1.5 million. The borrowings under the KBS Loan Agreement were classified as short-term obligations under GAAP as the agreement contained a subjective acceleration clause and required a lockbox arrangement whereby all receipts are swept daily to reduce borrowings outstanding. At December 31, 2021, approximately $3.1 million was outstanding under the KBS Loan Agreement.
On March 31, 2021, the parties to the KBS Loan Agreement have amended the KBS Loan Agreement to provide for increased availability under the KBS Loan Agreement to KBS under certain circumstances, including for new equipment additions, and certain other changes, as well as a waiver of certain covenants.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, KBS was not in compliance with the financial covenants. The occurrence of any unrectifiable event of default under the KBS Loan Agreement may result in KBS’s obligations under the KBS Loan Agreement becoming immediately due and payable. In all prior periods and as of December 31, 2021, we obtained a waiver from Gerber for financial covenant breaches. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain such waivers in the event of future financial covenant violations.
On March 8, 2022, the borrowers under the KBS Loan Agreement entered into the Nineteenth Amendment to KBS Loan Agreement to amend the financial covenants to require that KBS maintain (a) a net cash income (as defined in the KBS Loan Agreement) of at least equal to no less than $0 for the trailing 6-month period ending June 30, 2022 and no less than $500,000 for the trailing fiscal year ending December 31, 2022 and (b) a minimum EBITDA (as defined in the KBS Loan Agreement) of no less than $0 as of June 30, 2022 and no less than $850,000, as of the fiscal year ending December 31, 2022, as well as a waiver of certain covenants as of December 31, 2021.
EBGL Premier Note
On June 30, 2017, EdgeBuilder and Glenbrook (together, EBGL) entered into a Revolving Credit Loan Agreement (as amended, the Premier Loan Agreement with Premier Bank (“Premier”) providing EBGL with a working capital line of credit of up to $3.0 million.
Availability under the Premier Loan Agreement is based on a formula tied to EBGL’s eligible accounts receivable, inventory and equipment, and borrowings bear interest at the prime rate plus 1.50%, with interest payable monthly and the outstanding principal balance payable upon expiration of the term of the Premier Loan Agreement. The Premier Loan Agreement also provides for certain fees payable to Premier during its term. The initial term of the Premier Loan Agreement was scheduled to expire on June 30, 2018, but was extended multiple times by Premier through January 31, 2023. EBGL’s obligations under the Premier Loan Agreement are secured by all of their inventory, equipment, accounts and other intangibles, fixtures and all proceeds of the foregoing.
On January 31, 2020, EBGL entered into an Extension and Modification Agreement (the “Modification Agreement”) with Premier that modified the terms of the Revolving Credit Promissory Note (the “Premier Note”). Pursuant to the Modification Agreement, the amount of indebtedness evidenced by the Premier Note was reduced to $1.0 million, and the Premier Note was modified to: (a) extend the Final Maturity Date (as defined in the Premier Note) of the Premier Note to January 31, 2023, and (b) set the interest that the Premier Note would bear at 5.75% per annum. EBGL’s obligations under the Premier Loan Agreement were secured by all of its assets.
All obligations under the Premier Loan Agreement were repaid in full in the second quarter of 2021 and no amount remains outstanding as of December 31, 2021. In exchange Premier terminated all of its security interests in the assets of EBGL.
Gerber Star Loans
On January 31, 2020, SRE, 947 Waterford Road, LLC (“947 Waterford”), 300 Park Street, LLC (“300 Park”), and 56 Mechanic Falls Road, LLC (“56 Mechanic” and together with SRE, 947 Waterford, and 300 Park, (the “Star Borrowers”), each an Investments subsidiary, and the Company, ATRM, KBS, EdgeBuilder, and Glenbrook (collectively, the “Star Credit Parties”), entered into the Star Loan Agreement with Gerber providing the Star Borrowers with a credit facility with borrowing availability of up to $2.5 million ($2.0 million and $0.5 million to KBS and EBGL, respectively) or the Star Loan. The advance of $2.0 million to KBS is to be repaid in monthly installments of sixty (60) consecutive equal payments. The advance of $0.5 million to EBGL, which has been temporarily increased by $0.3 million due to be repaid on April 30, 2020, was to be repaid in monthly installments of twelve (12) consecutive equal payments. The Star Loan matures on the earlier of (a) January 1, 2025 or (b) the termination, the maturity or repayment of the EBGL Loan. Availability under the Star Loan Agreement was based on a formula tied to the value of real estate owned by the Star Borrowers, and borrowings bear interest at the prime rate plus 3.5% per annum.
On February 20, 2020, the Star Borrowers entered into a First Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (the “First Star Amendment”) with Gerber that amended the Star Loan Agreement in order to (i) temporarily advance $0.3 million to EBGL, which amount is to be repaid to Gerber on or before April 30, 2020; (ii) clarify that Gerber can make multiple advances under the Star Loan Agreement, and (iii) to correct the maturity date of the Star Loan. On April 30, 2020, the Star Borrowers entered into a Second Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (the “Second Star Amendment”) with Gerber that amended the Star Loan Agreement in order to change terms of repayment for the advance of $0.3 million to EBGL provided for under the First Star Amendment. Under the terms of the Second Star Amendment, the advance of $0.3 million to EBGL was to be repaid in three (3) consecutive equal monthly installments on the thirtieth (30th) day in each calendar month, commencing May 30, 2020, and in a final installment on or before July 31, 2020. As of September 30, 2020, EBGL had repaid the $0.3 million in full to Gerber.
The obligations of the Star Borrowers under the Star Loan Agreement are guaranteed by the Star Credit Parties and are secured by substantially all the assets of the Star Borrowers and the Star Credit Parties. Contemporaneously with the execution and delivery of the Star Loan Agreement, Jeffrey E. Eberwein, the Executive Chairman, executed and delivered a Guaranty (the “Gerber Eberwein Guaranty”) to Gerber, pursuant to which he guaranteed the performance of all the Star Borrowers’ obligations to Gerber. Mr. Eberwein’s obligations under the Gerber Eberwein Guaranty are limited in the aggregate to the amount of (a) $2.5 million, plus (b) costs of Gerber incidental to the enforcement of the Gerber Eberwein Guaranty or any guaranteed obligations.
On February 26, 2021, the Star Borrowers entered into a Third Amendment to the Star Loan Agreement (the “Third Star Amendment”) with Gerber that amended the contract rate to prime rate plus 3% and discharged the $2.5 million Gerber Eberwein Guaranty.
The financial covenants under the Star Loan Agreement include maintenance of a Debt Service Coverage Ratio of not less than 1:00 to 1:00, as defined in the Star Loan Agreement, as of December 31, 2021. The occurrence of any event of default under the Star Loan Agreements may result in the obligations of the Star Borrowers becoming immediately due and payable. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with the annual financial covenants.
As of December 31, 2021, $1.1 million was outstanding under the Star Loan Agreement. The borrowings under the Star Loan Agreement were classified as short-term obligations under GAAP, because the borrowings under the EBGL Loan Agreement were classified as short-term obligations under GAAP given the EBGL and KBS Loan Agreements contain a subjective acceleration clause and require a lockbox arrangement whereby all receipts are swept daily to reduce borrowings outstanding. Accordingly, if (i) a material adverse effect may be seen to have occurred, (ii) Gerber in its discretion deems a EBGL Loan Agreement default occurred, and (iii) the proceeds swept are insufficient to pay the balance outstanding, Gerber may then demand all obligations under the Star Loan Agreement immediately due and payable due to cross-default provision, occurring within the Star Loan Agreement. Since a material event can occur at any time, all obligations under the Star Loan Agreement, EBGL Loan Agreement and KBS Loan Agreement are classified as short-term obligations.
Gerber EBGL Loans
On January 31, 2020, EdgeBuilder and Glenbrook (the “EBGL Borrowers”), each a Construction Subsidiary, and the Company, 947 Waterford, 300 Park, 56 Mechanic, ATRM, and KBS (collectively, the “EBGL Credit Parties”), entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “EBGL Loan Agreement”) with Gerber providing the EBGL Borrowers with a credit facility with borrowing availability of up to $3.0 million (the “EBGL Loan”). On March 5, 2020, the EBGL Borrowers entered into a First Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (the “First EBGL Amendment”) with Gerber that amended the EBGL Loan Agreement and the KBS Loan Agreement to include a pledge $0.3 million of cash collateral by Lone Star Value Investors (“LSVI”) under the EBGL Loan Agreement which, prior to the First EBGL Amendment, was pledged by LSVI in connection with the KBS Loan Agreement. On July 1, 2020, the EBGL Borrowers entered into a Second Amendment that terminated the pledge of $0.3 million in cash collateral. On February 26, 2021, the EBGL Borrowers entered into a Third Amendment to the EBGL Loan Agreement (the “Third EBGL Amendment”), pursuant to which the Company and Gerber eliminated the minimum leverage ratio covenant, lowered the minimum EBITDA, and required the borrowers to not incur a net operating loss on bi-annual basis. The Third EBGL Amendment also discharged the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty described below. As of December 31, 2021, $1.7 million was outstanding under the EBGL Loan.
Availability under the EBGL Loan Agreement was also based on a formula tied to the EBGL Borrowers’ eligible accounts receivable and inventory, and borrowings bear interest at the prime rate plus 2.75% per annum. The EBGL Loan Agreement also provides for certain fees payable to Gerber during its term, including a 1.5% annual facilities fee and a 0.10% monthly collateral monitoring fee. EBGL’s obligations under the Premier Loan Agreement are secured by all of its assets. The EBGL Loan Agreement also provided for certain fees payable to Gerber during its terms. The EBGL Loan matures on the earlier of (a) January 1, 2023, unless extended, or (b) the termination, the maturity or repayment of the Star Loan. The maturity of the EBGL Loan is automatically extended for successive periods of one (1) year each unless terminated by Gerber or the EBGL Borrowers. The borrowings under the EBGL Loan Agreement were classified as short-term obligations under GAAP as the agreement contained a subjective acceleration clause and required a lockbox arrangement whereby all receipts are swept daily to reduce borrowings outstanding.
The obligations of the EBGL Borrowers under the EBGL Loan Agreement are guaranteed by the EBGL Credit Parties and are secured by substantially all the assets of the EBGL Borrowers and the EBGL Credit Parties. On March 5, 2020, contemporaneously with the execution and delivery of the First EBGL Amendment, Mr. Eberwein, executed and delivered a Guaranty (the “EBGL Eberwein Guaranty”) to Gerber which he guaranteed the performance of all the EBGL Borrowers’ obligations to Gerber under the EBGL Loan Agreement, including the full payment of all indebtedness owing by the EBGL Borrowers to Gerber in connection with the EBGL Loan Agreement and related financing documents. Mr. Eberwein’s obligations under the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty are limited in the aggregate to the amount of (a) $0.5 million, plus (b) costs of Gerber incidental to the enforcement of the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty or any guaranteed obligations.
On July 30, 2021, the EBGL Borrowers entered into a Fourth Amendment to the EBGL Loan Agreement (the “Fourth EBGL Amendment”) with Gerber, which increased the eligible inventory and the maximum borrowing limit from $3.0 million to $4.0 million.
The financial covenants under the EBGL Loan Agreement include maintenance of a minimum EBITDA and no net operating loss, as defined in the EBGL Loan Agreement, for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2021. The occurrence of any event of default under the EBGL Loan Agreement and certain events of default under the KBS Loan Agreement may result in the obligations of the EBGL Borrowers becoming immediately due and payable. As of December 31, 2021, no event of default was deemed to have occurred and EBGL was in compliance with the bi-annual financial covenants under the EBGL Loan Agreement.
On October 21, 2021, the EBGL Borrowers entered into the Fifth Amendment to the EBGL Loan Agreement (the “Fifth EBGL Amendment”) with Gerber to amend the definition of “Reserves” to include a minimum amount, subsequent to Glenbrook Building Supply, Inc. entering a new lease for a larger property.
On January 20, 2022, the EBGL Borrowers entered into the Sixth Amendment to the EBGL Loan Agreement (the “Sixth EBGL Amendment”) with Gerber and reduced the minimum average monthly loan amount to 25% of the $4.0 million maximum revolving amount.
On March 8, 2022, the EBGL Borrowers entered into the Seventh Amendment to the EBGL Loan Agreement (the “Seventh EBGL Amendment”) with Gerber to amend and lower the financial covenants to require that EBGL maintain (a) a lower net cash income (as defined in the EBGL Loan Agreement) at least equal to no less than $0 for the trailing 6-month period ending June 30, 2022 and no less than $1,000,000 for the trailing fiscal year end December 31, 2022 and (b) a reduced minimum EBITDA (as defined in the EBGL Loan Agreement) and no less than $0 as of June 30, 2022 or to be no less than $1,000,000 as of the fiscal year ending December 31, 2022.
Paycheck Protection Program
From April 2020 through May 2020, the Company and its subsidiaries received $6.7 million of loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”).
On April 30, 2020, each of KBS, EdgeBuilder and Glenbrook executed a separate promissory note evidencing unsecured loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”). The promissory note executed by KBS is for $0.8 million (the “KBS Note”), the promissory note executed by EdgeBuilder is for $0.2 million (the “EdgeBuilder Note”) and the promissory note executed by Glenbrook is for $0.2 million (the “Glenbrook Note”). The KBS Note, the EdgeBuilder Note and the Glenbrook Note, each dated April 30, 2020, are referred to together as the “Construction Notes”.
On May 11, 2020, the Company and each of Digirad Imaging Solutions, Inc. (“DIS”), DMS Imaging, Inc. (“DMS Imaging”) and DMS Health, each a direct or indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, executed a separate promissory note evidencing unsecured loans under the PPP. The promissory note executed by the Company, dated May 7, 2020, is for $0.8 million (the “Company Note”); the promissory note executed by DIS, dated May 5, 2020, is for $3.0 million (the “DIS Note”); the promissory note executed by DMS Imaging, dated May 5, 2020, is for $1.6 million (the “DMS Imaging Note”) and the promissory note executed by DMS Health, dated May 7, 2020, is for $0.1 million (the “DMS Health Note”). The Company Note, the DIS Note, the DMS Imaging Note, and the DMS Health Note are referred to together as the “Healthcare Notes”. The Construction Notes and the Healthcare Notes are referred to collectively as the “PPP Notes” and each promissory note individually as a “PPP Note”.
The PPP was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The loans evidenced by the Construction Notes were made through Bremer Bank (“Bremer”) as lender, and the loans evidenced by the Healthcare Notes were made through Sterling as lender.
The loans evidenced by the PPP Notes (the “PPP Loans”) have two-year terms and bear interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments under the PPP Loans are deferred until repaid.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, recipients of loans under the PPP could apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loan granted under the PPP. Such forgiveness would be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs and certain other eligible costs. Even if forgiveness is granted the PPP Loans may remain subject to review and audit for up to six (6) years.
During fiscal year 2020 and 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness on all PPP Loans. As of December 31, 2021, all PPP Loans were forgiven, resulting in a gain of $4.2 million in 2021 and $2.5 million in 2020, thus, the Company has no PPP Loans outstanding.
Eberwein Guarantees
SNB
On March 29, 2019, in connection with the Company’s entry into the SNB Loan Agreement, Mr. Eberwein, the Executive Chairman, entered into the Limited Guaranty Agreement (the “SNB Eberwein Guaranty”) with SNB pursuant to which he guaranteed to SNB the prompt performance of all the SNB Borrowers’ obligations to SNB under the SNB Loan Agreement, including the full payment of all indebtedness owing by Borrowers to SNB. Mr. Eberwein’s obligations under the SNB Eberwein Guaranty are limited in the aggregate to the amount of (a) $1.5 million, plus (b) reasonable costs and expenses of SNB incurred in connection with the SNB Eberwein Guaranty. Mr. Eberwein’s obligations under the SNB Eberwein Guaranty terminated upon the Company and Borrowers achieving certain milestones set forth therein.
Gerber
On March 5, 2020, contemporaneously with the execution and delivery of the First EBGL Amendment, Mr. Eberwein, executed and delivered the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty to Gerber pursuant to which he guaranteed the performance of all the EBGL Borrowers’ obligations to Gerber under the EBGL Loan Agreement, including the full payment of all indebtedness owing by the EBGL Borrowers to Gerber in connection with the EBGL Loan Agreement and related financing documents. Mr. Eberwein’s obligations under the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty were limited in the aggregate to the amount of (a) $0.5 million, plus (b) costs of Gerber incidental to the enforcement of the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty or any guaranteed obligations. On February 26, 2021, the Third EBGL Amendment discharged the EBGL Eberwein Guaranty and removed Mr. Eberwein as an ancillary guarantor from the EBGL Loan Agreement.
Premier
As a condition to the Premier Loan Agreement, Mr. Eberwein entered into a guaranty in favor of Premier, absolutely and unconditionally guaranteeing all of the borrowers’ obligations thereunder. As of May 26, 2021, all obligation under the Premier Loan Agreement have been repaid in full and no amount remains outstanding and Premier discharged Mr. Eberwein’s guaranty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On September 10, 2019, the parties to the KBS Loan Agreement entered a Consent and Acknowledgment Agreement and Twelfth Amendment to Loan Agreement, by and among Gerber, KBS, ATRM and the Company, pursuant to which the Company agreed to guarantee amounts borrowed by certain of ATRM’s subsidiaries from Gerber. The Twelfth Amendment requires us to serve as an additional guarantor with the existing guarantor, ATRM, with respect to the payment, performance and discharge of each and every obligation of payment and performance by the borrowing subsidiaries with respect to the loans made by Gerber to them. On January 31, 2020, the Company, ATRM, KBS and Gerber entered into a Thirteenth Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement (the “Thirteenth KBS Loan Amendment”) to amend the KBS Loan Agreement, by and among the Company, ATRM, KBS and Gerber, in order to, among other things (a) amend the definitions of “Ancillary Credit Parties,” “Guarantor,” “Obligations,” and “Subordinated Lender” to address the obligations of the Star Borrowers, the EBGL Borrowers, the Star Credit Parties, and the EBGL Credit Parties under the Loan Agreements and the Subordination Agreements to which they are a party and (b) add a new cross default provision.
See Note 8. Debt, within the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further detail.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate our estimates and judgments, the most critical of which are those related to revenue recognition, goodwill valuation, and income taxes. Furthermore, the impact on accounting estimates and judgements on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations due to COVID-19 has introduced additional uncertainties. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known.
Revenue Recognition
Pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. We record the amount of revenue that reflects the consideration that it expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised
goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
Revenue recognition is evaluated on a contract basis. Performance obligations are satisfied over time as work progresses or at a point in time. A performance obligation is satisfied over time if we have an enforceable right to payment, including a reasonable profit margin. Determining if an enforceable right to payment includes a reasonable profit margin requires judgment and is assessed on a contract by contract basis. For contracts requiring over time revenue recognition, the selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. We use a cost-based input measurement of progress because it best depicts the transfer of assets to the customer, which occurs as costs are incurred during the manufacturing process or as services are rendered. Under the cost-based measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the costs incurred to date.
Goodwill Valuation
We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, as well as when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We begin the process by performing an impairment analysis by quantitatively comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. Impairment charge for goodwill is recognized for the amount by which the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value and such loss should not exceed the total goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The Company recorded goodwill impairment of $3.4 million for the KBS reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company recorded goodwill impairment of $0.4 million for the EBGL reporting unit during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 7. Goodwill, within the notes to our consolidated financial statements, for further information.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes under the asset and liability method. This approach requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of differences between the tax basis of assets or liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements. We provide a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that these items will expire before we are able to realize their benefit. We calculate the valuation allowance in accordance with the authoritative guidance relating to income taxes, which requires an assessment of both positive and negative evidence regarding the realizability of these deferred tax assets when measuring the need for a valuation allowance. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
The authoritative guidance for income taxes defines a recognition threshold and measurement attributes for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax provision taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The guidance also provides direction on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. Under the guidance, the impact of an uncertain income tax position on the income tax return must be recognized at the largest amount that is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. An uncertain income tax position will not be recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of the income tax provision.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, within the notes to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for discussion of our discussion of new accounting pronouncements.