ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto included in this report on Form 10-K. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
This report includes various forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” Forward-looking statements discuss matters that are not historical facts. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, discussions regarding our operating strategy, sales and marketing strategy, regulatory strategy, our industry generally, overall economic conditions, our financial condition, liquidity and capital resources, our results of operations, and the impact of the ongoing coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic and our responses to it. Such statements include, but are not limited to, statements preceded by, followed by or that otherwise include the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “estimates,” “projects,” “can,” “could,” “may,” “will,” “would,” or similar expressions. For those statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. You should not unduly rely on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they were made. They give our expectations regarding the future but are not guarantees. We undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, unless required by law.
Overview
Stereotaxis is a pioneer and global leader in surgical robotics for minimally invasive endovascular intervention. We design, manufacture and market robotic systems, instruments and information systems for the interventional laboratory. Our proprietary robotic technology, Robotic Magnetic Navigation, fundamentally transforms endovascular interventions using precise computer-controlled magnetic fields to directly control the tip of flexible interventional catheters or devices. Direct control of the tip of an interventional device, in contrast to all manual hand-held devices that are controlled from their handle, can improve the precision, stability, reach and safety of these devices during procedures.
Our primary clinical focus has been electrophysiology, specifically cardiac ablation procedures for the treatment of arrhythmias. Cardiac ablation has become a well-accepted therapy for arrhythmias and a multi-billion-dollar medical device market with expectations for substantial long-term growth. We have shared our aspiration and a product strategy to expand the clinical focus of our technology to several additional endovascular indications including coronary, neuro, and peripheral interventions.
There is substantial real-world evidence and clinical literature for Robotic Magnetic Navigation in electrophysiology. Hundreds of electrophysiologists at over one hundred hospitals globally have treated over 100,000 arrhythmia patients with our robotic technology. Clinical use of our technology has been documented in over 400 clinical publications. Robotic Magnetic Navigation is designed to enable physicians to complete more complex interventional procedures with greater success and safety by providing image-guided delivery of catheters through the blood vessels and chambers of the heart to treatment sites. This is achieved using externally applied computer-controlled magnetic fields that govern the motion of the working tip of the catheter, resulting in improved navigation. The more flexible atraumatic design of catheters driven using magnetic fields may reduce the risk of patient harm and other adverse events. Performing the procedure from a control cockpit enables physicians to complete procedures in a safe location protected from x-ray exposure, with greater ergonomics, and improved efficiency. We believe these benefits can be applicable in other endovascular indications where navigation through complex vasculature is often challenging or unsuccessful and generates significant x-ray exposure.
Our primary products include the Genesis RMN System, the Odyssey Solution, and other related devices. We also offer to our customers the Stereotaxis Imaging Model S x-ray System and other accessory devices.
The Genesis RMN System is designed to enable physicians to complete more complex interventional procedures by providing image-guided delivery of catheters through the blood vessels and chambers of the heart to treatment sites. This is achieved using externally applied magnetic fields that govern the motion of the working tip of the catheter, resulting in improved navigation, efficient procedures, and reduced x-ray exposure.
The Odyssey Solution consolidates lab information onto one large integrated display, enabling physicians to view and control all the key information in the operating room. This is designed to improve lab layout and procedure efficiency. The system also features a remote viewing and recording capability called Odyssey Cinema, which is an innovative solution that delivers synchronized content for optimized workflow, advanced care, and improved productivity. This tool includes an archiving capability that allows clinicians to store and replay entire procedures or segments of procedures. This information can be accessed from locations throughout the hospital local area network and over the global Odyssey Network providing physicians with a tool for clinical collaboration, remote consultation, and training.
We promote our full suite of products in a typical hospital implementation, subject to regulatory approvals or clearances. This implementation requires a hospital to agree to an upfront capital payment and recurring payments. The upfront capital payment typically includes equipment and installation charges. The recurring payments typically include disposable costs for each procedure, equipment service costs beyond the warranty period, and ongoing software updates. In hospitals where our full suite of products has not been implemented, equipment upgrade or expansion can be implemented upon purchasing of the necessary upgrade or expansion.
We have received regulatory clearances and registration necessary for us to market the Genesis RMN System in the U.S. and Europe, and we are in the process of obtaining necessary registrations for extending our markets in other countries. Our prior generation robotic magnetic navigation system, the Niobe System, and the Odyssey Solution, Cardiodrive, and various disposable interventional devices have received regulatory clearance in the U.S., Europe, Canada, China, Japan and various other countries. We have received the regulatory clearance, licensing and/or CE Mark approvals that allow us to market the Vdrive and Vdrive Duo Systems with the V-CAS, V-Loop and V-Sono devices in the U.S., Canada and Europe. Stereotaxis Imaging Model S x-ray System is CE marked and cleared by the FDA.
Not all products have and/or require regulatory clearance in all of the markets we serve. Please refer to “Regulatory Approval” in Item 1 for a description of the regulatory clearance, licensing, and/or approvals we currently have or are pursuing.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $10.1 million of backlog, consisting of outstanding purchase orders and other commitments for these systems. Of the December 31, 2021 backlog, we expect approximately 78% to be recognized as revenue over the course of 2022. We had backlog of approximately $6.9 million as of December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance that we will recognize such revenue in any particular period or at all because some of our purchase orders and other commitments are subject to contingencies that are outside our control. These orders and commitments may be revised, modified or canceled, either by their express terms, as a result of negotiations or by project changes or delays. In addition, the sales cycle for the robotic magnetic navigation system is lengthy and generally involves construction or renovation activities at customer sites. Consequently, revenues and/or orders resulting from sales of our robotic magnetic navigation system can vary significantly from one reporting period to the next.
We have strategic relationships with technology leaders in the global interventional market. Through these strategic relationships we provide compatibility between our robotic magnetic navigation system and digital imaging and 3D catheter location sensing technology, as well as disposable interventional devices. The maintenance of these strategic relationships, or the establishment of equivalent alternatives, is critical to our commercialization efforts. There are no guarantees that any existing strategic relationships will continue, and efforts are ongoing to ensure the availability of integrated systems and devices and/or equivalent alternatives. We cannot provide assurance as to the timeline of the ongoing availability of such compatible systems or our ability to obtain equivalent alternatives on competitive terms or at all.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Prior to the spread of COVID-19, we were experiencing procedure trends consistent with the fourth quarter of 2019. We also saw strength in new capital orders. Beginning in January 2020, we saw a substantial reduction in robotic procedures in Asia Pacific, especially in China. By the height of the pandemic in that region, weekly procedures decreased to approximately 40% of the average rate experienced in the fourth quarter. As the COVID-19 pandemic subsided in China in March 2020, procedure volume began to recover and, by the end of the first quarter of 2020, we were seeing weekly procedures in the Asia Pacific region approach 70% of the fourth quarter average rates. Procedure disruption in other geographies was not significant until the middle of March 2020, when the worldwide impact of COVID-19 intensified. By the end of March, procedures in the U.S and Europe, which represent the majority of our procedures, declined to approximately 70% of the weekly procedure rate experienced in the fourth quarter of 2019. As the pandemic spread throughout the first quarter of 2020, various local restrictions on travel, mandatory closures, social distancing protocols and shelter-in-place orders negatively impacted our ability to complete installation and service activities, which resulted in declines in system and service revenue in the first quarter. Our supply-chain also experienced some impact as some suppliers struggled to source sub-components in February when most factories in China were seemingly closed. These issues were mostly alleviated by the end of the first quarter with the opening of the Chinese economy. During the first quarter, we also took proactive actions to reduce the risk that a prolonged future reduction in Chinese manufacturing might have on us. During the early portion of the second quarter, weekly procedures in the United States and Europe continued to decline, reaching approximately 40% of fourth quarter 2019 levels by the middle of April. In May, with the reopening of various regions, procedures in both geographies began to recover and by the end of June, procedures were approximating the level seen before the pandemic. During the second quarter of 2020, weekly procedure rates in Asia Pacific continued to improve, eventually reaching the pre-pandemic weekly procedure rate. During the third quarter of 2020, weekly procedures continued to recover and approached the levels seen before the pandemic. During the fourth quarter of 2020, periodic resurgence of COVID-19 caused hospitals and patients in some areas to again postpone procedures. Overall, weekly procedures during the fourth quarter remained generally consistent with the recovery seen in the third quarter.
During the first quarter of 2021, periodic resurgences of COVID-19 and the delayed rollout of vaccines in some geographies continued to impact our procedure volumes. Overall, procedure volumes improved slightly compared to the fourth quarter 2020 and were approximately 5% higher than the first quarter of 2020. While procedures in the Asia Pacific region had recovered to pre-pandemic levels, procedures in other geographies remained impacted with total procedures approximately 15% below those seen in the first quarter of 2019. During the second quarter of 2021, as the rollout of vaccines continued in the US and were varied in other geographies, overall procedure volumes for the second quarter 2021 remained fairly consistent with the first quarter of 2021 and were nearly 40% higher than the second quarter of 2020. During the third and fourth quarters of 2021, a resurgence of COVID and hospital staffing shortages depressed procedure volumes. Overall procedure volumes fell in the third quarter of 2021 by approximately 9% as compared to the third quarter of 2020 and overall procedure volumes in the fourth quarter of 2021 fell by approximately 8% as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020.
We have experienced some challenges and disruptions due to the pandemic such as worldwide supply chain disruptions, including shortages and inflationary pressures, and logistics delays which makes it difficult for us to source parts and ship our products. Our customers have also experienced similar supply chain issues as well as labor shortages, both of which have contributed to delayed hospital construction project timelines. While concerns remain, we are generally able to conduct normal business activities albeit in a more deliberate manner than prior to the pandemic.
Ongoing
Even with the rollout of effective vaccines, we do not expect all markets to recover at the same pace. The ongoing impact that the pandemic will have on our business will likely continue to vary by individual geography based on the extent of the outbreak in each area, the timing of vaccine distribution, specific governmental restrictions and the availability of testing capabilities, personal protective equipment, and hospital facilities, as well as decisions by our vendors, suppliers, customers and, ultimately, patients in response to the pandemic, none of which we are able to currently and accurately predict. While we cannot reliably estimate the depth or length of the impact, we continue to anticipate significant, periodic disruptions to our procedures volumes, service activities and system placements in 2022. In addition, we would expect that capital system orders will continue to experience some delay.
Capital markets and worldwide economies continue to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the outlook for 2022 depends on future developments, including but not limited to: the length and severity of ongoing outbreaks (including further new variants beyond Delta and Omicron, which may be more contagious, more severe or less responsive to treatment or vaccines), the effectiveness of containment actions, and the timing of vaccinations and achievement of herd immunity. The impact on local and/or global economies is uncertain, including ongoing risk of recession. Such economic disruptions, including a recession, could have a material adverse effect on our long-term business as hospitals continue to monitor and adjust capital and overall spending or redirect such spending to treatments related directly to the pandemic. To date, our manufacturing operations and supply chains have been manageably impacted, but we cannot guarantee that such will not be impacted further in the future. If our manufacturing operations or supply chains are materially interrupted, it may not be possible for us to timely manufacture relevant products at required levels, or at all. A material reduction or interruption to any of our manufacturing processes could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, and financial condition. Further, the COVID-19 pandemic and local actions, such as “shelter-in-place” orders and restrictions on our ability to travel and access our customers or temporary closures of our facilities or the facilities of our suppliers and their contract manufacturers, could also significantly impact our sales and our ability to ship our products and supply our customers. Any of these events could negatively impact the number of procedures performed and the number of system placements and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures. We review our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe the following accounting policies are critical to the judgments and estimates we use in preparing our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
We generate revenue from the initial capital sales of systems as well as recurring revenue from the sale of our proprietary disposable devices, from royalties paid to the Company on the sale by Biosense Webster of co-developed catheters, and from other recurring revenue including ongoing software updates and service contracts.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” we account for a contract with a customer when there is a legally enforceable contract between the Company and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. We record our revenue based on consideration specified in the contract with each customer, net of any taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities.
For contracts containing multiple products and services the Company accounts for individual products and services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, which is if a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package, and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. The Company recognizes revenues as the performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to a customer.
For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which the Company separately sells the products or services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, then the Company estimates the standalone selling price considering market conditions and entity-specific factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the products and services and market conditions. The Company regularly reviews standalone selling prices and updates these estimates as necessary.
Our revenue recognition policy affects the following revenue streams in our business as follows:
Systems:
Contracts related to the sale of systems typically contain separate obligations for the delivery of system(s), installation and an implied obligation to provide software enhancements if and when available for one year following installation. Revenue is recognized when the Company transfers control to the customer, which is generally at the point when acceptance occurs that indicates customer acknowledgment of delivery or installation, depending on the terms of the arrangement. Revenue from the implied obligation to deliver software enhancements if and when available is recognized ratably typically over the first year following installation of the system as the customer receives the right to software updates throughout the period and is included in Other Recurring Revenue. The Company’s system contracts generally do not provide a right of return. Systems are generally covered by a one-year assurance type warranty; warranty costs were approximately $0.2 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Disposables:
Revenue from sales of disposable products is recognized when control is transferred to the customers, which generally occurs at the time of shipment, but can also occur at the time of delivery depending on the customer arrangement. Disposable products are covered by an assurance type warranty that provides for the return of defective products. Warranty costs were not material for the periods presented.
Royalty:
The Company is entitled to royalty payments from Biosense Webster, payable quarterly based on net revenues from sales of the co-developed catheters.
Other Recurring Revenue:
Other recurring revenue includes revenue from product maintenance plans, other post warranty maintenance, and the implied obligation to provide software enhancements if and when available for a specified period, typically one year following installation of our systems. Revenue from services and software enhancements is deferred and amortized over the service or update period, which is typically one year. Revenue related to services performed on a time-and-materials basis is recognized when performed.
Sublease Revenue:
A portion of our principal executive office was subleased to a third party through 2021. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), the Company recorded sublease income as revenue.
The Company invoices its customers based on the billing schedules in its sales arrangements. Contract assets primarily represent the difference between the revenue that was recognized based on the relative selling price of the related performance obligations and the contractual billing terms in the arrangements. Customer deposits primarily relate to future system sales but can also include deposits on disposable sales. Deferred revenue is primarily related to service contracts, for which the service fees are billed up-front, generally quarterly or annually, and for amounts billed in advance for system contracts for which some performance obligations remain outstanding. For service contracts, the associated deferred revenue is generally recognized ratably over the service period. For system contracts, the associated deferred revenue is recognized when the remaining performance obligations are satisfied. See Note 2 to the financial statements for additional detail on deferred revenue. The Company did not have any impairment losses on its contract assets for the periods presented.
Assets Recognized from the Costs to Obtain a Contract with a Customer
The Company has determined that sales incentive programs for the Company’s sales team meet the requirements to be capitalized as the Company expects to generate future economic benefits from the related revenue generating contracts after the initial capital sales transaction. The costs capitalized as contract acquisition costs included in prepaid expenses and other assets in the Company’s balance sheets were $0.2 million and $0.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company did not incur any impairment losses during any of the periods presented.
Leases
The Company accounts for leases in accordance with ASU No. 2016-02 “Leases” (Topic 842) and all subsequent ASUs that modified Topic 842. A lease is defined as a contract, or part of a contract, that conveys the right to control the use of identified property, plant or equipment for a period of time in exchange for consideration. The Company determines if a contract contains a lease at inception. For contracts where the Company is the lessee, operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and operating lease liability on the Company’s balance sheet. The Company currently does not have any finance leases.
Operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. ROU assets also include any initial direct costs incurred and any lease payments made at or before the lease commencement date, less lease incentives received. The Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the commencement date in determining the lease liabilities as the Company’s leases generally do not provide an implicit rate. Lease terms may include options to extend or terminate when the Company is reasonably certain that the option will be exercised. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
The Company also has lease arrangements with lease and non-lease components. The Company elected the practical expedient not to separate non-lease components from lease components for the Company’s operating leases. Additionally, the Company applies the short-term lease measurement and recognition exemption in which right of use assets and lease liabilities are not recognized for leases less than twelve months.
As disclosed in Note 6, on March 1, 2021, the Company entered into an office lease agreement (the “Lease”) with Globe Building Company (the “Landlord”), under which the Company is leasing executive office space and manufacturing facilities of approximately 43,100 square feet of rentable space located at 710 N. Tucker Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri (the “Premises”) that serves as the Company’s new principal executive and administrative offices and manufacturing facility. Lease payments commenced on January 1, 2022 and the lease has a term of ten years, with two renewal options of five years each. The minimum annual rent under the terms of the Lease ranges from approximately $0.8 million in 2022 to $1.0 million in 2031.
The Company gained access to the Premises in the third quarter 2021 to begin constructing leasehold improvements. In accordance with ASC 842, the Company recorded a ROU asset and lease liability. The initial recognition of the ROU asset and lease liability was $5.9 million. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company received an occupancy permit and relocated its operations to the new leased space.
Cost of Contracts
Costs of systems revenue include direct product costs, installation labor and other costs, estimated warranty costs, and initial training and product maintenance costs. These costs are recorded at the time of sale. Costs of disposable revenue include direct product costs and estimated warranty costs and are recorded at the time of sale. Cost of revenue from services and license fees are recorded when incurred. Cost of sublease revenue is recorded on a straight-line basis.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock compensation expense, which is a non-cash charge, results from stock option, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, and restricted share grants made to employees, directors, and third-party consultants at the fair value of the grants. For time-based awards, the fair value of options and stock appreciation rights granted was determined using the Black-Scholes valuation method which gives consideration to the estimated value of the underlying stock at the date of grant, the exercise price of the option, the expected dividend yield and volatility of the underlying stock, the expected life of the option and the corresponding risk-free interest rate. The fair value of the grants of restricted shares and units was determined based on the closing price of our stock on the date of grant. Stock compensation expense for options, stock appreciation rights and for time-based restricted share grants and units is amortized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the underlying issue, generally over four years except for grants to directors which are generally earned over a period of six months. Stock compensation expense for performance-based restricted shares, if any, is amortized on a straight-line basis over the anticipated vesting period and is subject to adjustment based on the actual achievement of objectives. Compensation expenses related to grants to non-employees are re-measured quarterly through the vesting date. Compensation expense is recognized only for those options expected to vest, net of actual forfeitures. Estimates of the expected life of options have been based on the average of the vesting and expiration periods, which is the simplified method under general accounting principles for share-based payments. Estimates of volatility utilized in calculating stock-based compensation have been prepared based on historical data. Actual experience to date has been consistent with these estimates.
For market-based awards, stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the minimum service period regardless of whether or not the market target is probable of being achieved. The fair value of such awards is estimated on the grant date using Monte Carlo simulations.
The amount of compensation expense to be recorded in future periods may increase if we make additional grants of options, stock appreciation rights or restricted shares. The amount of expense to be recorded in future periods may decrease if the requisite service periods are not completed.
Valuation of Inventory
We value our inventory at the lower of the actual cost of our inventory, as determined using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, or its current net realizable value. We periodically review our physical inventory for excess, obsolete, and potentially impaired items and reserve accordingly. Our reserve estimate for excess and obsolete is based on expected future use. Excess manufacturing overhead costs attributable to idle facility expenses or abnormally low production volumes are excluded from inventory and recorded as an expense in the period incurred.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. We have established a valuation allowance against the entire amount of our deferred tax assets net of liabilities because we are not able to conclude, due to our history of operating losses, that it is more likely than not that we will be able to realize any portion of the deferred tax assets.
In assessing whether and to what extent deferred tax assets are realizable, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. We consider projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. Based upon the level of historical taxable losses, limitations imposed by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and projections for future losses over periods which the deferred tax assets are deductible, we determined that a 100% valuation allowance of deferred tax assets net of liabilities was appropriate.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue. Revenue increased from $26.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $35.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 32%. Revenue from sales of systems increased from $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 208%, driven by increased system sales volumes in the current year period. Revenue from sales of disposable interventional devices, service and accessories increased to $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately 4%, driven by higher procedure volumes partially offset by slightly lower service revenue. Sublease revenue was $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue increased from $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 54%. As a percentage of our total revenue, overall gross margin decreased to 66% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 71% for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by changes in product mix. Cost of revenue for systems sold increased from $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increased system sales volumes in the current year period. Gross margin for systems increased from less than negative $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to positive $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Cost of revenue for disposables, service, and accessories increased to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.0 million for year ended December 31, 2020 driven by increased disposable sales volumes and higher expenses incurred under service contracts in the current year period. Gross margin for disposables, service and accessories was 86% for the current year period compared to 87% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of sublease revenue was $1.0 million for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense increased from $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 25%. This increase was primarily due to higher project spending and measured hiring in the current year period.
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expense increased from $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 7%. This increase was primarily due to increased sales and marketing activities as normal activities resume following the height of the pandemic as well as higher compensation related costs.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expenses include finance, information systems, legal, and general management expenses. General and administrative expense increased from $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately 120%. This increase was primarily driven by higher stock-based compensation expense for the previously announced CEO Performance Award and the appreciating stock price as well as higher professional service fees in the current year period.
Interest Income (Expense). Net interest expense was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and net interest income was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31. 2020.
Income Taxes
Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain. Accordingly, net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by valuation allowances as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020 to reflect these uncertainties. We may not be able to utilize all of these loss carryforwards prior to their expiration. As of December 31, 2021, we had gross federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $120.1 million. The federal net operating loss carryforwards reflect accumulated book losses reduced for the 2013 IRC Section 382 ownership change limitation of $255.6 million and approximately $123.3 million of book/tax differences and expiration of unused carryforwards. The federal net operating loss carryforwards generated prior to the 2018 tax year will expire between 2030 and 2037. The federal net operating loss generated during and beyond 2018 will be carried forward indefinitely as a result of changes in the tax law following the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. As of December 31, 2021, we had gross state net operating loss carryforward of approximately $37.6 million which will expire at various dates between 2022 and 2041 if not utilized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity refers to the liquid financial assets available to fund our business operations and pay for near-term obligations. These liquid financial assets consist of cash and cash equivalents. We are continuously and critically reviewing our liquidity and anticipated capital requirements in light of the significant uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $498.7 million with cash and cash equivalents of $40.1 million, inclusive of restricted cash. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated by operations and proceeds from our debt and stock offerings.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any debt.
Revolving Line of Credit
The Company had a working capital line of credit with its primary lender, Silicon Valley Bank that matured on June 30, 2020 and was not renewed.
Paycheck Protection Program
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. Among the provisions contained in the CARES Act was the creation of the Paycheck Protection Program that provides for Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Section 7(a) loans for qualified small businesses. In general, the loan could be forgiven as long as the funds were used for payroll related expenses as well as rent and utilities paid during the twenty-four-week period from the date of the loan and as long as certain headcount and salary/wage levels were maintained. On April 10, 2020, the Company was informed by its lender, Midwest BankCentre (the “Bank”), that the Bank received approval from the SBA to fund the Company’s request for a loan under the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP Loan”). Per the terms of the PPP Loan, the Company received total proceeds of approximately $2.2 million from the Bank on April 20, 2020. In accordance with the loan forgiveness requirements of the CARES Act, the Company used the full proceeds from the PPP Loan primarily for payroll costs, rent and utilities. In March 2021, the Company applied for loan forgiveness and in June 2021, full loan forgiveness was granted by the SBA. The Company recognized a net gain from debt extinguishment of approximately $2.2 million upon forgiveness.
Equity Financing
As disclosed in Note 9, on May 25, 2020, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain accredited investors, whereby it, in a direct registered offering, agreed to issue and sell to the investors an aggregate of 3,658,537 shares of the Company’s common stock, $0.001 par value per share, at a price of $4.10 per share. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $15.0 million, after offering expenses.
Liquidity
The following table summarizes our cash flow by operating, investing and financing activities for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities. We used approximately $2.9 million and $3.5 million of cash in operating activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash used in operating activities was driven by lower working capital requirements during the current year period.
Net cash used in investing activities. We used $1.4 million and less than $0.1 million of cash in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used in investing activities was driven by the purchases of equipment and design and build-out costs associated with our new facility.
Net cash provided by financing activities. We generated approximately $0.5 million and 17.3 million of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The cash generated in the current year period was driven by the proceeds from issuance of stock from exercises of stock options, net of issuance costs, and proceeds from our employee stock purchase program. The cash generated in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the net proceeds of $15.0 million received from the May 2020 Securities Purchase Agreement and $2.2 million of proceeds received from the Paycheck Protection Program loan.
At December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $38.1 million, compared to a working capital of approximately $39.1 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in working capital was primarily driven by the net loss incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company had a working capital line of credit with its primary lender, Silicon Valley Bank that matured on June 30, 2020 and was not renewed.
Our principal source of liquidity is cash provided by operations and by the issuance of common stock through the exercise of stock options and our employee stock purchase program as well as cash received from past equity raises. The Company believes the cash and cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet its obligations as they become due in the ordinary course of business for at least 12 months following the date of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as for periods beyond that 12-month period. Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including success of clinical adoption within the installed base of robotic magnetic systems, new placements of capital systems, the resources we devote to developing and supporting our products, and other factors. We expect to continue to fund our operations with cash resources primarily generated from the proceeds of our past equity raises and from our working capital. In the future, we may finance cash needs through the sale of other equity securities or non-core assets, strategic collaboration agreements, debt financings or through distribution rights.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently have, nor have we ever had, any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. As a result, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could have arisen if we had engaged in these relationships.