ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. References to the “Company,” “us” or “we” refer to ShoulderUp Technology Acquisition Corp.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on May 20, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On November 19, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 30,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $300 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 1,350,000 private units for an aggregate purchase price of $13,500,000.
Upon the closing of our IPO on November 19, 2021, $306,000,000 ($10.00 per unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the initial public offering and the sale of private shares were placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete the initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the IPO , we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us but net of taxes payable (and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception up to December 31, 2021 was our formation and preparation for our IPO, and subsequent to the IPO, identifying a target company for a business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from May 20, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $225,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses of approximately $104,000; and franchise tax expense of approximately $124,000; offset by the income from investments held in the Trust Account and operating account of approximately $3,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $0.8 million in its operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $0.9 million. The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 (see Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements) for the Founder Shares, the loan of approximately $29,000 from the Sponsor under the Note (as defined in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
Of the net proceeds from the IPO and associated private placements, $306,000,000 of cash was placed in the Trust Account and $1,656,890 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for the Company’s working capital purposes.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans, as defined below (see Note 5 our consolidated financial statements). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company has alleviated the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern and has sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The public shares contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to our amended and restated articles of incorporation. In accordance with the accounting treatment for redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require Class A common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all public shares would be classified outside of permanent equity.
We have elected to recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per common share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net loss does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the Over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 15,675,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, because their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from May 20, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.