ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to assist in understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Historical results may not be indicative of future performance. Forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and any factors discussed in the sections entitled “Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” of this report. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the “Selected Historical Consolidated Financial Data,” our audited consolidated annual financial statements and the related notes thereto and other information included in this report. A discussion and analysis of our results of operations and changes in financial condition for fiscal 2020 compared to 2019 may be found in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 2, 2021, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
Summit’s vision is to be the most socially responsible, integrated construction materials solution provider, collaborating with stakeholders to deliver differentiated innovations and solve our customers’ challenges. Within our markets, we strive to be a market leader by offering customers a single-source provider for construction materials and related downstream products through our vertical integration. Our materials include aggregates, which we supply across the United States, and in British Columbia, Canada, and cement, which we supply to surrounding states along the Mississippi River from Minnesota to Louisiana. In addition to supplying aggregates to customers, we use a portion of our materials internally to produce ready-mix concrete and asphalt paving mix, which may be sold externally or used in our paving and related services businesses. Our vertical integration creates opportunities to increase aggregates volumes, optimize margin at each stage of production and provide customers with efficiency gains, convenience and reliability, which we believe gives us a competitive advantage.
We are organized into 11 operating companies that make up our three distinct operating segments-West, East and Cement. We operate in 21 U.S. states and in British Columbia, Canada and currently have assets in 21 U.S. states and British Columbia, Canada. The map below illustrates our geographic footprint:
Business Trends and Conditions
The U.S. construction materials industry is composed of four primary sectors: aggregates; cement; ready-mix concrete; and asphalt paving mix. Each of these materials is widely used in most forms of construction activity. Participants in these sectors typically range from small, privately-held companies focused on a single material, product or market to publicly traded multinational corporations that offer a wide array of construction materials and services. Competition is constrained in part by the distance materials can be transported efficiently, resulting in predominantly local or regional operations. Due to the lack of product differentiation, competition for all of our products is predominantly based on price and, to a lesser extent, quality of products and service. As a result, the prices we charge our customers are not likely to be materially different from the prices charged by other producers in the same markets. Accordingly, our profitability is generally dependent on the level of demand for our materials and products and our ability to control operating costs.
Our revenue is derived from multiple end-use markets including public infrastructure construction and private residential and nonresidential construction. Public infrastructure includes spending by federal, state, provincial and local governments for roads, highways, bridges, airports and other infrastructure projects. Public infrastructure projects have
historically been a relatively stable portion of state and federal budgets. Residential and nonresidential construction consists of new construction and repair and remodel markets. Any economic stagnation or decline, which could vary by local region and market, could affect our results of operations. Our sales and earnings are sensitive to national, regional and local economic conditions and particularly to cyclical changes in construction spending, especially in the private sector. From a macroeconomic view, we see positive indicators for the construction sector, including positive trends in highway obligations, housing starts and non-residential construction activity.
Transportation infrastructure projects, driven by both federal and state funding programs, represent a significant share of the U.S. construction materials market. Federal funds are allocated to the states, which are required to match a portion of the federal funds they receive. Federal highway spending uses funds predominantly from the Federal Highway Trust Fund, which derives its revenue from taxes on diesel fuel, gasoline and other user fees. The dependability of federal funding allows the state departments of transportation to plan for their long term highway construction and maintenance needs. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) was signed into law on November 15, 2021. The IIJA provides $1.2 trillion in funding over five years from 2022 through 2026, including $550 billion in new investments for all modes of transportation, water, power and energy, environmental remediation, public lands, broadband and resilience.
In addition to federal funding, state, county and local agencies provide highway construction and maintenance funding. Our four largest states by revenue, Texas, Utah, Kansas and Missouri, represented approximately 23%, 15%, 12% and 9%, respectively, of our total revenue in 2021. The following is a summary of key funding initiatives in those states:
•The Texas Department of Transportation (“TXDOT”) updated its fiscal year 2022 lettings estimate to $10.2 billion up from $8.4 billion in fiscal year 2021 and $7.5 billion in fiscal year 2020. Longer term, TXDOT has indicated a target of $8 billion per year in total state and local lettings.
•The state of Utah anticipates transportation funding of approximately $1.8 billion in 2022, up from $1.3 billion in 2021.
•The Kansas Legislature approved a 2022 transportation budget of $2.2 billion, up from $1.9 billion in 2021.
•The Missouri Department of Transportation budget in 2022 is $3.2 billion, up from $3.1 billion in 2021.
Use and consumption of our products fluctuate due to seasonality. Nearly all of the products used by us, and by our customers, in the private construction or public infrastructure industries are used outdoors. Our highway operations and production and distribution facilities are also located outdoors. Therefore, seasonal changes and other weather-related conditions, in particular extended rainy and cold weather in the spring and fall and major weather events, such as hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms, heavy snows and flooding, can adversely affect our business and operations through a decline in both the use of our products and demand for our services. In addition, construction materials production and shipment levels follow activity in the construction industry, which typically occurs in the spring, summer and fall. Warmer and drier weather during the second and third quarters of our fiscal year typically result in higher activity and revenue levels during those quarters. The first quarter of our fiscal year typically has lower levels of activity due to weather conditions.
We are subject to commodity price risk with respect to price changes in liquid asphalt and energy, including fossil fuels and electricity for aggregates, cement, ready-mix concrete and asphalt paving mix production, natural gas for hot mix asphalt production and diesel fuel for distribution vehicles and production related mobile equipment. Liquid asphalt escalator provisions in most of our private and commercial contracts limit our exposure to price fluctuations in this commodity. We often obtain similar escalators on public infrastructure contracts. In addition, as we seek to manage our risk to increasing energy prices, we enter into various firm purchase commitments, with terms generally less than one year, for certain raw materials.
Financial Highlights- Year ended January 1, 2022
The principal factors in evaluating our financial condition and operating results for the year ended January 1, 2022 are:
•Net revenue increased 4.6% or $97.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily resulting from organic growth and to a lesser extent, acquisition growth.
•Our operating income increased 12.4% or $27.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, as pricing and volume increases exceeded the increases in cost of revenue.
•In 2021, the Company sold seven businesses in the East segment and one in the West segment, resulting in cash proceeds of $128.3 million and a total gain on disposition of $20.0 million.
•In September 2021, we redeemed all $300.0 million of 5.125% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”) using existing cash on hand. We recognized a loss on debt financing of $6.0 million on this redemption.
Components of Operating Results
Total Revenue
We derive our revenue predominantly by selling construction materials and products and providing paving and related services. Construction materials consist of aggregates and cement. Products consist of related downstream products, including
ready-mix concrete, asphalt paving mix and concrete products. Paving and related services that we provide are primarily asphalt paving services.
Revenue derived from the sale of construction materials is recognized when risks associated with ownership have passed to unaffiliated customers. Typically this occurs when products are shipped. Product revenue generally includes sales of aggregates, cement and related downstream products and other materials to customers, net of discounts or allowances and taxes, if any.
Revenue derived from paving and related services is recognized on the percentage-of-completion basis, measured by the cost incurred to date compared to estimated total cost of each project. This method is used because management considers cost incurred to be the best available measure of progress on these contracts. Due to the inherent uncertainties in estimating costs, it is at least reasonably possible that the estimates used will change over the life of the contract.
Operating Costs and Expenses
The key components of our operating costs and expenses consist of the following:
Cost of Revenue (excluding items shown separately)
Cost of revenue consists of all direct production and delivery costs and primarily includes labor, repair and maintenance, utilities, raw materials, fuel, transportation, subcontractor costs, and royalties. Our cost of revenue is directly affected by fluctuations in commodity energy prices, primarily diesel fuel, liquid asphalt and other petroleum-based resources. As a result, our adjusted cash gross profit margins can be significantly affected by changes in the underlying cost of certain raw materials if they are not recovered through corresponding changes in revenue. We attempt to limit our exposure to changes in commodity energy prices by entering into forward purchase commitments when appropriate. In addition, we have sales price adjustment provisions that provide for adjustments based on fluctuations outside a limited range in certain energy-related production costs. These provisions are in place for most of our public infrastructure contracts, and we seek to include similar price adjustment provisions in our private contracts.
In 2021, we reclassified $126.7 million and $119.7 million of fixed overhead expenses related to production activities from general and administrative expenses to cost of revenue for the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively, to conform to the current year presentation. We believe these reclassifications enhance the comparability of our financial statements to others in the industry and have no impact on previously reported operating income, as well as certain non-GAAP measures defined below, such as Adjusted EBITDA, or Adjusted EBITDA Margin; however, Adjusted Cash Gross Profit and Adjust Cash Gross Profit Margins were reduced.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs, including stock-based compensation charges, for our sales and marketing, administration, finance and accounting, legal, information systems, human resources and certain managerial employees. Additional expenses include audit, consulting and professional fees, travel, insurance, rental costs, property taxes and other corporate and overhead expenses.
Depreciation, Depletion, Amortization and Accretion
Our business is capital intensive. We carry property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet at cost, net of applicable depreciation, depletion and amortization. Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is computed on a straight-line basis or based on the economic usage over the estimated useful life of the asset. The general range of depreciable lives by category, excluding mineral reserves, which are depleted based on the units of production method on a site-by-site basis, is as follows:
Amortization expense is the periodic expense related to leasehold improvements and intangible assets. The intangible assets were recognized with certain acquisitions and are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the life of the underlying asset or the remaining lease term.
Accretion expense is the periodic expense recorded for the accrued mining reclamation liabilities and landfill closure and post-closure liabilities using the effective interest method.
Results of Operations
The United States and other countries have reacted to the COVID-19 pandemic with unprecedented government intervention. The global impact of the outbreak continues to evolve, and many countries have reacted by re-instituting, or strongly encouraging quarantines and restrictions on travel, limiting operations of non-essential businesses, imposing vaccine or testing mandates and taking other restrictive measures designed to help slow the spread of COVID-19. While most economic activity has normalized or returned to near pre-pandemic levels, there have been longer lasting disruptions to global supply chains and employment trends that have adversely impacted many industries. The extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its after effects on our future results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain.
During 2021, our operating markets remained substantially unaffected by COVID-19. However, we believe its impact may negatively affect our operations in subsequent periods if construction activity in future periods slows due to COVID-19 or its related impacts on the supply chain and labor markets. We continue to monitor our operations, the operations of our customers, and the recommendations of the various national, state and local governments in the areas in which we operate. We implemented additional safety measures specific to COVID-19 at all of our operating locations, which did not significantly increase our costs. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts the national and local economies in which we operate, and ultimately our business, will depend on numerous developments, which are highly uncertain and difficult to predict. These events, as they continue to develop, could result in business disruption, including reduced revenues, profitability and cash flow.
The following discussion of our results of operations is focused on the key financial measures we use to evaluate the performance of our business from both a consolidated and operating segment perspective. Operating income and margins are discussed in terms of changes in volume, pricing and mix of revenue source (i.e., type of product sales or service revenue). We focus on operating margin, which we define as operating income as a percentage of net revenue, as a key metric when assessing the performance of the business, as we believe that analyzing changes in costs in relation to changes in revenue provides more meaningful insight into the results of operations than examining costs in isolation.
Operating income (loss) reflects our profit after taking into consideration cost of revenue, general and administrative expenses, depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion and gain on sale of property, plant and equipment. Cost of revenue generally increases ratably with revenue, as labor, transportation costs and subcontractor costs are recorded in cost of revenue. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue vary throughout the year due to the seasonality of our business, and may also be impacted by acquisition and divestiture activities, depending on the size of the business acquired or divested. During 2021, our general and administrative expenses were not materially impacted by our acquisition or divestiture activity.
The table below includes revenue and operating income by segment for the periods indicated. Operating income (loss) by segment is computed as earnings before interest, loss on debt financings, tax receivable agreement expense, gain on sale of business, other income / expense and taxes.
______________________
(1) Corporate results primarily consist of compensation and office expenses for employees included in the Company's headquarters.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The table below sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to 2020
______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we find helpful in monitoring the performance of our business. See the definition of and the reconciliation below of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Net revenue increased $97.9 million in the year ended January 1, 2022, primarily resulting from a mix of organic and acquisition growth in our aggregates operations and organic growth in our cement and ready-mix concrete operations, partially offset by decreases from our divestiture activities. Of the increase in net revenue, $99.6 million was from increased sales of materials, offset by $1.0 million from decreased sales of products and $0.7 million from decreased service revenue. We generated organic volume growth of 1.8%, 6.3% and 1.6% in aggregates, cement and ready-mix concrete, respectively, during 2021 over the prior year period, while our organic asphalt volumes declined (13.2)% compared to 2020 due to a divestiture in May 2021. We had organic price growth in our aggregates, cement, ready-mix and asphalt lines of business of 4.9%, 2.9%, 3.4% and 2.2%, respectively, during 2021. Operating income increased by $27.9 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as our net revenue gains outpaced increases in our cost of revenue, general and administrative expenses and depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion expenses.
For the year ended January 1, 2022, our operating margin percentage increased from 10.5% to 11.3% compared to the year ended January 2, 2021, due to the items noted above. Adjusted EBITDA, as defined below, increased by $37.8 million in the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021.
As a vertically-integrated company, we include intercompany sales from materials to products and from products to services when assessing the operating results of our business. We refer to revenue inclusive of intercompany sales as gross revenue. These intercompany transactions are eliminated in the consolidated financial statements. Gross revenue by line of business was as follows:
______________________
* Revenue by product includes intercompany and intracompany sales transferred at market value. The elimination of intracompany transactions is included in Other. Revenue from the liquid asphalt terminals is included in asphalt revenue.
Detail of our volumes and average selling prices by product for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were as follows:
______________________
(1)Volumes are shown in tons for aggregates, cement and asphalt and in cubic yards for ready-mix concrete.
(2)Pricing is shown on a per ton basis for aggregates, cement and asphalt and on a per cubic yard basis for ready-mix concrete.
Revenue from aggregates increased $79.8 million in the year ended January 1, 2022. Aggregate volumes increased in most of our markets, except for small decreases in South Kansas, Northwest Missouri and Kentucky. Aggregate volumes growth was attributable to organic growth in both the West and East segments. Organic aggregate volumes increased 1.8% in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to increases in the Intermountain West, North Kansas, Virginia, Georgia and British Columbia markets. Aggregate average sales prices of $11.16 per ton increased 3.6% in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due our mix of higher priced products in the Intermountain West, British Columbia and South Texas markets.
Revenue from cement increased $25.3 million in the year ended January 1, 2022. In 2021, organic cement volumes increased 6.3% and organic cement average sales prices increased 2.9%, respectively, as compared to 2020.
Revenue from ready-mix concrete increased $33.9 million in the year ended January 1, 2022. In 2021, our ready-mix volumes increased 1.6% and our average sales prices increased 3.4%. These volume and price increases in 2021 occurred primarily in our Intermountain West and North Texas markets while our price increase was primarily in the Intermountain West market.
Revenue from asphalt decreased $43.8 million in the year ended January 1, 2022, primarily due to the divestiture of our paving business in Texas in May 2021. Despite the overall decrease in revenue from asphalt, in 2021 organic pricing increased 2.2%, with strong pricing gains in the Kentucky and South Texas geographies. Further, in 2021, we had strong asphalt volume increases in Kentucky, as 2020 volumes had been negatively impacted by COVID-19.
Other Financial Information
General and Administrative Expense
Our general and administrative expenses in 2021 increased $13.9 million over 2020, due to $3.4 million in severance related costs, an increase in consulting fees as we seek to optimize organizational efficiencies and increases in labor and benefits, offset by a decrease of $10.6 million in CEO transition costs, which occurred in 2020.
Loss on Debt Financings
In September 2021, we redeemed all $300.0 million 5.125% Senior Notes due 2025 using existing cash on hand. In connection with this transaction, charges of $6.0 million were recognized in the quarter ended October 2, 2021. The fees included $3.9 million for the applicable prepayment premium and $2.1 million for the write-off of unamortized deferred financing fees.
In August 2020, we issued $700 million of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2029 (the "2029 Notes"), resulting in net proceeds of $690.4 million, after related fees and expenses. The proceeds from the 2029 Notes were used to redeem the $650 million of 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023 (the "2023 Notes") at par. In connection with that transaction, charges of $4.1 million were recognized in the three and nine months ended September 26, 2020. The fees included $0.8 million for the write-off of unamortized original issue discount and $3.3 million for the write-off of unamortized deferred financing fees.
Gain on Sale of Businesses
In 2021, as part of our strategy to rationalize assets, we sold seven businesses in the East segment and one business in the West segment, resulting in total cash proceeds of $128.3 million and a net gain on disposition of businesses of $20.0 million.
Tax Receivable Agreement (Benefit) Expense
Our TRA benefit for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 was $6.8 million and $7.6 million, respectively. Each year, we update our estimate as to when TRA payments will be made. When payments are made under the TRA, a portion of the payment made will be characterized as imputed interest under IRS regulations. We also updated our estimate of the state income tax rate that will be in effect at the date the TRA payments are made. As a result of updated state income tax rate, and the timing of expected utilization of attributes noted above, we decreased our TRA liability by the amounts noted above.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our income tax expense was $44.4 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to income tax benefit of $12.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The effective tax rate for Summit Inc. differs from the federal statutory tax rate primarily due to (1) unrecognized tax benefits in 2020, (2) state taxes, (3) tax depletion expense in excess of the expense recorded under U.S. GAAP, (4) differences between book and tax basis for divested businesses and (5) various other items such as limitations on meals and entertainment, certain stock compensation and other costs. Additionally, in the first quarter of 2020, we recorded the impact of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Stability Act ("CARES Act") enacted into law in late March 2020, which reduced our unrecognized tax benefits by approximately $9.5 million. In the third quarter of 2020, final regulations were issued clarifying portions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ("TCJA"). Under the provisions of the final regulations, we reversed unrecognized tax benefits of $32.9 million in the third quarter of 2020.
As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, Summit Inc. had a valuation allowance of $1.7 million and $1.7 million against our deferred tax assets, respectively.
Segment Results of Operations
West Segment
______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we find helpful in monitoring the performance of our business. See the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure below.
Net revenue in the West segment increased $21.5 million in the year ended January 1, 2022, as increases in net revenues in our aggregates and ready-mix concrete lines of business outpaced a decrease in asphalt and paving revenues due to a divestiture in May 2021. Organic aggregate volumes increased 1.4% in 2021 as compared to 2020, and organic aggregates average sales prices increased 3.9%, primarily due to strong demand in our Intermountain West geography and in British Columbia. Organic ready-mix concrete volumes increased 5.4% and our organic ready-mix concrete average sales prices increased 3.5%. Residential construction activity remains strong, particularly in the Houston and Salt Lake City areas, two of our largest metro areas where we operate.
Despite increases in revenue, the West segment’s operating income decreased $5.4 million due to operational inefficiencies in our Texas markets caused by the weather in 2021 being less favorable than in 2020. Adjusted EBITDA increased $0.5 million in the year ended January 1, 2022. The operating margin percentage in the West segment decreased in 2021 as compared to 2020, due to the impact of the same factors noted above.
Gross revenue by product/service was as follows:
______________________
* Revenue by product includes intercompany and intracompany sales transferred at market value. The elimination of intracompany transactions is included in Other. Revenue from the liquid asphalt terminals is included in asphalt revenue.
The West segment’s percent changes in sales volumes and pricing comparing 2021 to 2020 were as follows:
Revenue from aggregates in the West segment increased $47.7 million in 2021 over 2020, primarily due to an increase in aggregates sales volumes. Aggregates volumes increased in 2021 mainly in our Texas markets which had increased acquisition volumes, and increased organic volumes in our Intermountain West and British Columbia markets. Aggregates pricing in 2021 increased 2.7% when compared to 2020, due to prices increases and market demand, offset by the impact of lower prices on acquisition related volumes.
Revenue from ready-mix concrete in the West segment increased $44.9 million in 2021 over 2020. For the year ended January 1, 2022, organic ready-mix concrete prices increased 3.5%. For the year ended January 1, 2022, our ready-mix concrete organic volumes increased 5.4%, as there were strong volume increases in the Intermountain West geographies, where we continue to see strong residential volumes.
In May 2021, we divested our paving business in Texas, which reduced our volumes and revenues subsequent to the closing date. As a result, revenue from asphalt in the West segment decreased $71.6 million and asphalt volumes decreased 24.4% in 2021. Average sales prices for asphalt increased 2.5% in 2021. Gross revenue for paving and related services in the West segment decreased by $89.0 million in 2021 primarily due to the divestiture of our paving business in Texas in May 2021.
Prior to eliminations of intercompany transactions, the net effect of volume and pricing changes on gross revenue for the year ended January 1, 2022 was approximately $1.2 million and $19.8 million, respectively.
East Segment
______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we find helpful in monitoring the performance of our business. See the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net income, below.
Net revenue in the East segment increased $48.8 million in 2021 over 2020, as increases in aggregates, asphalt and paving and related services were partially offset by a decrease in ready-mix concrete revenues. Organic aggregate volumes increased 2.1% in 2021 over 2020 levels, primarily in the Carolinas and Georgia markets. Organic aggregate pricing increased 5.7% with growth occurring in all of our markets. Organic ready-mix volumes decreased 9.2%, primarily in Kansas due to fewer non-residential projects. Organic ready-mix pricing increased 3.1%, due to increases in nearly all of our markets.
Primarily due to a strong rebound in our Kentucky market during 2021, organic asphalt volumes increased 17.0% in 2021 over 2020 levels, and paving and related services revenue increased $12.4 million.
Operating income in the East segment increased $20.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA increased $19.2 million in 2021 over 2020, primarily due the factors mentioned above. Operating margin percentage in 2021 increased to 11.8% from 9.7% in 2020, due to the items noted above.
Gross revenue by product/service was as follows:
______________________
* Revenue by product includes intercompany and intracompany sales transferred at market value. The elimination of intracompany transactions is included in Other. Revenue from the liquid asphalt terminals is included in asphalt revenue.
The East segment’s percent changes in sales volumes and pricing in 2021 as compared to 2020 were as follows:
Revenue from aggregates in the East segment increased $32.1 million in the year ended January 1, 2022. Aggregate volumes in 2021 increased 3.8%, as we had organic growth in our North Kansas, Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia markets. Aggregates pricing increased 5.1% in 2021 due to increases in all of our markets.
Revenue from ready-mix concrete in the East segment decreased $11.0 million in 2021, primarily due to lower organic volumes in all of our markets except Kentucky. In 2021, ready-mix concrete volumes decreased 9.2% primarily due to decreases in Kansas, and to a lesser extent in Virginia due to a divestiture. Ready-mix average sales prices increased 3.1% due to pricing gains in almost all of our markets.
Revenue from asphalt increased $27.8 million in 2021, primarily due to higher volumes in Kentucky, where our volumes in 2020 were negatively impacted by COVID-19. This was partially offset by decreases in South Kansas. Asphalt pricing increased 4.4% in 2021, due to product mix. Paving and related service revenue increased $12.4 million in 2021, primarily due to the items noted above.
Prior to eliminations of intercompany transactions, the net effect of volume and pricing changes on gross revenue for the year ended January 1, 2022 was approximately $15.5 million and $33.4 million, respectively.
Cement Segment
______________________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that we find helpful in monitoring the performance of our business. See the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net income, below.
Net revenue in the Cement segment increased $27.6 million in 2021 over 2020, primarily due to increased organic cement volumes of 6.3% and organic price increases. Our Green America Recycling facility, which provides fuel for one of our plants, is now operational, as we completed repairs and commissioning activities late in the third quarter 2021 after its prolonged shutdown due to an explosion in April 2020.
The Cement segment’s operating income increased $10.8 million and Adjusted EBITDA increased $24.2 million in 2021. In 2021, we received $1.2 million in insurance proceeds related to property, plant and equipment that was destroyed in the recycling plant explosion that occurred in April 2020, which was recorded as gain on sale of assets. In addition, we received $9.8 million in business interruption insurance proceeds in 2021, which was recorded as other income.
Operating margin percentage for the year ended January 1, 2022 increased to 22.2% from 20.4% in the prior year, primarily due to the same factors noted above.
Gross revenue by product was as follows:
______________________
* Revenue from waste processing and the elimination of intracompany transactions are included in Other.
The Cement segment’s percent changes in sales volumes and pricing in 2021 from 2020 were as follows:
Revenue from cement increased $25.3 million in 2021, as volumes increased 6.3%, supplemented by organic cement pricing gains.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash on-hand, cash provided by operations, amounts available for borrowing under our senior secured credit facilities and capital-raising activities in the debt and capital markets. In addition to our current sources of liquidity, we have access to liquidity through public offerings of shares of our Class A common stock. To facilitate such offerings, in January 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC that will expire in January 2023. The amount of Class A common stock to be issued pursuant to this shelf registration statement was not specified when it was filed and there is no specific limit on the amount we may issue. The specifics of any future offerings, along with the use of the proceeds thereof, will be described in detail in a prospectus supplement, or other offering materials, at the time of any offering.
As of January 1, 2022, we had $381.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and $560.5 million of working capital as compared to $418.2 million and $570.6 million, respectively, at January 2, 2021. Working capital is calculated as current assets less current liabilities. There were no restricted cash balances as of January 1, 2022 or January 2, 2021.
Our remaining borrowing capacity on our $345.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility as of January 1, 2022 was $327.1 million, which is net of $17.9 million of outstanding letters of credit, and is fully available to us within the terms and covenant requirements of our credit agreement.
Given the seasonality of our business, we typically experience significant fluctuations in working capital needs and balances throughout the year. Our working capital requirements generally increase during the first half of the year as we build up inventory and focus on repair and maintenance and other set-up costs for the upcoming season. Working capital levels then decrease as the construction season winds down and we enter the winter months, which is when we see significant inflows of cash from the collection of receivables.
Our acquisition strategy has historically required us to raise capital through equity issuances or debt financings. As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, our long-term borrowings totaled $1.6 billion and $1.9 billion, for which we incurred
$80.3 million and $91.2 million of interest expense, respectively. Our senior secured revolving facility has been adequate to fund our seasonal working capital needs and certain acquisitions. We had no outstanding borrowings on the revolving credit facility as of January 1, 2022.
For details regarding certain other material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations see “-Contractual Obligations” below.
During 2021, we also received $128.3 million in proceeds from divestitures as part of our Elevate Summit strategy. We expect to complete additional divestitures during 2022, although we cannot provide any assurances as to the timing or amount of those activities.
We believe we have access to sufficient financial resources from our liquidity sources to fund our business and operations, including contractual obligations, capital expenditures and debt service obligations, for at least the next twelve months. Our growth strategy contemplates future acquisitions for which we believe we have sufficient access to capital. We also plan to divest of certain dilutive businesses as we rationalize our portfolio, which will also generate additional capital.
As market conditions warrant we may, from time to time, seek to purchase our outstanding debt securities or loans, including Senior Notes and borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities. Such transactions could be privately negotiated, open market transactions, tender offers or otherwise. Subject to any applicable limitations contained in the agreements governing our indebtedness, any purchases made by us may be funded by the use of cash on our balance sheet or the incurrence of new secured or unsecured debt. The amounts involved in any such purchase transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. Any such purchases may equate to a substantial amount of a particular class or series of debt, which may reduce the trading liquidity of such class or series.
Our Long-Term Debt
Please refer to the notes to the consolidated financial statements found elsewhere in this report for detailed information regarding our long-term debt and senior secured revolving credit facility, scheduled maturities of long-term debt and affirmative and negative covenants. Among other things, we are required to maintain a Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio that is no greater than 4.75 to 1.00. Our first lien net leverage ratio, for purposes of this maintenance requirement, is calculated following each quarter based on information for the most recently ended four fiscal quarters for which internal financial information is available by dividing our Consolidated First Lien Net Debt as of the end of such period by our Consolidated EBITDA for such period. Consolidated EBITDA for purposes of our senior secured credit facility is calculated in accordance with our presentation of Further Adjusted EBITDA below. We define Further Adjusted EBITDA as Adjusted EBITDA plus transaction costs and the EBITDA contribution of certain recent acquisitions.
For the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, our Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio was 0.50 to 1.00 and 0.51 to 1.00, respectively, based on consolidated first lien net debt of $261.6 million and $254.5 million as of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively, divided by Further Adjusted EBITDA of $520.3 million and $496.5 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA and Further Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated. Adjusted EBITDA and Further Adjusted EBITDA are not U.S. GAAP measures and should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for our results as reported under U.S. GAAP.
______________________
(a)Represents non-cash equity-based compensation granted to employees.
(b)Represents the net (gain) loss recognized on assets identified for disposal. Includes non-recurring or one time income and expense items that were incurred outside normal operating activities such as integration costs, unrealized currency gains and losses and interest, tax, depreciation on unconsolidated joint ventures and fair value adjustments to contingent consideration obligations that originated with various acquisitions.
(c)Represents the transaction expenses associated with acquisitions and divestitures, consisting primarily of accounting, legal, valuation and financial advisory fees.
(d)Under the terms of our credit facilities, we include EBITDA from our acquisitions, net of dispositions, in each fiscal year for periods prior to acquisition. We believe this provides our lenders with a more meaningful view of our EBITDA across all periods by making the information more comparable.
At January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, $1.6 billion and $1.9 billion of total debt was outstanding under our respective debt agreements, respectively. Summit LLC’s senior secured credit facilities provide for term loans in an aggregate amount of $650.0 million and revolving credit commitments in an aggregate amount of $345.0 million (the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”). Summit LLC’s domestic wholly-owned subsidiary companies are named as guarantors of the Senior Notes and the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. Certain other partially-owned subsidiaries, and the wholly-owned Canadian subsidiary, Mainland, do not guarantee the Senior Notes or Senior Secured Credit Facilities. Summit LLC has pledged substantially all of its assets as collateral for the Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
On February 28, 2019, Summit LLC entered into Incremental Amendment No. 4 to the Credit Agreement which, among other things, increased the total amount available under the revolving credit facility to $345.0 million and extended the maturity date of the Credit Agreement to February 2024.
Senior Notes
On September 27, 2021, Summit LLC and Summit Finance (together, the “Issuers”) redeemed all $300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of their 2025 Notes using existing cash on hand at a price equal to par plus an applicable premium and the indenture under which the 2025 Notes were issued was satisfied and discharged. As a result of the redemption, charges of $6.0 million were recognized in the quarter ended October 2, 2021, which included charges of $3.9 million for the applicable redemption premium and $2.1 million for the write-off of the deferred financing fees.
On August 11, 2020, the Issuers issued $700.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.250% senior notes due January 15, 2029. The 2029 Notes were issued at 100.0% of their par value with proceeds of $690.4 million, net of related fees and expenses. Interest on the 2029 Notes is payable semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each year commencing on January 15, 2021.
In August 2020, using the proceeds from the 2029 Notes, all of the outstanding $650.0 million 6.125% senior notes due 2023 were redeemed at a price equal to par and the indenture under which the 2023 Notes were issued was satisfied and
discharged. As a result of the extinguishment, charges of $4.1 million were recognized in the quarter ended September 26, 2020, which included charges of $0.8 million for the write-off of original issue discount and $3.3 million for the write-off of deferred financing fees.
On March 15, 2019, the Issuers issued $300 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.500% senior notes due March 15, 2027. The 2027 Notes were issued at 100.0% of their par value with proceeds of $296.3 million, net of related fees and expenses. Interest on the 2027 Notes is payable semi-annually on March 15 and September 15 of each year commencing on September 15, 2019.
In March 2019, using the proceeds from the 2027 Notes, all of the 2022 Notes were redeemed at a price equal to par plus an applicable premium and the indenture under which the 2022 Notes were issued was satisfied and discharged. As a result of the extinguishment, charges of $14.6 million were recognized in the quarter ended March 30, 2019, which included charges of $11.7 million for the applicable redemption premium and $2.9 million for the write-off of deferred financing fees.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
Summit LLC has credit facilities that provide for term loans in an aggregate amount of $650 million and revolving credit commitments in an aggregate amount of $345 million (the "Senior Secured Credit Facilities"). Under the terms of Senior Secured Credit Facilities, as amended through February 2019, required principal payments of 0.25% of the refinanced aggregate amount of term debt are due on the last business day of each March, June, September and December. The unpaid principal balance is due in full on the maturity date of November 21, 2024.
The revolving credit facility bears interest per annum equal to, at Summit LLC's option, either (i) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (b) the prime rate of Bank of America, N.A. and (c) LIBOR plus 1.00% plus an applicable margin of 2.00% for base rate loans or (ii) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to Reuters prior to the interest period relevant to such borrowing adjusted for certain additional costs plus an applicable margin of 3.00% for LIBOR rate loans.
There were no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility as of January 1, 2022 or January 2, 2021. As of January 1, 2022, we had remaining borrowing capacity of $327.1 million under the revolving credit facility, which is net of $17.9 million of outstanding letters of credit. The outstanding letters of credit are renewed annually and support required bonding on construction projects and the Company’s insurance liabilities.
Summit LLC’s Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio, as such term is defined in the Credit Agreement, should be no greater than 4.75:1.0 as of each quarter-end. As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, Summit LLC was in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
Summit LLC’s wholly-owned domestic subsidiary companies, subject to certain exclusions and exceptions, are named as subsidiary guarantors of the Senior Notes and the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. In addition, Summit LLC has pledged substantially all of its assets as collateral, subject to certain exclusions and exceptions, for the Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by and used for operating, investing and financing activities and our capital expenditures for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
During the year ended January 1, 2022, cash provided by operating activities was $361.9 million primarily as a result of:
•Net income of $154.3 million, adjusted for $254.0 million of non-cash expenses, including $235.3 million of depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion, $19.7 million of share-based compensation and $24.7 million of change in deferred tax asset, net.
•Billed and unbilled accounts receivable increased by $31.7 million in fiscal 2021 as a result of our sales in the latter part of 2021 exceeding those levels of 2020.
•The timing of payments associated with accounts payable and accrued expenses of cash, which is consistent with the seasonality of our business whereby we build-up inventory levels and incur repairs and maintenance costs to ready the business for increased sales volumes in the summer and fall. These costs are typically incurred in the first half of the year and paid by year-end. In addition, we made $81.6 million of interest payments in 2021. Our cash interest payments are expected to decrease slightly from this amount in 2021 and beyond.
During the year ended January 2, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $408.9 million primarily as a result of:
•Net income of $141.2 million, adjusted for $235.4 million of non-cash expenses, including $227.8 million of depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion, $28.9 million of share-based compensation and $(18.4) million of change in deferred tax asset, net.
•Billed and unbilled accounts receivable decreased by $10.0 million in fiscal 2020 as a result of our sales in the latter part of 2020 being lower than those levels in 2019. The majority of our sales occur in the spring, summer and fall and we typically incur an increase in accounts receivable (net billed and unbilled) during the second and third quarters of each year. This amount is typically converted to cash in the fourth and first quarters.
•The timing of payments associated with accounts payable and accrued expenses of cash, which is consistent with the seasonality of our business whereby we build-up inventory levels and incur repairs and maintenance costs to ready the business for increased sales volumes in the summer and fall. These costs are typically incurred in the first half of the year and paid by year-end. In addition, we made $99.6 million of interest payments in 2020. Our cash interest payments are expected to decrease slightly from this amount in 2021 and beyond.
Investing Activities
During the year ended January 1, 2022, cash used for investing activities was $91.2 million, of which $19.5 million related to acquisitions completed in the period and $212.0 million was invested in capital expenditures, which was offset by $128.3 million of proceeds from the sale of businesses, as well as $11.7 million of proceeds from asset sales.
During the year ended January 2, 2021, cash used for investing activities was $285.6 million, of which $123.5 million related to acquisitions completed in the period and $177.2 million was invested in capital expenditures, which was partially offset by $14.0 million of proceeds from asset sales.
Financing Activities
During the year ended January 1, 2022, cash used in financing activities was $307.9 million. We made $329.0 million of payments on debt, including the redemption of $300.0 million of the 2025 Senior Notes in September 2021, received $32.5 million of proceeds from stock option exercises, which was offset by $10.4 million of payments on acquisition related liabilities.
During the year ended January 2, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $16.8 million. We received $700.0 million from proceeds of debt issuance, which was offset by $33.3 million of payments on acquisition related liabilities and $674.0 million in debt payments, which includes $14.4 million of finance lease cash payments. Our future payments under our finance lease obligations are expected to decrease slightly from 2020 levels.
Cash Paid for Capital Expenditures
We expended approximately $212.0 million in capital expenditures for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to $177.2 million and $177.5 million in the years ended January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively.
We estimate that we will invest between $270 million and $290 million in capital expenditures in 2022, which includes greenfield development projects. The timing of our greenfield expenditures is dependent upon the timing of when permits may be issued. We expect to fund our capital expenditure program through cash on hand, cash from operations, outside financing arrangements and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Exchanges of LP Units for shares of Class A common stock are expected to result in increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of Summit Holdings. These increases in tax basis may increase (for tax purposes) depreciation and amortization deductions and therefore reduce the amount of tax that Summit Inc. would otherwise be required to pay in the future. In connection with the IPO, we entered into a TRA with the holders of LP Units that provides for the payment by Summit Inc. to exchanging holders of LP Units of 85% of the benefits, if any, that Summit Inc. is deemed to realize as a result of these increases in tax basis and certain other tax benefits related to entering into the TRA, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the TRA. The increases in tax basis as a result of an exchange of LP Units for shares of Class A common stock, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the TRA, are difficult to accurately estimate as they will vary depending upon a number of factors, including:
•the timing of exchanges-for instance, the increase in any tax deductions will vary depending on the fair market value, which may fluctuate over time, of the depreciable or amortizable assets of Summit Holdings at the time of each exchange;
•the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the exchange-the increase in any tax deductions, as well as the tax basis increase in other assets, of Summit Holdings, is directly proportional to the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the exchange;
•the extent to which such exchanges are taxable-if an exchange is not taxable for any reason, increased deductions will not be available;
•the amount and timing of our income-Summit Inc. is required to pay 85% of the cash tax savings, if any, as and when realized. If Summit Inc. does not have taxable income, Summit Inc. is not required (absent a change of control or circumstances requiring an early termination payment) to make payments under the TRA for that taxable year because no cash tax savings will have been realized. However, any tax attributes that do not result in realized benefits in a given tax year will likely generate tax attributes that may be utilized to generate benefits in previous or future tax years. The utilization of such tax attributes will result in cash tax savings that will result in payments under the tax receivable agreement; and
•the effective tax rate - The benefit that Summit Inc. realizes is dependent on the tax rate in effect at the time taxable income is generated.
We anticipate funding payments under the TRA from cash flows from operations, available cash and available borrowings under our Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facilities. As of January 1, 2022, we had accrued $326.5 million as TRA liability. The entire TRA liability is a long term liability as no additional payments are expected in the next twelve months.
In addition, the TRA provides that upon certain changes of control, Summit Inc.’s (or its successor’s) obligations would be based on certain assumptions, including that Summit Inc. would have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize the deductions arising from tax basis and other tax attributes subject to the TRA. With respect to our obligations under the TRA relating to previously exchanged or acquired LP Units and certain net operating losses, we would be required to make a payment equal to the present value (at a discount rate equal to one year LIBOR plus 100 basis points) of the anticipated future tax benefits determined using assumptions (ii) through (v) of the following paragraph.
Furthermore, Summit Inc. may elect to terminate the TRA early by making an immediate payment equal to the present value of the anticipated future cash tax savings. In determining such anticipated future cash tax savings, the TRA includes several assumptions, including that (i) any LP Units that have not been exchanged are deemed exchanged for the market value of the shares of Class A common stock at the time of termination, (ii) Summit Inc. will have sufficient taxable income in each future taxable year to fully realize all potential tax savings, (iii) Summit Inc. will have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize any remaining net operating losses subject to the TRA on a straight line basis over the shorter of the statutory expiration period for such net operating losses or the five-year period after the early termination or change of control, (iv) the tax rates for future years will be those specified in the law as in effect at the time of termination and (v) certain non-amortizable assets are deemed
disposed of within specified time periods. In addition, the present value of such anticipated future cash tax savings are discounted at a rate equal to LIBOR plus 100 basis points.
As a result of the change in control provisions and the early termination right, Summit Inc. could be required to make payments under the TRA that are greater than or less than the specified percentage of the actual cash tax savings that Summit Inc. realizes in respect of the tax attributes subject to the TRA (although any such overpayment would be taken into account in calculating future payments, if any, under the TRA) or that are prior to the actual realization, if any, of such future tax benefits. Also, the obligations of Summit Inc. would be automatically accelerated and be immediately due and payable in the event that Summit Inc. breaches any of its material obligations under the agreement and in certain events of bankruptcy or liquidation. In these situations, our obligations under the TRA could have a substantial negative impact on our liquidity.
Under the terms of the TRA, we can terminate the TRA at any time, which would trigger a cash payment to the pre-IPO owners. Based upon a $40.14 per share price of our Class A common stock, the closing price of our stock on December 31, 2021 and a contractually defined discount rate of 1.58%, we estimate that if we were to exercise our right to terminate the TRA, the aggregate amount required to settle the TRA would be approximately $312 million.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents, as of January 1, 2022, our obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts and contingent commitments (in thousands).
______________________
(1)Future interest payments were calculated using the applicable fixed and floating rates charged by our lenders in effect as of January 1, 2022 and may differ from actual results.
(2)Amounts represent purchase commitments entered into in the normal course of business, primarily for fuel purchases, the terms of which are generally one year.
(3)The total amount payable under our TRA is estimated at $326.5 million as of January 1, 2022. Under the terms of the TRA, payment of amounts benefiting us is due to the pre-IPO owners within four months of the tax returns being submitted to the respective regulatory agencies when the benefits are realized. We are currently estimating benefits next being realized in the 2023 tax year, and paid to TRA holders in early 2025. The estimated timing of TRA payments is subject to a number of factors, primarily around the timing of the generation of future taxable income in future years, which will be impacted by business activity in those periods.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are party to certain legal actions arising from the ordinary course of business activities. Accruals are recorded when the outcome is probable and can be reasonably estimated. While the ultimate results of claims and litigation cannot be predicted with certainty, management expects that the ultimate resolution of all pending or threatened claims and litigation will not have a material effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or liquidity. We record legal fees as incurred.
In March 2018, we were notified of an investigation by the CCB into pricing practices by certain asphalt paving contractors in British Columbia, including Winvan. We believe the investigation is focused on time periods prior to our April 2017 acquisition of Winvan and we are cooperating with the CCB. Although we currently do not believe this matter will have a
material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations, we are not able to predict the ultimate outcome or cost of the investigation at this time.
Environmental Remediation and Site Restoration-Our operations are subject to and affected by federal, state, provincial and local laws and regulations relating to the environment, health and safety and other regulatory matters. These operations require environmental operating permits, which are subject to modification, renewal and revocation. We regularly monitor and review its operations, procedures and policies for compliance with these laws and regulations. Despite these compliance efforts, risk of environmental liability is inherent in the operation of our business, as it is with other companies engaged in similar businesses and there can be no assurance that environmental liabilities and noncompliance will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.
Other-We are obligated under various firm purchase commitments for certain raw materials and services that are in the ordinary course of business. Management does not expect any significant changes in the market value of these goods and services during the commitment period that would have a material adverse effect on the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows of the Company. The terms of the purchase commitments generally approximate one year.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 1, 2022, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Non-GAAP Performance Measures
We evaluate our operating performance using metrics that we refer to as “Adjusted EBITDA,” “Adjusted EBITDA Margin,” “Adjusted Cash Gross Profit” and “Adjusted Cash Gross Profit Margin” which are not defined by U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to earnings measures defined by U.S. GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA, adjusted to exclude accretion, loss on debt financings, gain on sale of business, non-cash compensation and certain other non-cash and non-operating items. Beginning with the first quarter of 2021, the Company no longer adjusts for transaction costs, as those costs are recurring cash payments and included in general and administrative expenses. We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue. We define Adjusted Cash Gross Profit as operating income before general and administrative expenses, depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion and Adjusted Cash Gross Profit Margin as Adjusted Cash Gross Profit as a percentage of net revenue.
We present Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Adjusted Cash Gross Profit and Adjusted Cash Gross Profit Margin for the convenience of investment professionals who use such metrics in their analyses. The investment community often uses these metrics to assess the operating performance of a company’s business and to provide a consistent comparison of performance from period to period. We use these metrics, among others, to assess the operating performance of our individual segments and the consolidated company.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized; therefore, it may not be possible to compare such financial measures with other companies’ non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. We strongly encourage investors to review our consolidated financial statements in their entirety and not rely on any single financial measure.
The tables below reconcile our net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, present Adjusted EBITDA by segment and reconcile operating income to Adjusted Cash Gross Profit for the periods indicated:
______________________
(1)The reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA is based on the financial results of Summit Inc. and its subsidiaries, which was $16.7 million, $20.5 million and 27.5 million less than Summit LLC and its subsidiaries in the years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019, respectively, due to interest expense associated
with a deferred consideration obligation, TRA expense and income tax benefit are obligations of Summit Holdings and Summit Inc., respectively, and are thus excluded from Summit LLC’s consolidated net income.
(2)For the year ended December 28, 2019, we negotiated a $2.0 million reduction in the amount of a contingent liability from one of our acquisitions. As we had passed the period to revise the opening balance sheet for this acquisition, the adjustment was recorded as other income.
_____________________
(1)Adjusted Cash Gross Margin is defined as Adjusted Cash Gross Profit as a percentage of net revenue.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to the valuation of accounts receivable, inventories, goodwill, intangibles and other long-lived assets, pension and other postretirement obligations and asset retirement obligations. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Acquisitions-Purchase Price Allocation
We regularly review strategic long-term plans, including potential investments in value-added acquisitions of related or similar businesses, which would increase our market share and/or are related to our existing markets. When an acquisition is completed, our consolidated statement of operations includes the operating results of the acquired business starting from the date of acquisition, which is the date that control is obtained. The purchase price is determined based on the estimated fair value of assets given to and liabilities assumed from the seller as of the date of acquisition. We allocate the purchase price to the estimated fair values of the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed as valued at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded for the excess of the purchase price over the net of the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. The estimation of fair values of acquired assets and assumed liabilities is judgmental and requires various assumptions and the amounts and useful lives assigned to depreciable and amortizable assets compared to amounts assigned to goodwill, which is not amortized, can significantly affect the results of operations in the period of and periods subsequent to a business combination.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction, and therefore represents an exit price. A fair value measurement assumes the highest and best use of the asset by market participants, considering the use of the asset that is physically possible, legally permissible, and financially feasible at the
measurement date. We assign the highest level of fair value available to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on the following options:
•Level 1-Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
•Level 2-Observable inputs, other than quoted prices, for similar assets or liabilities in active markets.
•Level 3-Unobservable inputs, which includes the use of valuation models.
Level 1 fair values are used to value investments in publicly-traded entities and assumed obligations for publicly-traded long-term debt.
Level 2 fair values are typically used to value acquired receivables, inventories, machinery and equipment,, land, buildings, deferred income tax assets and liabilities, liabilities for asset retirement obligations, environmental remediation and compliance obligations. Additionally, Level 2 fair values are typically used to value assumed contracts at other-than-market rates.
Level 3 fair values are used to value acquired mineral reserves and leased mineral interests and other identifiable intangible assets. The fair values of mineral reserves and leased mineral interests are determined using an excess earnings approach, which requires management to estimate future cash flows. The estimate of future cash flows is based on available historical information and forecasts determined by management, but is inherently uncertain. Key assumptions in estimating future cash flows include sales price, volumes and expected profit margins, net of capital requirements. The present value of the projected net cash flows represents the fair value assigned to mineral reserves and mineral interests. The discount rate is a significant assumption used in the valuation model and is based on the required rate of return that a hypothetical market participant would assume if purchasing the acquired business.
There is a measurement period after the acquisition date during which we may adjust the amounts recognized for a business combination. Any such adjustments are based on us obtaining additional information that existed at the acquisition date regarding the assets acquired or the liabilities assumed. Measurement period adjustments are generally recorded as increases or decreases to the goodwill recognized in the transaction. The measurement period ends once we have obtained all necessary information that existed as of the acquisition date, but does not extend beyond one year from the date of acquisition. Any adjustments to assets acquired or liabilities assumed beyond the measurement period are recorded in earnings.
We paid cash of $19.5 million and $123.5 million, net of cash acquired, in business combinations and allocated this amount to assets acquired and liabilities assumed during the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and in interim periods if events occur indicating that the carrying amounts may be impaired. The evaluation involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions and considerable management judgment. Our judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators and future cash flows are based on operational performance of our businesses, market conditions and other factors. Although there are inherent uncertainties in this assessment process, the estimates and assumptions we use, including estimates of future cash flows, volumes, market penetration and discount rates, are consistent with our internal planning. The estimated future cash flows are derived from internal operating budgets and forecasts for long-term demand and pricing in our industry and markets. If these estimates or their related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record an impairment charge on all or a portion of our goodwill. Furthermore, we cannot predict the occurrence of future impairment-triggering events nor the affect such events might have on our reported values. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that goodwill associated with our acquired businesses are impaired. Any resulting impairment loss could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
The annual goodwill test is performed by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, as a result of the qualitative assessment, it is determined that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform the two-step quantitative impairment test, otherwise further analysis is not required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the two-step quantitative impairment test. The ultimate outcome of the goodwill impairment review for a reporting unit should be the same whether we choose to perform the qualitative assessment or proceed directly to the two-step quantitative impairment test.
Under the two-step quantitative impairment test, step one of the evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. We use a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model to estimate the current fair value of our reporting units when testing for impairment, as management believes forecasted cash flows are the best indicator of fair value. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including macroeconomic trends in the reporting unit’s geographic area impacting private construction and public infrastructure industries, the timing of work embedded in our backlog, our performance and profitability under our contracts, our success in securing future sales and the appropriate interest rate used to discount the projected cash flows. We also perform a market assessment of our enterprise value. We believe the estimates and assumptions used in the valuations are reasonable.
In conjunction with our annual review of goodwill on the first day of the fourth quarter, we performed the qualitative assessment for our reporting units. In 2021, we performed a two-step quantitative analysis on four of our reporting units. Step 1 of that analysis compares the estimated the fair value of the reporting units using an income approach (i.e., a discounted cash flow technique) and a market approach to the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the estimated fair value exceeds its carrying value, the goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we proceed to the second step to measure the amount of potential impairment loss.
As of January 1, 2022, we determined that no events or circumstances from October 3, 2021 through January 1, 2022 indicated that a further assessment was necessary.
Service Revenue Recognition
We earn revenue from the provision of services, which are primarily paving and related services, but also include landfill operations and the receipt and disposal of waste that is converted to fuel for use in our cement plants. Revenue from the receipt of waste fuels is recognized when the waste is accepted and a corresponding liability is recognized for the costs to process the waste into fuel for the manufacturing of cement or to ship the waste offsite for disposal in accordance with applicable regulations.
Collectability of service contracts is due reasonably after certain milestones in the contract are performed. Milestones vary by project, but are typically calculated using monthly progress based on the percentage of completion or a customer’s engineer review of progress. The majority of the time, collection occurs within 90 days of billing and cash is received within the same fiscal year as services performed. On most projects the customer will withhold a portion of the invoice for retainage which may last longer than a year depending on the job.
Revenue derived from paving and related services is recognized over time based on the proportion of costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs at completion, which approximates progress towards completion. Under the this method, we recognize paving and related services revenue as services are rendered. The majority of our construction service contracts are completed within one year, but may occasionally extend beyond this time frame. The majority of our construction service contracts, and therefore, revenue, are opened and completed within one year, with most activity during the spring, summer and fall. We estimate profit as the difference between total estimated revenue and total estimated cost of a contract and recognize that profit over the life of the contract based on input measures. We generally measure progress toward completion on long-term paving and related services contracts based on the proportion of costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion. We include revisions of estimated profits on contracts in earnings under the cumulative catch-up method, under which the effect of revisions in estimates is recognized immediately. If a revised estimate of contract profitability reveals an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the loss in the period it is identified.
The percentage of completion method of accounting involves the use of various estimating techniques to project costs at completion, and in some cases includes estimates of recoveries asserted against the customer for changes in specifications or other disputes. Contract estimates involve various assumptions and projections relative to the outcome of future events over multiple periods, including future labor productivity and availability, the nature and complexity of the work to be performed, the cost and availability of materials, the effect of delayed performance, and the availability and timing of funding from the customer. These estimates are based on our best judgment. A significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of one or more of our contracts. We review our contract estimates regularly to assess revisions in contract values and estimated costs at completion. Inherent uncertainties in estimating costs make it at least reasonably possible that the estimates used will change within the near term and over the life of the contracts. No material adjustments to a contract were recognized in the year ended January 1, 2022.
We recognize claims when the amount of the claim can be estimated reliably and it is legally enforceable. In evaluating these criteria, we consider the contractual basis for the claim, the cause of any additional costs incurred, the reasonableness of those costs and the objective evidence available to support the claim.
When the contract includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. The amount of estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price is the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Types of variable consideration include, but are not limited to, liquidated damages and other performance penalties and production and placement bonuses.
The majority of contract modifications relate to the original contract and are often an extension of the original performance obligation. Predominately, modifications are not distinct from the terms in the original contract; therefore, they are considered part of a single performance obligation. We account for the modification using a cumulative catch-up adjustment. However, there are instances where goods or services in a modification are distinct from those transferred prior to the modification. In these situations, we account for the modifications as either a separate contract or prospectively depending on the facts and circumstances of the modification.
Generally, construction contracts contain mobilization costs which are categorized as costs to fulfill a contract. These costs are excluded from any measure of progress toward contract fulfillment. These costs do not result in the transfer of control of a good or service to the customer and are amortized over the life of the contract.
Costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings are composed principally of revenue recognized on contracts on the percentage of completion method for which billings had not been presented to customers because the amounts were not billable under the contract terms at the balance sheet date. In accordance with the contract terms, the unbilled receivables at the balance sheet date are expected to be billed in following periods. Billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings represent billings in excess of revenue recognized.
Income Taxes
Summit Inc. is a corporation subject to income taxes in the United States. Certain subsidiaries, including Summit Holdings, or subsidiary groups of the Company are taxable separate from Summit Inc. The provisions for income taxes, or Summit Inc.’s proportional share of the provision, are included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The Company’s deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the tax basis and financial statement amounts that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible, as well as consideration of tax-planning strategies to determine whether we may seek to utilize any net operating loss carryforwards scheduled to expire in the near future. The estimates of future taxable income involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions and considerable management judgment. Our judgments regarding future taxable income and future cash flows are based on operational performance of our businesses, market conditions and other factors. Although there are inherent uncertainties in this assessment process, the estimates and assumptions we use, including estimates of future cash flows, are consistent with our internal planning. The computed deferred balances are based on enacted tax laws and applicable rates for the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. A valuation allowance is recognized for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making such a determination, all available positive and negative evidence is considered, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If the Company determines it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets for which a valuation allowance had been recorded, then an adjustment would be made to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
The Company evaluates the tax positions taken on income tax returns that remain open and positions expected to be taken on the current year tax returns to identify uncertain tax positions. Unrecognized tax benefits on uncertain tax positions are recorded on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) the Company determines whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized is recognized. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recorded in income tax expense (benefit).
Tax Receivable Agreement
Tax Receivable Agreement- When Summit Inc. purchases LP Units for cash or LP Units are exchanged for shares of Class A common stock, this results in increases in Summit Inc.’s share of the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of Summit Holdings, which increases the tax depreciation and amortization deductions that otherwise would not have been available to Summit Inc. These increases in tax basis and tax depreciation and amortization deductions are expected to reduce the amount of cash taxes that we would otherwise be required to pay in the future. In connection with our IPO, we entered into a TRA with the holders of the LP Units and the pre-IPO owners that provides for the payment by Summit Inc. to exchanging holders of LP Units of 85% of the benefits, if any, that Summit Inc. actually realizes (or, under certain circumstances such as an early termination of the TRA is deemed to realize) as a result of (i) these increases in tax basis and (ii) our utilization of certain net operating losses of the pre-IPO owners and certain other tax benefits related to entering into the TRA, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the TRA.
We periodically evaluate the realizability of the deferred tax assets resulting from the exchange of LP Units for Class A common stock. Our evaluation considers all sources of taxable income; all evidence, both positive and negative, is considered to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is needed for some portion or all of the deferred tax assets. If the deferred tax assets are determined to be realizable, we then assess whether payment of amounts under the TRA have become probable. If so, we record a TRA liability of 85% of such deferred tax assets. In subsequent periods, we assess the realizability of all of our deferred tax assets subject to the TRA. Should we determine a deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance is realizable in a subsequent period, the related valuation allowance will be released and consideration of a corresponding TRA liability will be assessed. The realizability of deferred tax assets, including those subject to the TRA, is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those deferred tax assets become deductible and consideration of prudent and feasible tax-planning strategies.
The measurement of the TRA liability is accounted for as a contingent liability. Therefore, once we determine that a payment to a pre-IPO owner has become probable and can be estimated, the estimate of payment will be accrued.