Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Amounts in thousands, except share and per share data
Overview
We provide photovoltaic (“PV”) based power systems for the residential and commercial markets. Commercial projects include commercial, agricultural, industrial and public works projects.
On April 8, 2021, Sunworks, Inc., through its operating subsidiary Sunworks United (the “Buyer”), acquired all of the issued and outstanding membership interests (the “Acquisition”) of Solcius, from Solcius Holdings, LLC (“Seller”). Located in Provo, Utah, Solcius is a full-service, residential solar systems provider. The Acquisition creates a national solar power provider with a presence in various states, including California, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Massachusetts, New Jersey and South Carolina. We believe the Acquisition enhances economies of scale, leading to better access to suppliers, vendors and financial partners, as well as marketing and customer acquisition opportunities.
The Acquisition was consummated on April 8, 2021 pursuant to a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, dated as of April 8, 2021 (the “Purchase Agreement”), by and between Buyer and Seller. The purchase price for Solcius consisted of $51.75 million in cash, subject to post-closing adjustments related to working capital, cash, indebtedness, and transaction expenses.
Sunworks
Through our Sunworks subsidiaries, we design, arrange financing, integrate, install, and manage systems ranging in size from 2kW (kilowatt) for residential projects to multi-MW (megawatt) systems for larger commercial and public works projects. Commercial installations have included installations at office buildings, manufacturing plants, warehouses, service stations, churches, and agricultural facilities such as farms, wineries, and dairies. Public works installations have included school districts, local municipalities, federal facilities and higher education institutions. Commercial solar represented 23% of our 2021 revenue, compared to 74% of our revenue in 2020. Commercial Solar primarily operates in California.
Solcius
Through our Solcius operating subsidiary, we design, arrange financing, integrate, install, and manage systems, primarily for residential homeowners. We sell residential solar systems through multiple channels, through our network of sales channel partners, as well as, a growing direct sales channel strategy. We operate in several residential markets including California, Utah, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and South Carolina. We have direct sales and/or operations personnel in California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, South Carolina, Wisconsin and Minnesota.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to impairment of property, plant and equipment, goodwill, intangibles, deferred tax assets, costs to complete projects, and fair value computation using the Black Scholes option pricing model. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions, such as the trading value of our common stock and estimated future undiscounted cash flows, that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions; however, we believe that our estimates, including those for the above-described items, are reasonable.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include estimates used to review the Company’s goodwill, intangibles, impairments and estimations of long-lived assets, revenue recognition on construction contracts recognized over time, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, allowances for uncollectible accounts, finance lease right-of-use assets and liabilities, operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities, warranty reserves, inventory valuation, valuations of non-cash capital stock issuances and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues and related costs on construction contracts are recognized as the performance obligations for work are satisfied over time in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, revenue and associated profit, engineering, procurement and construction (“EPC”) projects for residential and smaller commercial systems that require us to deliver functioning solar power systems are generally completed within two to twelve months from commencement of construction. Construction on larger commercial and public works projects may be completed within eighteen to thirty-six months, depending on the size and location. We recognize revenue on residential projects following final inspection and approvals by all jurisdictions. We recognize revenue on commercial projects over time as our performance creates or enhances an energy generation asset controlled by the customer.
The cost of materials or equipment will generally be excluded from our recognition of profit, unless specifically produced or manufactured for a project, because such costs are not considered to be a measure of progress. All un-allocable indirect costs and corporate general and administrative costs are charged to the periods as incurred. However, in the event a loss on a contract is foreseen, we will recognize the loss in the period it is determined.
Revisions in cost and profit estimates during the course of the contract are reflected in the accounting period in which the facts which require the revision become known. We use an input method based on costs incurred as we believe that this method most accurately reflects our progress toward satisfaction of the performance obligation. Under this method, revenue arising from fixed-price construction contracts is recognized as work is performed based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligations. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions, and final contract settlements may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
Contract assets consist of (i) the earned, but unbilled, portion of a project for which payment is deferred by the customer until certain contractual milestones are met; (ii) direct costs, including commissions, labor related costs and permitting fees paid prior to recording revenue, and (iii) unbilled receivables which represent revenue that has been recognized in advance of billing the customer, which is common for larger construction contracts. Contract liabilities consist of deferred revenue and customer deposits and customer advances, which represent consideration received from a customer prior to transferring control of goods or services to the customer under the terms of a contract.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating lease right-of-use assets and short-term and long-term lease liabilities are included on the face of the condensed consolidated balance sheet. Finance lease ROU assets are presented within other assets, and finance lease liabilities presented as short-term or long-term finance lease liabilities.
ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most of our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. The operating lease ROU asset also excludes lease incentives. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with lease and non-lease components, which are accounted for as a single lease component. For lease agreements with terms less than 12 months, we have elected the short-term lease measurement and recognition exemption, which recognizes such lease payments on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Business Combinations and Goodwill
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with ASC 805, “Business Combinations,” where the total purchase price is allocated to the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The purchase price is allocated using the information currently available, and may be adjusted, up to one year from acquisition date, after obtaining more information regarding, among other things, asset valuations, liabilities assumed and revisions to preliminary estimates. The purchase price in excess of the fair value of the tangible and identified intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
The Company retains a valuation consulting firm to assist in testing for goodwill impairment in the fourth quarter of each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value and may not be recoverable. In accordance with the Company’s policies, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill at December 31, 2021. An impairment of $5,464 of goodwill was recorded. This goodwill was created by the acquisitions of Solar United Network, MD Energy and Plan B in 2014 and 2015 and was expensed. In 2020, as a result of the events and circumstances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s outlook for revenue, profitability and cash flow had deteriorated. Therefore, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill at March 31, 2020, where it was determined that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment of $4,000 at that time.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company periodically issues restricted stock units (“RSUs”), stock options and performance stock units (PSUs”) to employees and directors. The Company accounts for RSUs, stock option grants and PSUs issued and vesting to employees based on the authoritative guidance provided by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) whereas the value of the award is measured on the date of grant and recognized over the vesting or performance period.
The Company accounts for stock grants issued to non-employees in accordance with the authoritative guidance of the FASB whereas the value of the stock compensation is based upon the measurement date as determined at either a) the date at which a performance commitment is reached, b) a reasonable probability of reaching the performance obligation has been determined, or c) at the date at which the necessary performance to earn the equity instruments is complete. Non-employee stock-based compensation charges generally are amortized over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. In certain circumstances where there are no future performance requirements by the non-employee, option grants are immediately vested and the total stock-based compensation charge is recorded in the period of the measurement date.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivables are recorded on contracts for amounts currently due based upon progress billings, as well as retention, which are collectible upon completion of the contracts. Retention receivable is the amount withheld by a customer until a contract is completed. Retention receivables of $309 and $392 were included in the balance of trade accounts receivable as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluation of its customers. Management monitors outstanding receivables based on factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, historical trends, age of receivables and other information, and records bad debts using the allowance method. Accounts receivable are presented net of an allowance for doubtful accounts of $454 at December 31, 2021, and $253 at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, $454 was recorded as bad debt expense compared to $710 in 2020.
Inventory
Inventory is valued at lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method. Inventory primarily consists of panels, inverters, batteries and mounting racks and other materials. The Company reviews the cost of inventories against their estimated net realizable value and records write-downs if any inventories have costs in excess of their net realizable values. Inventory is presented net of an allowance of $312 at December 31, 2021 and $309 at December 31, 2020.
Warranty Liability
The Company establishes warranty liability reserves to provide for estimated future expenses as a result of installation, product and performance defects, product recalls and litigation incidental to the Company’s business. Liability estimates are determined based on management’s judgment, considering such factors as historical experience, the likely current cost of corrective action, manufacturers’ and subcontractors’ participation in sharing the cost of corrective action, and consultations with third party experts such as engineers. Solar panel manufacturers currently provide substantial warranties of between ten to twenty-five years with full reimbursement to replace and install replacement panels. Inverter manufacturers currently provide warranties covering ten to fifteen years including replacement and installation. The warranty liability for estimated future warranty costs at December 31, 2021 and 2020 is $1,251 and $1,131, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to consolidated financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. The measurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of applicable tax law. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance based on the amount of tax benefits that, based on available evidence, is not expected to be realized.
Impact of COVID-19
The continued global novel coronavirus and its variants (COVID-19) pandemic, has resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions and business shutdowns. The uncertain macroeconomic environment created by the COVID-19 pandemic has had and may continue to have a significant, adverse impact on our business. To assist readers in reviewing management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, we provide the following discussion regarding the effects COVID-19 has had on the Company, what management expects the future impact to be, how we are responding to evolving circumstances and how we are planning for further COVID-19 uncertainties.
State and local directives, guidelines, and other restrictions, as well as consumer behavior, continue to impact our operations in the regions in which we operate, particularly California. During 2021 we continued to serve customers. COVID-19 and the governmental directives materially disrupted the operations of the local and state governments by closing or restricting operations at city, county and state offices for design reviews, permitting projects, and inspections of projects. Utility companies have been unable to provide timely shutdowns, inspections and interconnection approvals. This disruption negatively impacts our ability to complete projects, generate revenue on projects in backlog and causes many customers to delay decisions on new projects.
Our revenue and gross profit in the year ended December 31, 2021 were negatively impacted by governmental responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed pre-construction approvals and installation activity for our larger public works, agriculture and commercial projects by delaying approvals and restricting our employees’ access to our work sites. Earlier governmental orders and social distancing guidelines slowed our sales process, as our customers avoided interacting with our sales and installation personnel and delayed buying decisions.
We received a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program of $2,847 which was used to pay for payroll costs, interest on debt, rent, utilities, and group health care benefits, allowing the Company to focus on revenue generating activities in an effort to mitigate some of the impact COVID-19 has on our business. The entire principal of the loan and all accrued interest was forgiven in June of 2021.
Although there is uncertainty around the continued impact and severity the COVID-19 pandemic has had, and will continue to have, on our operations, these developments and measures have negatively affected our business. We will continue to manage the impact through appropriate operational measures. Of concern is how the COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread and could continue to adversely impact our ability to source materials used in our operations or affect our ability to complete ongoing installations in a timely manner. Several of our personnel have been subject to Company-imposed quarantine restrictions based upon possible contact with individuals who have tested positive. We are encouraging our personnel to wear masks and use social distancing and we believe we are taking appropriate In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic spread globally, including to the United States, which resulted in significant governmental measures being implemented to control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, travel restrictions and business shutdowns. Although we could not predict the scope and severity of COVID-19, these developments and measures adversely affected our business and our results of operation and financial condition, particularly with respect to operations and our ability to complete ongoing installations in a timely manner. COVID-19 also caused a decline in demand of our products and services.
As the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects evolve, we are monitoring our business to ensure that our expenses are in line with expected cash generation. The extent to which our results are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic will largely depend on future developments which cannot be accurately predicted and are uncertain, but the COVID-19 pandemic has had and will continue to have an adverse effect on our business, operations, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
REVENUE AND COST OF GOODS SOLD
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue increased to $101,154 compared to $37,913 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately 77% of revenue of 2021 was from installations for the residential markets, or $77,861, compared to 26% of revenue, or $9,685 for the prior year. The increase in residential revenue is a result of the Solcius acquisition in April 2021. Commercial and public works revenue was approximately 23% of total revenue or $23,293 for 2021, compared to 74% or $28,228 of revenue in the prior year. Prior year commercial and public works revenue was higher as a result of a larger public works project installed in 2020.
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $56,507 or 55.9% of revenue compared to $29,902 or 78.9% of revenue reported for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of goods sold is primarily the result of the April 8, 2021 acquisition of Solcius.
Gross profit was $44,647 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This compares to $8,011 of gross profit for the prior year. The gross margin improved to 44.1% in 2021 compared to 21.1% in 2020. The margin improvement is the result of the Solcius acquisition and the related gross margin on residential projects combined with improved margin on commercial projects in 2021.
Revenue and gross profit in the year ended December 31, 2021 were positively impacted by the Solcius acquisition and improving market conditions. In contrast, the prior year operating results were negatively impacted by COVID 19 and the governmental responses to the pandemic.
SELLING AND MARKETING EXPENSES
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s selling and marketing expenses were $32,760 compared to $5,646 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, selling and marketing expenses were 32.4% of revenue in 2021 compared to 14.9% of revenue in 2020. The increased expenses were largely related to the Solcius acquisition and additional marketing spend for dealer commissions, advertising and branding. The Solcius sales and marketing model focuses on lead generation and effective interaction with a network of authorized dealers and third-party sales organizations. During the year, we invested in sales and marketing to expand our lead generation efforts and improve brand awareness. Additionally, these investments are targeted at positively impacting our ability to enter additional markets and grow our in-house sales capability for residential markets.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
Total G&A expenses of $26,036 for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased compared to $13,116 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The G&A expenses increased from the prior year primarily as a result of the Solcius acquisition in April of 2021.
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT
Goodwill impairment recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $5,464 and $4,000, respectively. At December 31, 2021 we performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill and determined that the remaining carrying of goodwill resulting from the acquisitions made in 2014 and 2015 exceeded their fair value and we recorded an impairment for the remaining balances. In March 2020, as a result of the events and circumstances resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, our outlook for revenue, profitability and cash flow deteriorated. Therefore, we performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill at March 31, 2020. It was determined that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020 and, as a result, we recorded an impairment of $4,000 during the first quarter of 2020.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION EXPENSES
During the year ended December 31, 2021 we incurred $3,734 in total non-cash stock-based compensation expense, compared to $147 for the prior year. The year over year increase in stock-based compensation is the result of the company expanding RSU and stock option grants as part of the compensation structure to a broader population of employees.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $5,877, compared to $337 for the prior year. Depreciation and amortization expenses increased as a result of the Solcius acquisition which resulted in an increase in property and equipment and $15,600 of identified intangible assets of Solcius. The total $15,600 balance of intangible assets is being amortized over the estimated useful lives of the specific assets. The estimated useful lives range from nine months to ten years. The amortization expense from the April 2021 Solcius acquisition through December 2021 was $5,140.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSE), NET
Other income was $2,599 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an expense of $704 for the year 2020. Other income is primarily the result of the June 2021 forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loan of $2,847 and $34 of accrued loan interest. Interest expense for 2021 was $381 compared to $714 during 2020. The 2021 interest expense includes an estimated accrual for possible interest in the settlement of a sales tax liability from earlier years. The 2020 interest expense was primarily related to the interest paid on a $2.25 million loan balance outstanding pursuant to a senior promissory note plus the amortization of a $435 exit fee and the origination loan fees that were both shown as interest expense in the prior year period.
NET LOSS
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $26,625 and includes the goodwill impairment expense of $5,464 and the amortization Solcius intangibles of $5,140. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15,939 including the $4,000 goodwill impairment expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had $19,719 in unrestricted cash at December 31, 2021, as compared to $38,991 at December 31, 2020. We believe that the aggregate of our existing cash and cash equivalents is sufficient to meet our operating cash requirements and strategic objectives for growth for at least the next year. To satisfy our capital requirements, including acquisitions and ongoing future operations, we will likely seek to raise additional financing through debt and equity financings.
On January 27, 2021, the Company filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252475) (the “Registration Statement”), with the SEC. The Registration Statement allows the Company to offer and sell, from time to time in one or more offerings, any combination of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, or units having an aggregate initial offering price not to exceed $100 million. The Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on February 3, 2021. In 2021 we sold 5,356,984 shares with gross proceeds of approximately $63 million. Approximately $37 million of the $100 million total is available for future offerings pursuant to the Registration Statement.
As of December 31, 2021, our working capital surplus was $28,736 compared to a working capital surplus of $30,890 at December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $29,210 of cash in operating activities compared to $4,337 used in operating activities for the prior year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the current year net loss combined with investments in working capital to secure inventory and minimize the impacts of supply chain disruption.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $51,325 for the year ended December 31, 2021, including $50,619 net cash used to complete the Solcius acquisition and the remaining for purchases of property, plant and equipment. The cash used in investing activities in the 2020 totaled $26 for minor equipment purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $61,238. This increase was primarily due to net proceeds from sales of our common stock in 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $40,163. This is due to net proceeds of $41,406 received from the At the Market offerings, proceeds from a Paycheck Protection Loan of $2,847 partially offset by the repayment of the $3,750 promissory note payable and principal payments on acquisition and equipment debt totaling $340.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, results of operations, liquidity, or capital expenditures.