ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Please refer to the section entitled “Forward Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report immediately prior to Item 1. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Executive Overview
Our principal business is the design and manufacture of aluminum wheels for sale to OEMs in North America and Europe and to the aftermarket in Europe. We employ approximately 7,800 full-time employees, operating in eight manufacturing facilities in North America and Europe. We are one of the largest aluminum wheel suppliers to global OEMs and we believe we are the #1 European aluminum wheel aftermarket manufacturer and supplier. Our OEM aluminum wheels accounted for approximately 91 percent of our sales in 2021 and are primarily sold for factory installation on vehicle models manufactured by BMW (including Mini), Daimler (Mercedes-Benz, AMG, Smart), Ford, GM, Honda, Jaguar-Land Rover, Lucid Motors, Mazda, Nissan, PSA, Renault, Stellantis, Subaru, Suzuki, Toyota, VW Group (Volkswagen, Audi, SEAT, Skoda, Porsche, Bentley) and Volvo. We sell aluminum wheels to the European aftermarket under the brands ATS, RIAL, ALUTEC and ANZIO. North America and Europe represent the principal markets for our products, but we have a diversified global customer base consisting of North American, European and Asian OEMs.
Effect of COVID-19 Pandemic
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic introduced significant volatility in the financial markets and had a widespread adverse effect on the automotive industry.
While navigating through this period of volatility and uncertainty, Superior’s top priorities were:
•
Ensuring the health and safety of our employees
•
Maintaining the financial health of the Company, and
•
Serving our customers.
In order to ensure the health and safety of our employees globally and respond to the then current industry production environment, we closed production at our European facilities in late March 2020. In North America, our manufacturing operations ceased production in early April 2020. The Company reopened all of its facilities by June 1, 2020, in line with industry demand and finished goods levels, and in accordance with local government requirements. As a result, COVID-19 had a significant adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition in 2020, but this effect had largely subsided by the end of 2020 with the exception of supply chain disruptions which emerged late in 2020 and continued in 2021. We are continuing to monitor the resurgence of the virus, including the emergence of new virus variants and the progress of the vaccination efforts.
Industry Overview and Supply Chain Disruption
A broad range of factors impact automotive industry sales and production volumes, including consumer demand and preferences, dealer inventory levels, labor relations, trade agreements, cost and availability of raw materials and components, fuel prices, regulatory requirements, government initiatives, availability and cost of credit, changing consumer attitudes toward vehicle ownership and other factors. Our sales are driven generally by overall automotive industry production volumes and, more specifically, by the volumes of the vehicles for which we supply wheels. In addition, favorable product mix drives higher sales since larger diameter wheels and premium finishes command higher unit prices. Larger cars and light trucks, as well as premium vehicle platforms, such as luxury, sport utility and crossover vehicles, typically employ larger diameter wheels and premium finishes.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also contributed to supply chain disruptions across a number of industries. The automotive industry has been, and will likely continue to be, impacted by the supply chain disruptions that emerged in late 2020 as OEM vehicle production resumed and began to scale following the shutdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. These supply chain disruptions became a more significant challenge in 2021 and include shortages of semiconductor chips, electric vehicle batteries, shipping containers, steel, resin and foam. The semiconductor chip shortage, which began to affect global automotive industry production in the first two quarters of 2021, drove significantly lower OEM vehicle production and high OEM production volatility in the third and fourth quarters of 2021. Although automotive industry production volumes in the first half of 2021 were higher than the first half of 2020, production volumes in the second half of 2021 were lower than 2020. Lower production volumes coupled with OEM customer order
volatility have resulted in manufacturing inefficiencies, including elevated labor, scrap and equipment change over costs. In addition, certain of our costs increased significantly in 2021, particularly the cost of aluminum, energy and materials that incorporate resins. Although our OEM contracts provide for the pass through of fluctuating aluminum costs, the mechanisms generally do not adequately incorporate the current cost to alloy the aluminum. Our OEM contracts generally do not provide for the pass through of other costs, including energy and materials that incorporate resins. With respect to our aftermarket business, we adjust our pricing periodically to reflect increased costs. Rising costs and OEM production volatility have caused our inventory balance to increase, negatively impacting our cash flows.
Automotive industry production volumes in the North American and Western and Central European regions, our principal markets, are shown below for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the corresponding periods of 2020 and 2019:
Automotive passenger and light truck vehicle production volumes in North America and Western and Central Europe, remained relatively flat in 2021 as compared to 2020 (only 3.2 percent lower), but were 24.4 percent lower than 2019. North American volumes in 2021 were flat as compared to 2020, however volumes for Western and Central Europe declined 6.2 percent. While industry production volumes in 2020 were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, 2021 volumes were constrained by the semiconductor chip shortage which emerged in the first two quarters of 2021 and worsened in the last half of the year. Although volumes had improved 30.3 percent in the first half of 2021 as compared to the first half 2020, they declined 25.5 percent in the latter half of the year as compared to the second half of 2020. IHS, an independent automotive industry analyst firm, forecasts that 2022 production volumes in North America and Western and Central Europe will increase18.6 percent over 2021 (16.6 percent in North America and 20.6 percent in Western and Central Europe), but volumes will continue to lag 2019 by 10.3 percent. While semiconductor manufacturers have announced plans to expand capacity over the next several years, it is unclear when automotive industry semiconductor chip shortages will begin to subside. The rebound in production volumes will be dependent upon broader availability of semiconductor chips, among other factors.
During 2021, we experienced significant increases in the cost of aluminum, the principal raw material used in the manufacture of our wheels, of over 45 percent on a year-over-year basis. While we were able to protect the margins of our OEM business by passing these costs on to our customers in 2021, aluminum price increases have increased our working capital and reduced our operating cash flow. In addition, our electricity and natural gas costs have risen significantly in 2021, as has the cost of materials incorporating resins. If these cost pressures continue in 2022, our margins and operating cash flow could be adversely impacted.
Business Overview
Globally, we shipped 16.1 million units in 2021, up from 15.2 million in 2020 but down from 19.2 million in 2019. Superior volumes increased 6.1 percent, better than the 3.2 percent decline in overall industry volumes for 2021 but 16.2 percent lower than our 2019 volumes.
The following chart shows the comparison of our operational performance in 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
Sales in 2021 were higher than 2020 primarily due to favorable product mix and higher aluminum prices and shipment volumes (despite the semiconductor chip shortage which constrained OEM 2021 vehicle production volumes), as well as favorable foreign exchange rates. Our income from operations increased year-over-year due to the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of $193.6 million recognized in 2020, as well as improved North American profitability primarily associated with favorable product mix and higher shipment volumes. Similarly, our 2021 Adjusted EBITDA was higher than 2020 primarily due to North American favorable product mix and higher shipment volumes.
The following table is a summary of the Company’s operating results for 2021 and 2020:
Results of Operations
(1)
Value added sales is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. Refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Annual Report for a definition of value added sales and a reconciliation of value added sales to net sales, the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
(2)
Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure that is not calculated according to U.S. GAAP. Refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Annual Report for a definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
2021 versus 2020
Shipments
Wheel unit shipments were 16.1 million for 2021, compared to wheel unit shipments of 15.2 million in the prior year, an increase of 6.1 percent. The increase was attributable to a 9.9 percent increase in North American volume and a 2.2 percent increase in European volume.
Net Sales
Net sales for 2021 were $1,384.8 million compared to net sales of $1,100.8 million in the prior year, an increase of $284.0 million or 25.8 percent. The increase in revenue was due to $178.0 million attributable to higher pass through of aluminum to the OEMs; $88.3 million related to favorable product mix and higher shipment volumes; and $17.7 million resulting from favorable foreign exchange, primarily related to the Euro. The increase in shipment volumes was primarily due to the 2020 shutdowns at our key OEM customers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, while the increase in aluminum pass through was due to the higher cost of aluminum and higher shipment volumes, as well as product mix.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $1,270.0 million for 2021, compared to $1,035.1 million in the prior year, an increase of $234.9 million. The increase in cost of sales was due to $159.3 million in higher raw material costs; $65.6 million related to increased shipment volumes and product mix; and $10.0 million resulting from higher foreign exchange, primarily related to the Euro.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for 2021 were $59.3 million, or 4.3 percent of net sales, compared to $52.4 million, or 4.8 percent of net sales in the prior year. The $6.9 million increase was primarily due to a $10.7 million increase in compensation and benefit expense, including $4.7 million due to the modification of the 2019 and 2020 PSU awards, and temporary savings actions taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a $4.4 million gain on the sale of our Fayetteville, Arkansas facility in 2021.
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangibles
In the first quarter of 2020, we recognized a goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge of $193.6 million relating to our European reporting unit (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report).
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense for 2021 was $41.9 million, compared to interest expense of $45.4 million in the prior year. The $3.5 million decrease was due to lower average interest rates on the term Loan Facility and substantially lower borrowings under our revolving lines of credit during 2021, as compared to 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense, net was $2.3 million in 2021, primarily due to a net casualty loss of $1.5 million associated with a flood at our Werdohl, Germany location. Other expense of $2.8 million in 2020 was primarily due to $2.4 million of foreign exchange losses.
Income Tax Provision
The income tax provision for 2021 was $7.4 million on pre-tax income of $11.2 million, representing an effective tax rate of 66.5 percent. The 2021 effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, nondeductible charges and U.S. tax on foreign earnings, partially offset by a favorable split of pre-tax jurisdictional income. The income tax provision for 2020 was $14.9 million on pre-tax loss of $228.7 million, representing an effective income tax rate of (6.5) percent. The 2020 effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to the effect of the goodwill impairment in Germany and the recognition of a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets, partially offset by a favorable split of pre-tax jurisdictional income.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income in 2021 was $3.8 million, or a loss per diluted share of $1.17, compared to net loss of $243.6 million, or a loss per diluted share of $10.81 in 2020.
Segment Sales and Income from Operations
North America
In 2021, net sales of our North America segment increased 35.4 percent, as compared to 2020. The increase in net sales was due to $129.5 million in higher aluminum pass through to the OEMs and $65.3 million related to a 9.9 percent increase in shipment volumes and favorable product mix. North American segment income from operations for 2021 was $41.9 million higher than the prior year due to $27.1 million related to favorable material and manufacturing cost performance and $20.2 million related to favorable product mix and higher shipment volumes, partially offset by a $5.4 million increase in compensation and benefit expense. The increase in compensation and benefit expense was largely due to the modification of the 2019 and 2020 PSU awards.
Europe
In 2021, net sales of our European segment increased 16.2 percent, compared to 2020. The increase in net sales was due to $48.5 million in higher aluminum pass through to the OEMs; $23.0 million related to favorable product mix and a 2.2 percent increase in shipment volumes; and $17.7 million in favorable foreign exchange. European segment income from operations for 2021 was $193.9 million higher than the prior year due to a $193.6 million goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge recognized in 2020.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $113.5 million compared to $152.4 million at December 31, 2020. Our sources of liquidity primarily include cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under available debt facilities, factoring arrangements for trade receivables and, from time to time, other external sources of funds. Working capital (current assets minus current liabilities) and our current ratio (current assets divided by current liabilities) were $172.4 million and 1.7:1, respectively, at December 31, 2021, versus $152.5 million and 1.7:1 at December 31, 2020. While the Company continues to effectively manage all elements of working capital, inventories have increased in 2021 due to rising raw material costs and, to a lesser extent, higher conversion costs.
Our working capital requirements, investing activities and cash dividend payments have historically been funded from internally generated funds, debt facilities, cash and cash equivalents, and we believe these sources will continue to meet our future requirements. Capital expenditures relate to improving production quality and efficiency and extending the useful lives of existing property and expenditures for new product offerings, as well as expanded capacity for existing products. During 2022, we expect that capital expenditures will be approximately $80.0 million, $42.9 million of which has been committed under outstanding purchase orders at December 31, 2021.
In connection with the acquisition of our European operations, we entered into several debt and equity financing arrangements during 2017. On March 22, 2017, we entered into a USD Senior Secured Credit facility (“USD SSCF”) consisting of a $400.0 million Senior Secured Term Loan Facility (“Term Loan Facility”) and a $160.0 million Revolving Credit Facility (“Revolving Credit Facility,” together with the Term Loan Facility referred to as the USD Senior Secured Credit Facility, “USD SSCF”). On May 22, 2017, we issued 150,000 shares of redeemable preferred stock for an aggregate purchase price of $150.0 million. On June 15, 2017, we issued €250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.00% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 (the “Notes”). Finally, as part of the European business acquisition, we also assumed $70.7 million of outstanding debt, including a €30.0 million European Revolving Credit Facility (“EUR SSCF”) (subsequently increased to €60.0 million). In addition, the European business entered into equipment loan agreements totaling $13.4 million (€12.0 million) in the fourth quarter of 2019. The Company drew down €10.6 million on these equipment loans in the first quarter of 2020 and drew the remaining €1.4 million in the first quarter of 2021. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic uncertainty, the Company drew down on its USD SSCF and EUR SSCF revolving credit facilities to provide additional liquidity. As of March 31, 2020, the Company had borrowings outstanding under these facilities of $207.9 million. The Company resumed all its operations by June 1, 2020 and fully repaid the borrowings under the revolving credit facilities by September 30, 2020. There are no borrowings under the Company’s USD SSCF or EUR SSCF at December 31, 2021.
Balances outstanding under the Term Loan Facility, Notes, and equipment loans as of December 31, 2021 were $349.2 million, $245.8 million, and $18.6 million, respectively. The balance of the redeemable preferred stock was $199.9 million as of December 31, 2021. The Term Loan Facility matures May 23, 2024 and the Notes mature June 15, 2025. In addition, the redeemable preferred stock may be unconditionally redeemed on or after September 14, 2025 at the redemption amount, currently $300 million, provided the Company has sufficient available funds. Under Delaware law, any redemption payment would be limited to the “surplus” that our Board determines is available to fund a full or partial redemption without rendering us insolvent. The shares of preferred stock that have not been redeemed would continue to receive an annual dividend of 9 percent on the $150.0 million original stated value, plus any accrued and unpaid dividends, which would be paid quarterly. The Board would have to evaluate on an ongoing basis the ability of the Company to make any further redemption payments until the full redemption amount has been paid. The Company intends to
refinance a portion or all of its debt obligations, including the Term Loan Facility and Notes, prior to maturity. As a part of any refinancing, the Company will review its overall capital structure and may evaluate other sources of capital which could include issuance of common stock or restructuring of the preferred stock.
On May 3, 2021, the Company extended the term of the Revolving Credit Facility under its USD SSCF. The commitment under the facility was reduced from $160.0 million to $132.5 million, with $25.0 million of the commitment maturing May 23, 2022 and the remaining $107.5 million maturing October 31, 2023. During the second quarter of 2021, the Company amended its European Revolving Credit Facility (“EUR SSCF”), extending the term to May 22, 2023 and increasing the applicable margins and commitment fees, while maintaining the €60.0 million commitment. Our liquidity totaled $308.7 million at December 31, 2021, including cash and cash equivalents of $113.5 million and available unused commitments under credit facilities of $195.2 million.
As part of our ongoing efforts to improve our cash flow and related liquidity, we negotiate with suppliers to optimize our terms and conditions, including extended payment terms. Beginning in 2021, the Company receives extended payment terms for a portion of our purchases with one of our principal aluminum suppliers in exchange for a nominal adjustment to the product pricing. The payment terms provided to us are consistent with aluminum industry norms, as well as those offered to the supplier’s other customers. The supplier intends to finance these extended terms by factoring receivables due from us with a financial institution. We are not a party to the supplier’s factoring agreement with the financial institution. We remit payments directly to our supplier, except with respect to product purchased under extended terms which have been factored by the supplier. These payments are remitted directly to the financial institution in accordance with the payment terms originally negotiated with our supplier. As of December 31, 2021, the Company owed $17.6 million to the financial institution which is included in accounts payable in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company made $78.3 million in payments to the financial institution pursuant to the supplier’s factoring arrangement for the year ended December 31, 2021. These payments are included in cash flows from operations within the consolidated statements of cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no significant off-balance sheet arrangements other than factoring of $97.6 million of our trade receivables.
The following table summarizes the cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
2021 versus 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $44.9 million in 2021, as compared to $150.1 million in 2020. The decrease in cash flow provided by operating activities was primarily driven by an increase in working capital, partially offset by increased profitability. In 2021, the increase in working capital consumed $66.3 million of cash, while the reduction in working capital in 2020 provided $73.5 million of cash. The increase in working capital was primarily due to the higher cost of aluminum.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $57.5 million in 2021, as compared to $44.2 million in 2020. This increase in investing activities was driven by resumption of certain capital projects that were suspended in 2020 due to the COVID-19 production shutdowns and ongoing investments to support increased production capabilities in both the North American and European regions, partially offset by proceeds of $6.6 million from the sale of our Fayetteville, Arkansas facility.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 was $24.0 million, as compared to $37.1 million in 2020. This change was primarily due to prepayments of the Term Loan Facility in 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In this Annual Report, we discuss two important measures that are not calculated according to U.S. GAAP, value added sales and Adjusted EBITDA.
In the discussion of operating results, we provide information regarding value added sales. Value added sales represents net sales less the value of aluminum and services provided by outsourced service providers (“OSPs”) that are included in net sales. Contractual arrangements with our customers allow us to pass on changes in aluminum prices. Value added sales is worthy of being highlighted for the benefit of users of our financial statements as it allows users of the financial statements to consider our net sales information both with and without the aluminum and OSP costs. Management utilizes value added sales as a key metric to determine growth of the Company because it eliminates the volatility of aluminum prices.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest income and expense, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, restructuring charges and other closure costs and impairments of long-lived assets and investments, changes in the fair value of the redeemable preferred stock embedded derivative liability, acquisition and integration and certain hiring and separation related costs, proxy contest fees, gains associated with early debt extinguishment, and accounts receivable factoring fees. We use Adjusted EBITDA as an important indicator of the operating performance of our business. Adjusted EBITDA is used in our internal forecasts and models when establishing internal operating budgets, supplementing the financial results and forecasts reported to our Board of Directors and evaluating short-term and long-term trends in our operations. We believe the Adjusted EBITDA financial measure assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying operational measures to manage our business, to evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace and to establish operational goals. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table reconciles our net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, to our Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)
In 2021, we incurred $5.3 million of restructuring costs comprised of ongoing fixed costs associated with our Fayetteville, Arkansas facility, relocation and installation costs of repurposed machinery and costs of site preparation activities which occurred as part of the sale of the facility. Additionally, we recognized a gain on sale of $4.4 million related to the sale of the Fayetteville, Arkansas facility. We also incurred $1.5 million of costs from a flood at our Werdohl, Germany facility, $4.5 million related to the Werdohl restructuring, $4.3 million of certain hiring and separation costs, $2.1 million of accounts receivable factoring fees, and $0.7 million of other costs.
(2)
In 2020, we incurred charges of approximately $11.6 million of restructuring costs primarily comprised of ongoing fixed costs associated with our Fayetteville, Arkansas facility and relocation and installation costs of repurposed machinery. Additionally, we incurred $4.1 million of restructuring costs in connection with exiting the automotive racing market segment, as well as $1.5 million of certain hiring and separation costs, $1.4 million of accounts receivable factoring fees, and $0.6 million of other costs.
(3)
The change in the fair value is mainly driven by the change in our stock price during the respective periods.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Accounting estimates are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements. These estimates require the use of judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses in the periods presented. We believe the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, due to the inherent uncertainties in developing estimates actual results could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustments to these balances in future periods (refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for our significant accounting policies related to our critical accounting estimates).
Revenue Recognition - Revenue estimation uncertainty primarily relates to deferral and recognition of tooling revenue and recognition of certain price adjustments on sales to our OEM customers treated as variable consideration. Tooling revenues, related to the initial tooling reimbursed by our customers, are deferred and recognized over the average life of the vehicle wheel program on a straight-line basis. A portion of our selling prices to OEM customers is attributable to the aluminum content of our wheels. Our selling prices are adjusted for changes in the current aluminum market based upon specified aluminum price indices during specific pricing periods, as agreed with our customers. Our selling prices also incorporate a wheel weight price component which is based on customer product specifications. We estimate the variable consideration using the “most likely” amount estimation approach. Changes in aluminum prices are monitored and revenue is adjusted as changes in the aluminum index occur. Weights are monitored, and prices are adjusted as variations arise. Customer contract prices are generally adjusted quarterly to incorporate these price adjustments. Price adjustments due to production efficiencies are generally recognized as and when negotiated with customers. Adjustments to selling prices in 2021 and 2020 related to prior year revenues were $2.6 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
Fair Value Measurements - The Company applies fair value accounting for all financial assets and liabilities and non-financial assets and liabilities that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis, while other assets and liabilities are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as an asset impairment. Fair value is estimated by applying the following hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels and bases the categorization within the hierarchy upon the lowest level of input that is available and significant to the fair value measurement:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Inputs that are generally unobservable and typically reflect management’s estimate of assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Our derivatives are over-the-counter customized derivative instruments and are not exchange traded. We estimate the fair value of these instruments using the income valuation approach. Under this approach, future cash flows are estimated and discounted to a present value using market-based expectations for interest rates, foreign exchange rates, commodity prices and the contractual terms of the derivative instruments. The discount rate used is the relevant interbank deposit rate (e.g., LIBOR) plus an adjustment for non-performance risk.
Impairment of Goodwill - Goodwill is not amortized but is instead evaluated for impairment annually at the end of the fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that impairment may be more likely than not. A considerable amount of management judgment and assumptions are required in performing the quantitative impairment test, principally related to determining the fair value of the reporting unit. Estimation uncertainty in determining the fair value of the reporting unit primarily relates to estimation of the cash flows and weighted average cost of capital used in the income valuation approach and the estimated EBITDA and EBITDA market multiples used in the market valuation approach, among other factors.
At March 31, 2020, the impact of the COVID-19 developments and uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic had introduced significant volatility in the financial markets and was having a widespread adverse effect on the automotive industry, including reductions in both consumer demand and OEM automotive production. In response, our key customers temporarily closed
nearly all production facilities in Europe and North America (our primary markets) during the quarter ended March 31, 2020. As a result, we concluded that impairment was more likely than not, and that an interim test of our goodwill was required.
We utilized both an income and a market approach, weighted 75 percent and 25 percent respectively, to determine the fair value of the European reporting unit as part of our goodwill impairment assessment. The income approach is based on projected debt-free cash flow, which is discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. The discount rate used is the weighted average of an estimated cost of equity and of debt (“weighted average cost of capital”). The weighted average cost of capital is adjusted as necessary to reflect risk associated with the business of the European reporting unit. Financial projections are based on estimated production volumes, product prices and expenses, including raw material cost, wages, energy and other expenses. Other significant assumptions include terminal value cash flow and growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approach is based on the observed ratios of enterprise value to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of comparable, publicly traded companies. The market approach fair value is determined by multiplying historical and anticipated financial metrics of the European reporting unit by the EBITDA pricing multiples derived from comparable, publicly traded companies.
At March 31, 2020, we determined that the carrying value of the European reporting unit exceeded its fair value by an amount greater than the remaining goodwill balance and we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge equal to the remaining goodwill balance of $182.6 million. The decline in fair value was primarily due to significantly lower market multiples and increased discount rates, as well as further declines in forecasted industry production volumes in Western and Central Europe as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and consequent economic instability. Forecasted revenues, EBITDA and cash flow for the European reporting unit also declined as compared to the prior year long-range plan due to lower forecasted industry production volumes which adversely impacted fair value under both the income and market approaches. Significant assumptions used under the income approach included a weighted average cost of capital (WACC) of 12.0 percent and a long-term growth rate of 1.5 percent, as compared to 10.0 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively, used in the 2019 assessment. In determining the WACC, management considered the level of risk inherent in the cash flow projections and current market conditions, including the significant increase in credit spreads and systemic market and Company specific risk premiums. The decline in the fair value under the market approach was attributable to the decline in the average EBITDA market multiple (4.9X EBITDA in 2020, 5.7X EBITDA in 2019) and lower forecasted EBITDA, as compared to the 2019 assessment (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for further discussion of asset impairments).
Impairment of Intangible Assets - Intangible assets include both finite and indefinite-lived intangible assets. Finite-lived intangible assets consist of brand names, technology and customer relationships. Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives (since the pattern in which the asset will be consumed cannot be reliably determined). Indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but are instead evaluated for impairment annually at the end of the fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that impairment may be more likely than not. Indefinite-lived intangible assets, excluding goodwill, consist of trade names associated with our aftermarket business. Estimation uncertainty in assessing impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible asset is primarily related to the assumptions used in estimating the underlying cash flows and the discount rate used in determining fair value. In the first quarter of 2020, we recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $11.0 million related to our aftermarket trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset which was primarily attributable to a further decline in forecasted aftermarket revenues and a decline in associated profitability. As a result, there were no indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with our European operations as of December 31, 2020 (refer to Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for further discussion of asset impairments).
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - Management evaluates the recoverability and estimated remaining lives of long-lived assets whenever facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable or the useful life has changed. Estimation uncertainty in evaluating recoverability of long-lived assets within a given asset group is primarily related to the assumptions used in estimating the cash flows associated with the respective asset group, as well as the discount rate used in determining fair value in the event of an impairment. The asset group is the unit of accounting for a long-lived asset or group of long-lived assets which represents the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other asset groups. An impairment loss occurs when the carrying value of an asset group (including the carrying value of liabilities associated with the long-lived assets within the asset group) exceeds the undiscounted cash flows expected to be realized from the use and eventual disposition of the respective long-lived assets. Fair value is determined primarily by discounting the estimated expected cash flows. If the carrying amount of an asset group is impaired, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds fair value. The Company’s asset groups consist of the North American and European reportable segments.
Retirement Plans - Subject to certain vesting requirements, our unfunded retirement plan generally provides for a benefit based on final average compensation, which becomes payable on the employee’s death or upon attaining age 65, if retired. The net periodic pension cost and related benefit obligations are primarily based on assumptions regarding the discount rate and the mortality of the participants, among other factors. The net periodic pension costs and related obligations are measured using actuarial techniques and assumptions (refer to Note 16, “Retirement Plans” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for a description of these assumptions).
The following information illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions of our unfunded retirement plan as of December 31, 2021. They also may not be additive, so the impact of changing multiple factors simultaneously cannot be calculated by combining the individual sensitivities shown.
The effect of the indicated increase (decrease) in selected factors is shown below (in thousands):
Income Taxes - The Company operates in a number of geographic locations and is subject to foreign, U.S. federal, state and local taxes applicable in each of the respective jurisdictions. These tax laws are complex and involve uncertainties in the application to our facts and circumstances that may be subject to interpretation. We recognize benefits for uncertain tax positions based on a process that requires judgment in the technical application of laws, regulations and various related judicial opinions. If an uncertain tax position is more likely than not (probability of greater than 50 percent) to be sustained upon examination, we estimate the tax benefit as the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis, which is more likely than not to be realized upon ultimate settlement with tax authorities. Evaluation of tax positions, their technical merits, and measurements using cumulative probability are inherently subjective estimates since they require our assessment of the probability of future outcomes. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis, including consideration of changes in circumstances, such as new regulations, recent judicial opinions or the results of recent examinations by tax authorities. Any necessary changes to our estimates are recorded in the period in which the change occurs.
As a part of our income tax provision, we must also evaluate the likelihood that we will be able to realize our deferred tax assets which is dependent on our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in future years. A valuation allowance must be provided when, in our judgment, based on currently available information, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of such deferred tax assets will not be realized. The assessment regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted is based on an evaluation of possible sources of taxable income and considers all available positive and negative evidence, including the following:
•
Nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative financial reporting losses: A pattern of recent losses is heavily weighted as a source of negative evidence. We generally consider cumulative pre-tax losses in the three-year period ending in the current quarter to be significant negative evidence of future profitability. We also consider the strength and trend of earnings.
•
Sources of future taxable income: Future reversals of existing temporary differences are heavily weighted sources of objectively verifiable evidence. Projections of future taxable income are a source of positive evidence only when the projections are combined with a history of recent profitability and can be reasonably estimated. Otherwise, these projections are considered inherently subjective and generally will not be sufficient to overcome negative evidence that includes cumulative losses in recent years, particularly if the projected future profitability is dependent on a turnaround to profitability that has not yet been achieved.
•
Tax planning strategies: If necessary and available, tax planning strategies could be implemented to accelerate taxable amounts to utilize expiring carryforwards. These strategies would be a source of additional positive evidence and, depending on their nature, could be heavily weighted.
Our accounting for the valuation of deferred tax assets represents our best estimate of future events. Changes in our current estimates, due to unanticipated market conditions, governmental legislative actions or events, could have a material effect on our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, deferred tax assets were $102.1 million and $90.7 million, respectively, and valuation allowances against those deferred tax assets were $69.4 million and $46.5 million (refer to Note 14, “Income Taxes” in the
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report for additional information).