ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to the “Company,” “SVF Investment Corp.,” “SVF Investment Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to SVF Investment Corp.. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”, “Business” and the audited financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K,
words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 5, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is SVF Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 7, 2021. On January 12, 2021, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 60,375,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 7,875,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $603.8 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $33.9 million, of which approximately $21.1 million was deferred underwriting commissions. On April 22, 2021, the underwriters made a payment to us in an amount of $600,000 to reimburse certain of our expenses in connection with our initial public offering.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 9,383,333 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $14.1 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $603.8 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act. which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 12, 2023, (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to fund Regulatory Withdrawals (as defined in our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association), subject to an annual limit of $250,000, for a maximum of 24 months and/or to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one
basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, we had approximately $1.0 million held outside the trust account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and $603,786,848 held inside the trust account. We cannot assure you that our plan to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.0 million in its operating bank account and a working capital deficit of approximately $1.0 million.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the payment by our Sponsor of $25,000 for certain offering costs on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, and loans proceeds from our Sponsor of $300,000 pursuant to the Note. We repaid the Note in full on January 13, 2021.
Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, the Company’s liquidity needs will be satisfied with a portion of the proceeds of $2.0 million from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, $2.0 million was drawn under the Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations if the we are unable to complete a Business Combination with 24 months from closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 12, 2023 management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time which is considered to be one year from the issuance of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
In connection with the Company’ s assessment of going concern considerations management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination with 24 months from closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 12, 2023, raises substantial doubt about the Company’ s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time which is considered to be one year from the issuance of these financial statements. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to January 12, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $16.7 million, which consisted of change in fair value of derivative liabilities of approximately $147.5 million, change in fair value of working capital loan of approximately $2.2 million and income from investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $37,000, partially offset by general and administrative expenses of approximately $2.3 million, general and administrative expenses to related party of approximately $28.2 million, offering costs associated with derivative liabilities of approximately $2.2 million, loss on the Forward Purchase Agreement of approximately $97.4 million and loss on working capital loan of approximately $2.3 million. Of the approximately $28.1 million in general and administrative expenses with related parties, approximately $28.1 million is a noncash charge for the excess initial fair value of Private Placement Warrants over the purchase price for such warrants paid by our Sponsor.
For the period from October 5, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $130,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loan) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of this prospectus to purchase up to 7,875,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 12, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $12.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $21.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward Purchase Agreement
We entered into a Forward Purchase Agreement with the Forward Purchase Investor, which provides for the purchase of $250,000,000 of forward purchase units (the “Forward Purchase Units”), with each unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share (a “Forward Purchase Share”) and one-fifth
of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share (a “Forward Purchase Warrant”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The Forward Purchase Agreement also provides that the Forward Purchase Investor may elect to purchase up to an additional $50,000,000 of Forward Purchase Units, which will also have a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit and consist of one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth
of one warrant. Any elections to purchase up to 5,000,000 additional Forward Purchase Units will take place in one or more private placements in such amounts and at such time as the Forward Purchase Investor determines, but no later than simultaneously with the closing of the initial Business Combination. We and the Forward Purchase Investor may determine, by mutual agreement, to increase the number of additional Forward Purchase Units at any time prior to the initial Business Combination. The obligations under the Forward Purchase Agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the Public Shareholders. The Forward Purchase Securities will be issued only in connection with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The proceeds from the sale of Forward Purchase Securities may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, expenses in connection with the initial Business Combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Critical Accounting Policies
Working Capital Loan - Related Party
We have elected the fair value option to account for our working capital loan - related party with our Sponsor. As a result of applying the fair value option, we record each draw at fair value with a gain or loss recognized at issuance, and subsequent changes in fair value are recorded as change in the fair value of working capital loan - related party on the statements of operations. The fair value is based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. These inputs reflect management’s and, if applicable, an independent third-party valuation firm’s own assumption about the assumptions a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Derivative Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The 12,075,000 warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”), the 9,383,333 Private Placement Warrants, the 5,000,000 committed forward purchase warrants and the 1,000,000 additional forward purchase warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and the difference between the fair value and the book value recognized as a loss. We adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering, Private Placement Warrants and Forward Purchase Agreement were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and forward purchase warrants have been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with derivative liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating
expenses in the statements of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were included in temporary equity along with accretion of the Class A ordinary shares. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the total offering costs of the Initial Public Offering, approximately $2.6 million was included in offering cost-derivative liabilities in the statements of operations. We classified deferred underwriting commissions as non-current
liabilities as our liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 60,375,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets.
We recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 21,458,333 ordinary shares since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per ordinary share for year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Non-cash
compensation to Sponsor
We record non-cash
compensation recognized as a result of the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants being in excess of the amount paid by the Sponsor, pursuant to ASC 718, Share-based Compensation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
“Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The provisions of ASU 2020-06 are applicable for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, with early adoption permitted no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.