ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the Cayman Islands on March 4, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization, or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our ordinary shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from March 4, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and ongoing legal, accounting and professional service fees and costs associated with identifying a target. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an Initial Business Combination.
For the period from March 4, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $7,138,194, which consisted of formation and operating expenses of $2,398,687, offset by a gain of $9,534,000 for the change in fair value of the warrant liability and an unrealized gain of $2,881 on marketable securities held in trust.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $660,723. Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of ordinary shares by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On November 9, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which included the exercise in full by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 11,350,000 Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor and the Anchor Investors at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $11,350,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $234,600,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $24,551,888 in transaction costs, $4,600,000 of underwriting discounts and commissions, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees, $686,869 of other offering costs, and $11,215,019 excess fair value of anchor investor shares.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting fees and income taxes payable), to complete our Initial Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an Initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an Initial Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that an Initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an Initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Initial Business Combination.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing to complete our Initial Business Combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our Trust Account, or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we have not consummated our initial business combination within the required time period because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities. The agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $2,500 for office space, operational support and secretarial and administrative services has been waived by the Sponsor. The Company has not paid any amounts under this agreement as of December 31, 2021.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an Initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants underlying the Public Units and the warrants sold in the Private Placement (the “Private Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Under ASC 815-40, the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are not indexed to our ordinary shares in the manner contemplated by ASC 815-40 because the holder of the instrument is not an input into the pricing of a fixed-for-fixed option on equity shares. Accordingly, we classify the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value at the end of each reporting period and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit. As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a remeasurement of $39,069,010, $10,167,477 of which was recorded in additional paid-in capital and $28,901,533 was recorded in accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption at December 31, 2021, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net income per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the trust account earnings. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 11,350,000 private warrants in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the
inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. As a result, diluted net income per ordinary share is the same as basic net income per ordinary share for the periods presented.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of net income per ordinary share subject to possible redemption and allocates the net income into the two classes of shares in calculating net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted. For redeemable Class A ordinary shares, net income per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance. For non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares, net income per share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average number of nonredeemable Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares include the founder shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the trust account.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.