Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those identified under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this report.
Overview
Savara Inc. (together with its subsidiaries “Savara,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”) is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on rare respiratory diseases. Our lead program, molgramostim nebulizer solution (“molgramostim”), is an inhaled granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in Phase 3 development for autoimmune pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (“aPAP”). Previously, our pipeline included molgramostim for nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) lung infection in both non-cystic fibrosis (“CF”) and CF patients, vancomycin hydrochloride inhalation powder (“vancomycin”) for persistent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (“MRSA”) lung infection in people living with CF and inhaled liposomal ciprofloxacin (“Apulmiq”) for non-CF bronchiectasis. Savara, together with its wholly-owned subsidiaries, which includes Aravas Inc., Savara ApS, Drugrecure A/S, and Savara Australia Pty. Limited, operate in one segment with its principal office in Austin, Texas.
Since inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and resources to identifying and developing our product candidates, recruiting personnel, and raising capital. We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flow from operations and have no product revenue from inception to date. From inception to December 31, 2021, we have raised net cash proceeds of approximately $392.9 million, primarily from public offerings of our common stock, private placements of convertible preferred stock, and debt financings.
We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $43.0 million and $49.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $300.5 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We have chosen to operate by outsourcing our manufacturing and most of our clinical operations. We expect to incur significant additional expenses and continue to incur operating losses for at least the next several years as we initiate and continue the clinical development of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidate. We expect that our operating losses will fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year due to timing of clinical development programs and efforts to achieve regulatory approval.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $34.0 million and short-term investments of $127.2 million. We will continue to require substantial additional capital to continue our clinical development and potential commercialization activities. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to continue to fund our operations. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our clinical development efforts. Failure to raise capital as and when needed, on favorable terms or at all, would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidate.
Recent Events
COVID-19
The continuing COVID-19 global pandemic poses risks to our business. As we commence enrollment of our additional Phase 3 trial for the use of molgramostim for the treatment of aPAP, there remains a general uncertainty regarding the impact of COVID-19 on the aPAP patient population and physicians. Patients suffering from aPAP lung disease are prone to underlying lung conditions and are often treated by infectious disease specialists and pulmonologists. These treating physicians are on the front lines in addressing this global pandemic and must now, understandably, focus their attention on COVID-19. Further, if an aPAP patient enrolled in the study were to contract COVID-19, they may need to discontinue their participation.
Additionally, we are unable to quantify the impact this situation will have on our future financial performance, but the public health actions being undertaken to reduce the spread of the virus have created, and may continue to create, challenges and disruptions to our operations. Management, on an on-going basis, is evaluating our liquidity position, communicating with and monitoring the actions of our service providers, manufacturers, and suppliers and reviewing our near-term financial performance as we manage Savara through the uncertainty related to COVID-19.
As of the date of this report:
•management monitors local conditions and establishes appropriate policies to help ensure the health and safety of our employees;
•our third-party service providers, manufacturers, and suppliers may experience similar circumstances which could negatively impact our supply chain and progress of our development pipeline; and
•COVID-19 and related safety concerns have and could delay recruitment of our clinical trials.
The COVID-19 pandemic remains extremely fluid and we are continuing to re-assess the impact on our operations by monitoring the spread of COVID-19, emerging COVID-19 variants, and the actions implemented to combat the virus in various regions throughout the world. Where appropriate, we are making necessary operational and strategic decisions where possible, in an attempt to mitigate the negative impact of the virus on our operations.
Income Taxes
The CARES Act
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many governments are taking measures to provide aid and economic stimulus. These measures include deferring the due dates of tax payments or other changes to their income and non-income-based tax laws. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act”), which was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the U.S., includes many measures to assist companies, including temporary changes to income and non-income-based tax laws.
Additionally, the CARES Act provides for non-income tax provisions, such as allowing payments of the employer share of Social Security payroll taxes that would otherwise be due from the date of enactment through December 31, 2020 to be paid over the following two years. Other provisions will allow eligible employers subject to closure due to the COVID-19 pandemic to receive a 50% credit on qualified wages against their employment taxes each quarter with any excess credits eligible for refunds.
On August 8, 2020, former President Trump issued a COVID-19 relief executive order (“EO”) intending to help alleviate the hardships experienced by American workers as a result of the pandemic. The EO focuses on four key areas of relief including the deferral of payroll tax obligations for certain workers.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act extended and expanded the availability of the CARES Employee Retention credit through June 30, 2021. Subsequently, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (“ARP”), enacted on March 11, 2021, extended and expanded the availability of the CARES Employee Retention credit through December 31, 2021; however, certain provisions apply only after December 31, 2020.
We have assessed the provisions of the CARES Act, EO, and ARP and do not believe the measures mentioned above materially impact us or are relevant to our tax reporting. However, we are continuing to assess these and other provisions of the CARES Act and ARP and any potential additional federal stimulus packages with regards to their impact on our tax reporting as well as any provisions which may benefit us or our employees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report for additional discussion.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We record the costs associated with research, nonclinical and clinical trials, and manufacturing development as incurred. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses, with a substantial portion of our on-going research and development activities conducted by third party service providers, including contract research and manufacturing organizations.
We accrue for expenses resulting from obligations under agreements with CROs, CMOs, and other outside service providers for which payment flows do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us. Accruals are recorded based on estimates of services received and efforts expended pursuant to agreements established with CROs, CMOs, and other outside service providers. These estimates are typically based on contracted amounts applied to the proportion of work performed and determined through analysis with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrual balance in each reporting period. In the event advance payments are made to a CRO, CMO, or outside service provider, the payments will be recorded as a prepaid asset which will be amortized or expensed as the contracted services are performed. As actual costs become known, we adjust our prepaids and accruals. Inputs, such as the services performed, the number of patients enrolled, or the trial duration, may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to research and development expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations. To date, we have not experienced any material deviations between accrued and actual research and development expenses.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations, and as further defined by Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2017-01, Business Combinations (Topic 805), which requires the purchase price to be measured at fair value. When the purchase consideration consists entirely of shares of our common stock, we calculate the purchase price by determining the fair value, as of the acquisition date, of shares issued in connection with the closing of the acquisition and, if the transaction involves contingent consideration based on achievement of milestones or earn-out events, the probability-weighted fair value, as of the acquisition date, of shares issuable upon the occurrence of future events or conditions pursuant to the terms of the agreement governing the business combination. If the transaction involves such contingent consideration, our calculation of the purchase price involves probability inputs that are highly judgmental due to the inherent unpredictability of drug development, particularly by development-stage companies such as ours. We recognize estimated fair values of the tangible assets and intangible assets acquired, including IPR&D, and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date, and we record as goodwill any amount of the purchase price of the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in excess of the fair value.
Goodwill and Acquired In-Process Research and Development
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, our IPR&D and goodwill, when applicable, is determined to have indefinite lives and, therefore, is not amortized. Instead, it is tested for impairment annually and between annual tests if we become aware of an event or a change in circumstances that would indicate the carrying value may be impaired. For instance, based upon the ultimate scope and scale of the COVID-19 global pandemic, there may be materially negative impacts to the assumptions made with respect to our IPR&D assets that could result in an impairment of such assets.
With respect to the impairment testing of acquired IPR&D, ASU 2011-08, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Testing Goodwill for Impairment, and ASU 2012-02, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment, provide us a two-step impairment process with the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads us to determine that it is more-likely-than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50%) that our acquired IPR&D is impaired. If we choose to first assess qualitative factors and we determine that it is more-likely-than not acquired IPR&D is not impaired, we are not required to take further action to test for impairment.
ASU 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, outlines an impairment model providing us the option to implement a one-step method for determining impairment of goodwill, thereby simplifying the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 (quantitative calculation of measuring a goodwill impairment loss by comparing the implied fair value of a reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill) from the goodwill impairment test. Under the amendments in this guidance, an entity should perform its annual or interim goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Additionally, an entity should consider income tax effects from any tax-deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable.
When we perform a quantitative assessment of acquired IPR&D, we compare its carrying value to its estimated fair value to determine whether an impairment exists. In previous years, due to a lack of Level 1 or Level 2 inputs, the Multi-Period Excess Earnings Method (“MPEEM”), which is a form of the income approach, was used to estimate the fair value of acquired IPR&D when performing a quantitative assessment. Under the MPEEM, the fair value of an intangible asset is
equal to the present value of the asset’s projected incremental after-tax cash flows (excess earnings) remaining after deducting the market rates of return on the estimated value of contributory assets (contributory charge) over its remaining useful life. We evaluate potential impairment of our acquired IPR&D annually on September 30, utilizing a qualitative approach and determining if it was more-likely-than not that the fair value was impaired. We evaluate potential impairment of our acquired goodwill, if any, annually on June 30, performing the quantitative analysis based upon market capitalization.
Our determinations as to whether, and if so, the extent to which goodwill and acquired IPR&D become impaired are highly judgmental and, in the case of applying the MPEEM approach to estimate fair value, are based on significant assumptions regarding our projected future financial condition and operating results, changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets, development of our acquired assets or our overall business strategy, and regulatory, market, and economic environment and trends.
If the associated research and development effort is abandoned, the related asset will be written-off, and we will record a non-cash impairment loss on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. For those products that reach commercialization, the IPR&D asset will be amortized over its estimated useful life.
Product Revenue
We record revenue based on a five-step model in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. To date, we have not generated any product revenue from our product candidates.
Milestone Revenue
With respect to the license agreement related to molgramostim, which includes certain milestone payments to be remunerated to us by the licensee, we identify the performance obligations, determine the transaction price, allocate the contract transaction price to the performance obligations, and recognize the revenue when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. We identify the performance obligations included within the license agreement and evaluate which performance obligations are distinct.
The milestone payments are a form of variable consideration as the payments are contingent upon achievement of a substantive event. The milestone payments are estimated and included in the transaction price when we determine, under the variable consideration constraint, that it is probable that there will not be a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized in future periods. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust the estimate of the overall transaction price.
Share-based Compensation Expenses
We recognize the cost of stock-based awards granted to employees based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. The value of the award is recognized as expense ratably over the requisite service period. We recognize the compensation costs for awards that vest over several years on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Forfeitures are recognized when they occur, which may result in the reversal of compensation costs in subsequent periods as the forfeitures arise. In addition, we account for any modifications to stock-based awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation.
We estimate the grant-date fair value of a stock option award using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model (“Black-Scholes model”). In determining the grant-date fair value of a stock option award under the Black-Scholes model, we must make a number of assumptions, including the term of the award, the volatility of the price of our common stock over the term of the award, and the risk-free interest rate. Changes in these or other assumptions could have a material impact on the compensation expense we recognize.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities will be recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is established against the deferred tax assets to reduce their carrying value to an amount that is more-likely-than not to be realized.
Financial Operations Overview
Research and Development Expenses
We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. These expenses consist primarily of the following:
•expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, consultants, and clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of our clinical trials;
•contract manufacturing expenses, primarily for the production of clinical supplies; and
•internal costs that are associated with activities performed by our research and development organization, which primarily consists of:
•personnel costs, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for maintenance of facilities and depreciation expense; and
•regulatory expenses and technology license fees related to development activities.
The largest component of our operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities. The following table shows our research and development expenses by product candidate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We expect research and development expenses will remain significant in the future as we advance our molgramostim product candidate into and through clinical trials and pursue regulatory approvals, which will require a significant increased investment in regulatory support and contract manufacturing and inventory build-up related costs.
The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in timely developing and achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of our product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, intellectual property rights, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to accurately determine the duration and completion costs of our development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of molgramostim.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, and related costs for personnel in executive, finance and accounting, legal, and investor relations; as well as professional and consulting fees for accounting, legal, investor relations, business development, human resources, and information technology services. Other G&A expenses include facility lease and insurance costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense) includes amortization expense related to capitalized debt issuance costs and debt discount under our amended loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. Interest expense is typically reported net of interest income which includes interest earned on our cash, cash equivalent, and short-term investment balances. Other income (expense) also includes net unrealized and realized gains and losses from foreign currency transactions, foreign exchange derivatives not designated as hedging, refundable tax credits generated by some of our foreign subsidiaries, and securities subject to fair value accounting as well as any other non-operating gains and losses.
Results of Operations - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Milestone Revenue
We recognized $0.3 million in revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the prior achievement and receipt of a milestone payment in October 2018 pursuant to a license agreement. The license agreement was terminated during the third quarter of 2020 causing all performance obligations to have been satisfied, which resulted in the recognition of revenue. There was no such revenue recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased $6.0 million, or 17.3%, to $29.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $35.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is largely attributable to $5.4 million of acquisition costs for the acquisition of an inhaled liposomal ciprofloxacin product candidate (the “Licensed Product”) in March 2020 and a $6.9 million decrease in CMC and clinical operations activities associated with the wind down of our vancomycin study. This is partially offset by a $6.4 million increase in costs associated with molgramostim for the treatment of aPAP related to the startup and progression of the IMPALA-2 trial.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased $1.9 million, or 13.4%, to $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the recognition of a one-time non-recurring charge of $0.8 million for non-cash stock-based compensation and approximately $1.5 million of paid and accrued severance payments to former members of executive management during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, increased $1.2 million to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is primarily related to a reduction in investment income of approximately $0.8 million, which is included in the Interest expense, net line item on the consolidated statement of operations in this Annual Report. This reduction is primarily due to lower interest rates. Additionally, Foreign currency exchange (loss) gain decreased to a loss by $0.3 million due to a change in foreign currency exchange rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $34.0 million in cash, $127.2 million in short-term investments, and an accumulated deficit of $300.5 million. Since inception through December 31, 2021, our operations have been financed primarily by net cash proceeds of approximately $392.9 million, primarily from public offerings of common stock, private placements, and debt financings.
We have used and intend to use the net proceeds from these offerings for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to, the funding of clinical development of and pursuing regulatory approval for our product candidate and general and administrative expenses. Given the uncertainty created by the COVID-19 global pandemic, we will continue to monitor our liquidity and capital requirements.
Debt Facility
As discussed in Note 7. Debt Facility in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank during the year ended December 31, 2017, which was amended a fourth time in March 2021, under which we have drawn a total of $25 million.
Common Stock Sales Agreement
Wainwright Sales Agreement
On April 28, 2017, the Company entered into a Common Stock Sales Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”), as sales agent, which was amended by Amendment No. 1 to the Common Stock Sales Agreement on June 29, 2018 (the “Wainwright Sales Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, through Wainwright, shares of Savara’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of not more than $60 million, in addition to the $2.3 million in shares sold prior to the Amendment.
On July 2, 2021, the Company delivered written notice to Wainwright that it was terminating the Wainwright Sales Agreement effective July 12, 2021.
Evercore Sales Agreement
On July 6, 2021, the Company entered into a Common Stock Sales Agreement with Evercore Group L.L.C., (“Evercore”), as sales agent (the “Sales Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, through Evercore, shares of Savara’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Shares”), having an aggregate offering price of not more than $60 million. The Agreement was effective on July 16, 2021 (“New Registration Statement”), the date the Company’s shelf registration agreement on Form S-3, as filed with the SEC on July 6, 2021, was declared effective by the SEC. The Shares will be offered and sold pursuant to the New Registration Statement. Subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, Evercore will use commercially reasonable efforts to sell the Shares from time to time, based upon the Company’s instructions. The Company has provided Evercore with customary indemnification rights, and Evercore will be entitled to a commission at a fixed commission rate equal to 3% of the gross proceeds per Share sold. Sales of the Shares, if any, under the Sales Agreement may be made in transactions that are deemed to be “at the market offerings” as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Company has no obligation to sell any of the Shares and may at any time suspend sales under the Sales Agreement or terminate the Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not sell any shares of common stock under either the Wainwright Sales Agreement or the Evercore Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 942,825 shares of common stock under the Wainwright Sales Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $2.3 million.
Recent Public Offering
On March 11, 2021, we completed a public issuance of our common stock and pre-funded warrants for gross proceeds of approximately $130 million and net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses, of approximately $122.2 million as discussed in Note 10. Stockholders’ Equity in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Since 2017, we have completed four public offerings with combined net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, of approximately $257.6 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $40.1 million, consisting of a net loss of $43.0 million, a $1.8 million decrease in Accounts payable and Accrued expenses and other current liabilities mostly relating to the wind down or completion of our non-aPAP trials during 2020, and a $1.0 million increase in Prepaid and
other current assets associated with prepaid research and development costs for our IMPALA-2 trial. This was partially offset by approximately $5.8 million of non-cash charges (comprised primarily of depreciation and amortization including right-of-use assets, amortization on premium to short-term investments, amortization of debt issuance costs and stock-based compensation).
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $39.8 million, consisting of a net loss of $49.6 million, which was partially offset by (1) non-cash, share-based compensation expense of $5.1 million and (2) other non-cash charges related to amortization and depreciation of $0.7 million. In addition, the net loss was impacted by the write-off of acquired in-process research and development of $5.4 million related to the asset acquisition in the first quarter of 2020 of Apulmiq. The cash paid for the acquisition is reflected in cash flows from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in or provided by investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was primarily the result of net sale and maturities of short-term investments. In addition, we paid $3.2 million in the first quarter of 2020 related to the acquisition of Apulmiq.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $120.8 million, which was primarily related to $122.2 million in net proceeds from the public issuance of common stock and pre-funded warrants and $2.5 million in net proceeds from the exercise of warrants. This was partially offset by the payment of $3.9 million to repurchase outstanding warrants, as discussed in Note 10. Stockholders’ Equity in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.7 million, which was primarily related to net proceeds of $2.3 million related to the sales of our common stock through “at the market offerings” under the Sales Agreement and $1.8 million of net proceeds related to the exercise of certain milestone warrants issued in a private placement offering of our common stock in December 2019. These proceeds were partially offset by the payment of $0.5 million related to the end of period charge following the Third Amendment of our debt facility with Silicon Valley Bank in January 2020.
Future Funding Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize our product candidate. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development and manufacturing activities, particularly as we continue the research, development, manufacture, and clinical trials of, and seeking regulatory approval for, our product candidate. In addition, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of our product candidate, we anticipate we may need additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $161.2 million. Although we have sufficient capital to fund our planned activities, including those discussed in Note 11. Commitments - Manufacturing and Other of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report, we may need to raise additional capital to further fund the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidate and to begin commercialization of any approved product. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our clinical development efforts. Failure to raise capital as and when needed, on favorable terms or at all, would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidate.
Although we are well capitalized, until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, we may finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity securities and potentially through borrowings, grants, and strategic alliances with partner companies. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidate to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Manufacturing and Other Commitments and Contingencies
We are subject to various manufacturing royalties and payments and other commitments related to molgramostim.
For a summary of the contingent milestone payments and commitments, refer to Note 11. Commitments - Manufacturing and Other, of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
Other Contracts
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for research studies, clinical trials, testing, and other services. These contracts generally provide for termination upon notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements, of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report milestone for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their effect, if any, on us.