Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements relating to our expectations, projections, beliefs, and prospects, which are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In some cases you can identify these statements by forward-looking words, such as “believe,” “will,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “might,” “plan,” “expect,” “predict,” “could,” “potentially” or the negative of these terms or similar expressions. You should read these statements carefully because they may discuss future expectations, contain projections of future results of operations or financial condition, or state other “forward-looking” information. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. We caution investors that our business and financial performance are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a medical device company focused on developing and commercializing products intended to transform the way calcified cardiovascular disease is treated. We aim to establish a new standard of care for medical device treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (“atherosclerosis”) through our differentiated and proprietary local delivery of sonic pressure waves for the treatment of calcified plaque, which we refer to as intravascular lithotripsy (“IVL”). Our IVL system (our “IVL System”), which leverages our IVL technology (our “IVL Technology”), is a minimally invasive, easy-to-use, and safe way to significantly improve patient outcomes. Our IVL catheters are cleared or approved for use in a number of countries and development programs are underway to expand indications and geographies. We are currently selling the following products in countries where we have applicable regulatory approvals:
Products for Treatment of Peripheral Artery Disease (“PAD”):
•
Our Shockwave M5 IVL catheter (the “M5 catheter”) and M5+ IVL catheter (“M5+ catheter”) are five-emitter catheters for use in our IVL System in “medium” vessels for the treatment of above-the-knee PAD. The M5 catheter was CE-Marked in April 2018 and cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in July 2018. The M5+ catheter, for which we are currently initiating a limited market release in the United States and select international locations, was CE-Marked in November 2020 and cleared by the FDA in April 2021.
•
Our Shockwave S4 IVL catheter (“S4 catheter”) is a four-emitter catheter for use in our IVL System in small vessels for the treatment of below-the-knee PAD. The second version of our S4 catheter was cleared by the FDA in August 2019 and accepted by our EU notified body in May 2020 for use in our IVL System.
Product for the Treatment of Coronary Artery Disease (“CAD”):
•
Our Shockwave C2 IVL catheter (“C2 catheter”) is a two-emitter catheter for use in our IVL System for the treatment of CAD. The C2 catheter was CE-Marked in June 2018. In August 2019, we received the Breakthrough Device Designation from the FDA for our C2 catheters using our IVL System for the treatment of CAD. In August of 2020, we submitted an application to the FDA for U.S. pre-market approval of our C2 catheters, which was approved by the FDA in February 2021.
Our differentiated range of M5 and M5+ catheters, S4 catheters and C2 catheters enables delivery of IVL therapy of diseased vasculature throughout the body for calcium modification. Our IVL catheters resemble in form a standard balloon angioplasty catheter, the device most commonly used by interventionalists. This familiarity makes our IVL System easy to learn, adopt and use on a day-to-day basis.
Since inception, we have focused on generating clinical data to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of our IVL Technology. These initial studies have consistently shown low rates of complications regardless of which vessel was being
studied. In addition to gaining regulatory approvals or clearances, the data from our clinical studies strengthen our ability to drive adoption of IVL Technology across multiple therapies in existing and new market segments. Our past studies have also guided optimal IVL procedure technique and informed the design of our IVL System and future products in development. In addition, we also have ongoing clinical programs across several products and indications, which, if successful, will allow us to expand commercialization of our products into new geographies and indications. For a discussion of our current clinical trials, refer see the section titled “Business - Company Overview - Our Products and Product Pipeline.”
The first two indications we are targeting with our IVL System are PAD, the narrowing or blockage of vessels that carry blood from the heart to the extremities, and CAD, the narrowing or blockage of the arteries that supply blood to the heart. In the future, we see significant opportunity in the potential treatment of aortic stenosis, a condition where the heart’s aortic valve becomes increasingly calcified with age, causing it to narrow and obstruct blood flow from the heart.
We have adapted the use of lithotripsy to the cardiovascular field with the aim of creating what we believe can become the safest, most effective means of addressing the growing challenge of cardiovascular calcification. Lithotripsy has been used to successfully treat kidney stones (deposits of hardened calcium) for over 30 years. By integrating lithotripsy into a device that resembles a standard balloon catheter, physicians can prepare, deliver, and treat calcified lesions using a familiar form factor, without disruption to their standard procedural workflow. Our differentiated IVL System works by delivering shockwaves through the entire depth of the artery wall, modifying calcium in the medial layer of the artery, not just at the superficial most intimal layer. The shockwaves crack this calcium and enable the narrowed artery to expand at low pressures, thereby minimizing complications inherent to traditional balloon dilations, such as dissections or tears. Preparing the vessel with IVL facilitates optimal outcomes with other therapies, including stents and drug-eluting technologies. Using IVL also avoids complications associated with atherectomy devices such as dissection, perforation, and embolism. When followed by an anti-proliferative therapy such as a drug-coated balloons or drug-eluting stents, the micro-fractures may enable better drug penetration into the arterial wall and improve drug uptake, thereby improving the effectiveness of the combination treatment.
We market our products to hospitals whose interventional cardiologists, vascular surgeons, and interventional radiologists treat patients with PAD and CAD. We have dedicated meaningful resources to establish a direct sales capability in the United States, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France, and the United Kingdom, and we are working to build out our direct sales team in Japan in anticipation of the launch of our C2 catheters, for which we anticipate Japanese regulatory approvals in the first half of 2022. We have complemented our direct sales capability with distributors actively selling our products in over 50 countries in North and South America, Europe, the Middle East, Asia, Africa, and Australia/New Zealand. We are actively expanding our international field presence through new distributors, as well as additional sales and clinical personnel. In addition, we are continuing to add new U.S. sales territories.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we generated revenue of $237.1 million, $67.8 million and $42.9 million, respectively, and incurred net losses of $9.1 million, $65.7 million and $51.1 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, 21%, 45% and 47%, respectively, of our product revenue was generated from customers located outside of the United States. Our sales outside of the United States are denominated principally in Euros. As a result, we have foreign exchange exposure. We have not entered into any material foreign currency hedging contracts, although we may do so in the future.
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses. Although we had positive net income for the quarters ended September 30, 2021, and December 31, 2021, we had a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021. We may continue to incur losses in the future, which may vary significantly from period to period. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses as we (i) expand our marketing efforts to increase adoption of our products, (ii) expand existing relationships with our customers, (iii) obtain regulatory clearances or approvals for our planned or future products, (iv) conduct clinical trials on our existing and planned or future products, and (v) develop new products or add new features to our existing products. We will need to continue to generate significant revenue in order to sustain profitability as we continue to grow our business. Even if we achieve profitability for any period, we cannot be sure that we will remain profitable for any substantial period of time.
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the sales of our common stock in our public offerings, private sales of our equity securities, payments received from customers purchasing our products and, to a lesser extent, proceeds from our debt financings. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had positive cash flows from operations of $15.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $201.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and an accumulated deficit of $252.8 million.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
The global COVID-19 pandemic presents significant risks to us and has had, and continues to have, far reaching impacts on our business, operations, and financial results and condition, directly and indirectly, including, without limitation, impacts on: the health of our management and employees; our manufacturing, distribution, marketing and sales operations; our research and development activities, including clinical activities; and customer and patient behaviors.
Access to many hospitals and other customer sites may be or may periodically be, depending on the current COVID-19 infection rates in the applicable location, restricted to essential personnel, which negatively impacts our ability to promote the use of our products with physicians. Additionally, many hospitals and other therapeutic centers have in the past suspended, and may suspend or continue to suspend in the future, many elective procedures, resulting in a reduced volume of procedures using our products. Our customer behavior is impacted by the prevalence of COVID-19 and changes in the infection rates in the locations where our customers are located.
Quarantines, shelter-in-place and similar government orders have also impacted and may continue to impact, our third-party manufacturers and suppliers, and could in turn adversely impact the availability or cost of materials, which could disrupt our supply chain.
In addition, we have recently seen some disruptions in the operations of certain of our third-party suppliers, resulting in increased lead-times, higher component costs and lower allocations for our purchase of some components and, in certain cases, requiring us to procure materials from alternate suppliers or incur higher logistical expenses. We are continuing to work closely with our manufacturing partners and suppliers to enable us to source key components and maintain appropriate inventory levels to meet customer demand. However, we have not experienced material disruptions in our supply chain to date.
We have taken a variety of steps to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, while attempting to minimize business disruption. Essential staff in manufacturing and limited support functions continued to work from our Santa Clara headquarters following appropriate hygiene and social distancing protocols. To reduce the risk to our other employees and their families from potential exposure to COVID-19, until recently all other staff in our Santa Clara headquarters were required to work from home. Certain of these other employees had begun to return to our headquarters full or part-time during the second quarter of 2021, although we continue to review the impact of the omicron variant of COVID-19 on employee safety. We continue to limit travel to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers.
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and customers and on the markets in which we operate, and will take further actions that we consider prudent to address the COVID-19 pandemic, while ensuring that we can support our customers and continue to develop our products.
The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us remains highly uncertain and will depend on future developments and factors that continue to evolve, including the ability of various regions to effectively manage COVID-19, the extent of the continuing resurgence of COVID-19, the efficacy and extent of distribution of vaccines, and the impact of mutations of COVID-19, including the current omicron variant, and the ability of various economies and supply-chains to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. Most of these developments and factors are outside of our control and could exist for an extended period of time even after any cessation of the pandemic.
Factors Affecting Our Business
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, our results of operations and growth. These factors include:
•
Market acceptance. The growth of our business depends on our ability to gain broader acceptance of our current products by continuing to make physicians and other hospital staff aware of the benefits of our products to generate increased demand and frequency of use, and thus increase sales to our hospital customers. Our ability to grow our business will also depend on our ability to expand our customer base in existing or new target end markets. Although we are attempting to increase the number of patients treated with procedures that use our products through our established relationships and focused sales efforts, we cannot provide assurance that our efforts will increase the use of our products.
•
Regulatory approvals/clearances and timing and efficiency of new product introductions. We must successfully obtain timely approvals or clearances and introduce new products that gain acceptance with physicians, ensuring adequate supply while avoiding excess inventory of older products and resulting inventory write-downs or write-offs. For our sales to grow, we will also need to obtain regulatory clearance or approval of our other pipeline products in the United States and in international markets. In addition, as we introduce new
products, we expect to build our inventory of components and finished goods in advance of sales, which may cause quarterly fluctuations in our results of operations.
•
Sales force size and effectiveness. The rate at which we grow our sales force and the speed at which newly hired salespeople become effective can impact our revenue growth or our costs incurred in anticipation of such growth. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives and expanding our international marketing programs to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospital accounts.
•
Competition. Our industry is intensely competitive and, in particular, we compete with a number of large, well-capitalized companies. We must continue to successfully compete in light of our competitors’ existing and future products and related pricing and their resources to successfully market to the physicians who use our products.
•
Reimbursement. The level of reimbursement from third-party payors for procedures performed using our products could have a substantial impact on the prices we are able to charge for our products and how widely our products are accepted. The level at which reimbursement is set for procedures using our products, and any increase in reimbursement for procedures using our products, will depend substantially on our ability to generate clinical evidence, to gain advocacy in the respective physician societies and to work with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and payors.
•
Clinical results. Publications of clinical results by us, our competitors and other third parties can have a significant influence on whether, and the degree to which, our products are used by physicians and the procedures and treatments those physicians choose to administer for a given condition.
•
Product and geographic mix; timing. Our financial results, including our gross margins, may fluctuate from period to period based on the timing of customer orders or medical procedures, the number of available selling days in a particular period, which can be impacted by a number of factors, such as holidays or days of severe inclement weather in a particular geography, the mix of products sold and the geographic mix of where products are sold. In particular, our distributors for international sales receive a distribution margin on sales of our IVL catheters, which affects our gross margin.
•
COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken in response thereto, which have negatively affected, and we expect will continue to negatively affect, our revenues and results of operations. Due to these impacts and measures, we may experience significant and unpredictable fluctuations in demand for certain of our products as hospital customers re-prioritize the treatment of patients and distributors adjust their operations to support the current demand level.
•
Seasonality. We have experienced some seasonality during summer months, which we believe is attributable to the postponement of elective surgeries for summer vacation plans of physicians and patients. We also anticipate that we may in the future experience some seasonal slowing of demand for our products in our fourth quarters due to year-end clinical treatment patterns, such as the postponement of elective surgeries during the holiday period. We expect these seasonal factors to become more pronounced in the future as our business grows.
In addition, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience meaningful variability in our quarterly revenue and gross margin as a result of a number of factors, including, but not limited to: inventory write-offs and write-downs; costs, benefits and timing of new product introductions; the availability and cost of components and raw materials; and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Additionally, we experience quarters in which operating expenses, in particular research and development expenses, fluctuate depending on the stage and timing of product development.
While these factors may present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Product revenue
Product revenue is primarily derived from the sale of our IVL catheters.
We sell our products to hospitals, primarily through direct sales representatives, as well as through distributors in selected international markets. For products sold through direct sales representatives, control is transferred upon delivery to customers. For products sold to distributors internationally and certain customers that purchase stocking orders in the United States, control is transferred upon shipment or delivery to the customer’s named location, based on the contractual shipping terms. Additionally, a portion of our revenue is generated through a consignment model under which inventory is maintained at hospitals. For consignment inventory, control is transferred at the time the catheters are consumed in a procedure.
Cost of product revenue
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of costs of components for use in our products, the materials and labor that are used to produce our products, the manufacturing overhead that directly supports production and the depreciation relating to the generators used in our IVL System that we provide to our hospital customers, often on a cost-free loan basis to facilitate the use of our IVL catheters in their procedures. We depreciate the generators over a three-year period. We expect cost of product revenue to increase in absolute terms as our revenue grows.
Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, the cost of direct materials, product mix, geographic mix, discounting practices, manufacturing costs, product yields, head count and cost-reduction strategies. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which, if successful, we believe will reduce costs and enable us to increase our gross margin percentage. While we expect gross margin percentage to increase over the long term, gross margin percentage will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we continue to introduce new products and adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of applicable personnel, consulting, materials and clinical trial expenses. Research and development expenses include:
•
certain personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonus, travel and stock-based compensation;
•
cost of clinical studies to support new products and product enhancements, including expenses for clinical research organizations and site payments;
•
materials and supplies used for internal research and development and clinical activities;
•
allocated overhead including facilities and information technology expenses; and
•
cost of outside consultants who assist with technology development, regulatory affairs, clinical affairs and quality assurance.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. In the future, we expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to develop new products, enhance existing products and technologies and perform activities related to obtaining additional regulatory approval.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, sales commissions, travel and stock-based compensation. Other sales and marketing expenses include marketing and promotional activities, including trade shows and market research, and cost of outside consultants. We expect to continue to grow our sales force and increase marketing efforts as we continue commercializing products based on our IVL Technology.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonus, travel and stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses include professional services fees, including legal,
audit and tax fees, insurance costs, cost of outside consultants and employee recruiting and training costs. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) compliance and investor relations.
Share in net loss of equity method investment
Share in net loss of equity method investment, represents our proportionate share of the underlying income or loss incurred in connection with our joint venture with Genesis MedTech International Private Limited (“Genesis”).
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and short-term investments and the net impact of foreign exchange gains and losses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Product revenue. Product revenue increased by $169.4 million, or 250%, from $67.8 million in 2020 to $237.1 million in 2021, driven primarily by coronary catheter revenues, and secondarily by peripheral catheter revenues, as further described below.
The following table represents our product revenue based on product line:
Coronary product revenue increased by $136.9 million, or 557%, from $24.6 million in 2020 to $161.5 million in 2021. In February 2021, we received FDA approval for our C2 catheters. The increase in coronary product revenue was due to the commencement of sales in the United States, increased adoption of our products internationally, and continued recovery from
the COVID-19 pandemic impact in the prior year. All coronary product revenue was from international customers for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Peripheral product revenue increased by $32.1 million, or 76%, from $42.0 million in 2020 to $74.1 million in 2021. The change was due to an increase in the number of our M5 and S4 IVL catheters sold within the United States and internationally driven by increased adoption of our products and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic impact in the prior year.
Other product revenue increased by $0.4 million, or 34%, from $1.2 million in 2020 to $1.6 million in 2021. The change was due to an increase in the purchase volume of our IVL generators and other accessories within the United States and internationally.
We sold to a greater number of customers in the United States and to a greater number of distributors internationally in 2021 compared to 2020. Product revenue, classified by the major geographic areas in which our products are shipped, was $186.3 million within the United States and $50.8 million for all other countries in 2021 compared to $37.1 million within the United States and $30.7 million for all other countries in 2020.
Cost of product revenue and gross margin percentage. Cost of product revenue increased by $20.4 million, or 97%, from $21.0 million in 2020 to $41.4 million in 2021. The increase was driven by higher product sales volume compared to the prior year. Gross margin percentage improved to 83% in 2021, compared to 69% in 2020. This change in gross margin percentage was primarily due to higher average selling price and lower fixed costs per unit from increased production volume of our IVL catheters and increased manufacturing efficiencies from improvements to operations and production.
Research and development expenses. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the periods presented:
Research and development expenses increased by $13.6 million, or 37%, from $36.9 million in 2020 to $50.5 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $12.0 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs due to an increase in head count to support research and development activities. There was also a $2.6 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs due to increased information technology, rent and building expenditures, a $1.2 million increase for outside consultants, and a $0.4 million increase in materials and supplies. These increases were partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in clinical-related costs primarily due to the timing of completion of patient enrollment for certain clinical trials and the timing of commencement of new clinical trials, and a $0.8 million decrease in other research and development costs due to software license costs in the prior year not incurred in the current year.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $59.6 million, or 115%, from $51.7 million in 2020 to $111.3 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $45.2 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs, as a result of a higher head count and increased revenue for the year-ended December 31, 2021. Marketing and promotional expenses increased by $5.2 million to support the continued commercialization of our products. There was also a $4.3 million increase due to travel-related costs driven by higher head count and continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic impact in the prior year, a $2.4 million increase in facilities and other allocated costs, due to increased information technology, rent and building expenditures, a $1.9 million increase due to consulting and general corporate expenses, a $0.5 million increase in materials and supplies, and a $0.1 million increase due to recruiting and training fees.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $10.9 million, or 46%, from $23.9 million in 2020 to $34.7 million in 2021. The change was primarily due to a $7.7 million increase in compensation and personnel-related costs due to an increase in head count, $2.1 million increase in consulting, professional services and general corporate expenses, and a $1.1 million increase in recruiting, training, information technology and facilities costs.
Share in net loss of equity method investment. The share in net loss of equity method investment of $6.3 million in 2021 was due to our 45% ownership in the joint venture which was acquired in March 2021.
Interest expense. Interest expense of $1.1 million was related to our outstanding term loan which matures in December 2023. The term loan requires monthly repayments of principal starting in July 2022.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net decreased by $1.8 million, or 146%, from $1.3 million in other income, net in 2020 to $0.6 million in other expense, net in 2021. The decrease in other income was primarily due to a decrease in interest income attributable to the decreased interest rate environment in the comparable period and the timing of the maturities of marketable securities. Also included in other income (expense), net are the net impact of foreign exchange gains and losses.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been the net proceeds we received through the sales of our common stock in our public offerings, private sales of our equity securities, payments received from customers purchasing our products and, to a lesser extent, proceeds from our debt financings. On March 11, 2019, upon completion of our initial public offering (“IPO”), we received net proceeds of $99.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Concurrent with the IPO, we completed a private placement for net proceeds of $10.0 million. On November 15, 2019, we completed a follow-on offering for net proceeds of $96.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On June 19, 2020, we completed an offering for net proceeds of $83.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
On February 11, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Amended Credit Facility”) to refinance our existing term loan, which was accounted for as a modification. The Amended Credit Facility provided us with a supplemental term loan in the amount of $16.5 million. We received net proceeds of $3.3 million, which reflects an additional $4.3 million in principal as of the date of the modification less the final balloon payment fee of $1.0 million. The supplemental term loan matures on December 1, 2023. The Amended Credit Facility provides an interest-only payment through June 30, 2022.
We have a number of ongoing clinical trials and expect to continue to make substantial investments in these trials as well as additional clinical trials designed to provide clinical evidence of the safety and efficacy of our existing products. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives and expanding our international marketing programs to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts and physicians as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospitals. We also expect to continue to make investments in research and development, regulatory affairs, and clinical studies to develop future generations of products based on our IVL Technology, support regulatory submissions, and demonstrate the clinical efficacy of our products. Moreover, we expect to continue to incur expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing and SEC compliance, investor relations and other expenses. Because of these and other factors, although we had positive net income for the quarters ended September 30, 2021, and December 31, 2021, we had a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 and we may incur net losses and have negative cash flows from operations in the future.
As of December 31, 2021, we have $201.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and an accumulated deficit of $252.8 million.
In the short term, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient for at least the next 12 months to meet our requirements and plans for cash, including supporting working capital and capital expenditure requirements. In the long term, our ability to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the cost, timing and results of our clinical trials and regulatory reviews;
•
the cost of our research and development activities for new and modified products;
•
the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•
the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish including any contract manufacturing arrangements;
•
the timing, receipt and amount of sales from our current and potential products;
•
the degree of success we experience in commercializing our products;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technologies;
•
the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions.
To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and cash and other requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of additional debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, there is a possibility we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Debt, Principal, and Interest
Our debt, principal and interest commitments consist of our debt obligations under the Amended Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had debt, principal, and interest commitments of $17.1 million, of which $6.0 million is expected to be paid within the next twelve months.
Manufacturing Purchase Obligations
We have fixed commitments with a contract manufacturer of approximately $12.7 million within the next twelve months.
Operating Leases
Our operating lease commitments mostly consist of our lease obligations for our Santa Clara headquarter office spaces. During the year ended 2021, we entered into a lease amendment and executed a lease for an additional facility. Our total operating lease commitments as of December 31, 2021 are approximately $56.2 million, of which $3.5 million is expected to be paid within the next twelve months.
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any commitments or obligations, including contingent obligations, arising from arrangements with unconsolidated entities or persons that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, cash requirements or capital resources.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
In 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $15.0 million, attributable to a net loss of $9.1 million, non-cash charges of $40.7 million, partially offset by a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $16.5 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $27.3 million in stock-based compensation, $6.3 million in share in net loss of equity method investment, $3.6 million in depreciation and amortization, $2.0 million in amortization of right-of-use assets, $1.1 million in accretion of discount on available-for-sale securities, and $0.5 million in amortization of debt issuance costs. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $25.7 million increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales, a $12.1 million increase in inventory driven by an increase in raw material, work in progress, and finished goods inventory to support sales growth, a $2.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and a $0.2 million decrease in lease liability due to lease payments. These changes were partially offset by a $21.6 million increase in accrued and other current liabilities resulting from expansion in our operating activities and accrued employee compensation driven by increased headcount, a $1.9 million increase in accounts payable due to the timing of vendor billings and payments, and a decrease in other assets of $0.1 million.
In 2020, cash used in operating activities was $71.2 million, attributable to a net loss of $65.7 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $20.3 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $14.8 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $10.4 million in stock-based compensation, $1.9 million in depreciation and amortization, $1.5 million in amortization of right-of-use assets, $0.6 million in amortization of debt issuance costs, $0.3 million in accretion of discount on available-for-sale securities and $0.2 million of a loss due to the write down of fixed assets. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $17.1 million increase in inventory and $4.3 million increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales, a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.3 million increase in other assets, a $1.4 million decrease in accounts payable and a $0.8 million decrease in lease liabilities. These changes were partially offset by a $4.0 million increase in accrued and other current liabilities resulting primarily from the expansion in our operating activities, leasehold improvements associated with our Santa Clara office and laboratory premises, and accrued bonuses and commissions.
Investing activities
In 2021, cash provided by investing activities was $26.4 million, attributable to proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale investments of $156.1 million, partially offset by purchase of available-for-sale investments of $117.2 million and purchases of property and equipment of $12.4 million.
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $107.5 million, attributable to the purchase of available-for-sale securities of $168.0 million and the purchase of property and equipment of $11.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale investments of $72.0 million.
Financing activities
In 2021, cash used in financing activities was $2.5 million, attributable to $8.3 million of payment of taxes withheld on net settled vesting of restricted stock units (“RSUs”), partially offset by proceeds of $3.0 million from stock option exercises and proceeds of $2.8 million from the issuance of shares under our employee stock purchase plan.
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $90.0 million, attributable to $83.4 million from the public offering of our common stock, $3.3 million from borrowings under the Amended Credit Facility, proceeds of $4.3 million from stock
option exercises and proceeds of $1.8 million from the issuance of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. These changes were offset by payment of taxes withheld on net settled vesting of RSUs of $1.4 million, principal payments on our term loan of $1.1 million and payment of public offering costs of $0.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue
Product Revenue
We sell our products to hospitals, primarily through direct sales representatives, as well as through distributors in selected international markets. For products sold through direct sales representatives, control is transferred upon delivery to customers. For products sold to distributors internationally and certain customers that purchase stocking orders in the United States, control is transferred upon shipment or delivery to the customer’s named location, based on the contractual shipping terms. Additionally, a portion of our revenue is generated through a consignment model under which inventory is maintained at hospitals. For consignment inventory, control is transferred at the time the catheters are consumed in a procedure.
Under agreements with our customers, we may provide for the use of an IVL generator and connector cable at no charge to facilitate the use of our IVL catheters. These agreements do not contain contractually enforceable minimum commitments and are generally cancellable by either party with 30 days’ notice.
License Revenue
For arrangements that contain a license of our functional intellectual property with a customer, we consider whether the license grant is distinct from other performance obligations in the arrangement. A license grant of functional intellectual property is generally considered to be capable of being distinct if a customer can benefit from the license on its own or together with other readily available resources. License revenue for licenses of functional intellectual property is recognized at a point in time when we satisfy our performance obligation of transferring the license to the customer.
On March 19, 2021, we entered into the Joint Venture Deed (the “JV Agreement”) with Genesis to establish a long-term strategic partnership to develop, manufacture and commercialize certain of our interventional products in the People’s Republic of China, excluding the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau. Under the JV Agreement, Genesis Shockwave Private Ltd. (the “JV”) was formed under the laws of Singapore to serve as a joint venture with Genesis for the purpose of establishing and managing such a strategic partnership.
In connection with the formation of the JV on March 19, 2021, we received a 45% equity stake in the JV in exchange for the contribution of intellectual property. We determined that the JV met the definition of a customer under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and that the promised goods and services of the contribution of the license of intellectual property and associated manufacturing technology transfer to the JV were considered to be a single performance obligation. The transaction price of $12.3 million was estimated by reference to the cash value of the shares which were issued at the formation of the JV.
As of December 31, 2021, the associated manufacturing technology transfer to the JV has not yet been completed. We recorded a related party contract liability, noncurrent, of $12.3 million for the outstanding performance obligation.
Equity Method Investment
Entities which we have significant influence over the activities, but do not control, are accounted for under the equity method of accounting in accordance with Topic 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures.
Our carrying value in the equity method investment is reported as equity method investment on our consolidated balance sheet. We record our proportionate share of the underlying income or loss which is recognized in share in net loss of equity method investment. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our share in the losses incurred by the equity method investee was $6.3 million. We eliminate any intra-entity profits to the extent of our beneficial interest.
We assess our equity method investment for impairment when events or circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of the investment may be impaired. We consider all available evidenced in assessing whether a decline in fair value is other than temporary. If the decline in fair value is determined to be other than temporary, the difference between the carrying amount of the investment and estimated fair value is recognized as an impairment charge.
Accrued research and development costs
We accrue liabilities for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by our third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet and within research and development expense on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We accrue for these costs based on factors, such as estimates of the work completed and budget provided and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred since our inception.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
No recently issued accounting standards are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.