Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a technology infrastructure company powering the sustainable growth of the connected world and the Internet of Everything. Using our technology platform, we provide solutions to help enable that growth. Our advanced data centers are the center of our platform and provide power densities that exceed industry averages with efficient cooling, while being powered by 100% renewable energy. These exascale data centers address the growing challenges facing the data center industry. Our critical infrastructure components in our data centers are purpose-built to satisfy customers’ needs, drive efficiency and enable the deployment of highly advanced computing technologies.
We presently own and operate five primary campus locations, called Primes, which encompass 16 colocation facilities with an aggregate of up to 5.1 million GSF of space. Our Primes consist of The Core Campus in Las Vegas, Nevada; The Citadel Campus near Reno, Nevada; The Pyramid Campus in Grand Rapids, Michigan; The Keep Campus in Atlanta, Georgia; and The Rock Campus in Austin, Texas, which was launched with our acquisition in June 2021 of all of the equity interests of Data Foundry and certain real property interests used in connection with Data Foundry’s operations.
In addition to our Primes, we held a 50% ownership interest in SUPERNAP International, S.A. (“SUPERNAP International”), which had deployed facilities in Italy and Thailand, until February 2021, when we acquired SUPERNAP International’s 30% ownership interest in SUPERNAP Thailand, the entity which has deployed the facility in Thailand, and sold our ownership interest in SUPERNAP International, thus disposing of our interest in the facility in Italy. We account for our ownership interest in SUPERNAP Thailand under the equity method of accounting.
We currently have more than 1,300 customers, including some of the world’s largest technology and digital media companies, cloud, IT and software providers, as well as financial institutions and network and telecommunications providers. Our ecosystem connects over 350 cloud, IT and software providers and more than 100 network and telecommunications providers. Our business is based on a recurring revenue model comprised of (1) colocation, which includes the licensing and leasing of cabinet space and power and (2) connectivity services, which include cross-connects, broadband services and external connectivity. We consider these services recurring because our customers are generally billed on a fixed and recurring basis each month for the duration of their contract. We generally derive more than 95% of our revenue from recurring revenue and we expect to continue to do so for the foreseeable future.
Our non-recurring revenue is primarily comprised of installation services related to a customer’s initial deployment. These services are non-recurring because they are typically billed once, upon completion of the installation.
In November 2021, our board of directors approved the pursuit of a REIT conversion with a target of electing REIT status for the taxable year beginning January 1, 2023. We will report material developments and plans from time to time as the key steps for our conversion to a REIT are put in place and completed.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 49
Factors that May Influence Future Results of Operations
Impact of COVID-19. The global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and its resurgences has and may continue to negatively impact global economic activity, which, despite progress in vaccination efforts, remains uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. In addition, new variants of COVID-19 continue to emerge, including the recent Omicron variant which appears to be the most transmissible variant to date. While we have not incurred significant disruptions thus far from COVID-19, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against variants, the response by governmental bodies and regulators, the severity of the disease or any variant, the duration of the outbreak, the future impact to the business of our customers, partners and vendors, and other facts identified in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in Part I of this Form 10-K. Given the ongoing and dynamic nature of the circumstances, it is difficult to predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of COVID-19 and its variants on the global economy and to our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
Market and Economic Conditions. We are affected by general business and economic conditions in the United States and globally. These conditions include short-term and long-term interest rates, inflationary pressures, supply chain issues, money supply, political issues, legislative and regulatory changes, fluctuations in both debt and equity capital markets and broad trends in industry and finance, all of which are beyond our control. Macroeconomic conditions that affect the economy and the economic outlook of the United States and the rest of the world, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants, could adversely affect our customers and vendors, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Growth and Expansion Activities. Our future revenue growth will depend on our ability to maintain our existing revenue base while expanding and increasing utilization at our existing and developing Prime Campus locations. Our existing Prime Campus locations currently encompass 16 colocation facilities with an aggregate of up to 5.1 million GSF of space and up to 508 MW of power. As of December 31, 2021, the utilization rates at these Prime Campuses, based on currently available cabinets, were approximately 95%, 99%, 99%, 96%, and 77% at The Core Campus, The Citadel Campus, The Pyramid Campus, The Keep Campus, and The Rock Campus, respectively. Each of our existing Primes has room for further expansion. We may be unable to attract customers to our data centers or retain them for a number of reasons, including if we fail to provide competitive pricing terms, provide space that is deemed to be inferior to that of our competitors or are unable to provide services that our existing and potential customers desire.
Cost of Power. We are a large consumer of power, and the cost of energy accounts for a significant portion of our cost of revenue. We require power supply to provide many services we offer, such as powering and cooling our customers’ IT equipment and operating critical data center plant and equipment infrastructure. Pursuant to our service agreements, we provide our customers with a committed level of power supply availability and we have committed to operating our data centers with 100% clean and renewable energy. Most of our customer agreements provide the ability to increase our prices in response to an increase in the cost of energy; however, our gross profit can be adversely affected by increases in our cost of energy if we choose not to pass along the increases to our customers. For instance, historically, we generally have intentionally not passed along the seasonal increase in energy costs during the summer months to the full extent permitted under our contracts in order to avoid seasonal adjustments to our customer pricing, and that practice has, therefore, resulted in a decrease in our gross profit in those periods. Beginning in July 2021, we increased certain customer pricing in response to an increase in the cost of energy. As an unbundled purchaser of energy in Nevada, we are able to purchase power in the open market through long-term power contracts, which we believe reduces variability of energy costs. Our existing customers may not renew their contracts with us or may reduce the services purchased from us, or we may be unable to attract new customers, if we experience increased energy costs or limited availability of power resources, including clean and renewable energy. Our brand or reputation could be adversely affected if we are unable to operate our data centers with 100% clean and renewable energy.
Capital Expenditures. Our growth and expansion initiatives require significant capital. The costs of constructing, developing, operating and maintaining data centers, and growing our operations are substantial. While we strive to match the growth of our facilities to the demand for services, we still must spend significant amounts before we receive any revenue. If we are unable to generate sufficient capital to meet our anticipated capital requirements, our growth could slow and operations could be adversely affected. Our maintenance capital expenditures were $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Growth in Customers. Our results of operations could be significantly affected by the growth or reduction of our customer base. We have over 1,300 customers, including some of the world’s largest technology and digital media companies, cloud, IT and software providers, financial institutions, and network and telecommunications providers.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 50
We believe we have significant opportunities to both grow penetration of our existing customers as well as attract new customers. Our ability to attract new customers depends on a number of factors, including our ability to offer high quality services at competitive prices and the capability of our marketing and sales team to attract new customers. Additionally, a significant portion of our revenue is highly dependent on our top 10 customers and the loss of these customers or any significant decrease in their business could adversely affect our results of operations.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We monitor the following unaudited key metrics and financial measures, some of which are not calculated in accordance with GAAP to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Recurring Revenue
We calculate recurring revenue as contractual revenue under signed contracts calculated in accordance with GAAP for the applicable period. Recurring revenue does not include any installation or other one-time revenue, which would be classified as non-recurring revenue. Management uses recurring revenue as a supplemental performance measure because it provides a useful measure of increases or decreases in contractual revenue from our customers and provides a baseline revenue measure on which to plan expenses.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of recurring revenue to total revenue:
Capital Expenditures
We define capital expenditures as cash purchases of property and equipment during a particular period. We believe that capital expenditures is a useful metric because it provides information regarding the growth of our technology infrastructure platform and the potential to expand our services and add new customers.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss adjusted for interest expense, interest income, income taxes, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, amortization of customer relationships, and for specific and defined supplemental adjustments to exclude (i) non-cash equity-based compensation expense; (ii) equity in net losses of investments; and (iii) certain other items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
Our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not prepared in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin because we believe certain investors use them as measures of a company’s historical operating performance and its ability to service and incur debt and make capital expenditures. We believe that the inclusion of certain adjustments in presenting Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin is appropriate to provide additional information to investors because Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin exclude certain items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance and that are not excluded in the calculation of EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is also similar to the measures used under the debt covenants
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 51
included in our credit facilities, except that the definition used in our credit facilities does not exclude certain cash gains or litigation expense. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allowing for greater transparency with respect to key financial metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision-making.
Our non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results under GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures versus their nearest GAAP equivalents. Non-GAAP financial measures may not provide information directly comparable to measures provided by other companies in our industry, as those other companies may calculate their non-GAAP financial measures differently. In addition, the non-GAAP financial measures exclude certain recurring expenses that have been and will continue to be significant expenses of our business.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of our net income to Adjusted EBITDA:
________________________________________
(1)Interest income is included in the “Other” line of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
(2)Litigation expense and acquisition-related costs are included in the “Selling, general and administrative expense” line in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
During each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we derived more than 96% of our revenue from recurring revenue streams, consisting primarily of (1) colocation, which includes the licensing and leasing of cabinet space and power and (2) connectivity services, which include cross-connects, broadband services and external connectivity. The remainder of our revenue is from non-recurring revenue, which primarily includes installation services related to a customer’s initial deployment. The majority of our revenue contracts are classified as licenses, with the exception of certain contracts that contain lease components. Based on the current growth stage of our business, we expect increases in revenue to be driven primarily by increases in volume, rather than changes in the prices we charge to our customers.
We recognize revenue when control of these goods and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Revenue from recurring revenue streams is generally billed monthly and recognized using a time-based measurement of progress as customers receive service benefits evenly throughout the term of the contract. Contracts with our customers generally have terms of three to five years. Non-recurring installation fees, although generally paid in a lump sum upon installation, are deferred and recognized ratably over the contract term, which is determined using a portfolio
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 52
approach. Revenue is generally recognized on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent, largely because we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the contract, take title to services, and bear credit risk.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of depreciation and amortization expense, expenses associated with the operations of our facilities, including electricity and other utility costs and repairs and maintenance, data center employees’ salaries and benefits, including equity-based compensation, connectivity costs, and rental payments related to our leased buildings and land used in data center operations. A substantial portion of our cost of revenue is fixed in nature and may not vary significantly from period to period, unless we expand our existing data centers or open new data centers. However, there are certain costs that are considered more variable in nature, including utilities and supplies that are directly related to growth in our existing and new customer base. The largest portion of our utility costs is fixed and a smaller portion is variable with market conditions.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including customer growth, the expansion of our existing data centers or opening of new data centers, and the cost of our utilities, specifically electricity. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these factors.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and related expenses, including equity-based compensation, accounting, legal and other professional service fees, real estate and personal property taxes, rental payments related to our corporate office lease, marketing and selling expenses, including sponsorships, commissions paid to partners, travel, depreciation and amortization expense, insurance, and other facility and employee related costs. This expense classification may not be comparable to those of other companies. We expect to incur additional selling, general and administrative expenses as we continue to scale our operations to invest in sales and marketing initiatives to further increase our revenue and support our growth. We also expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of the NYSE, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services. Further, we expect to continue to incur general and administrative expenses in the form of equity-based compensation as a result of the continued issuance and vesting of equity awards. As a result, we expect that our selling, general and administrative expense will continue to increase in absolute dollars, but may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period.
Litigation Settlement Expense
Litigation settlement expense consists of the issuance of shares of Class A common stock upon the settlement of certain litigation based on the closing share price on the settlement date.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our credit facilities and senior unsecured notes and amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discount, net of amounts capitalized.
Gain (Loss) on Swaps
Gain (loss) on swaps consists of changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps used to mitigate our exposure to interest rate risk and power swaps used to mitigate our exposure to adverse changes in the price of power, inclusive of periodic net settlement amounts.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt consists of losses resulting from certain lenders exiting our credit facilities in connection with amending our credit agreement.
Equity in Net Losses of Investments
Equity in net losses of investments consists of our share of results of operations from our equity method investments, including foreign currency translation adjustments. We held a 50% ownership interest in SUPERNAP International until February 2021, when we acquired SUPERNAP International’s 30% ownership interest in SUPERNAP Thailand and sold our ownership interest in SUPERNAP International. We had discontinued the equity
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 53
method of accounting for our investment in SUPERNAP International as the carrying value of our investment was reduced to zero as a result of recording our share of its losses. Our interest in SUPERNAP Thailand was accounted for under the equity method of accounting through December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our investment in SUPERNAP Thailand was reduced to zero as a result of recording our share of operating losses and foreign currency translation adjustments. Accordingly, we discontinued the equity method of accounting for our investment in SUPERNAP Thailand as of December 31, 2021 and will not provide for additional losses until our share of future net income, if any, equals the share of net losses not recognized during the period the equity method was suspended. Our losses will continue to include the foreign currency translation adjustments in our investment.
Gain on Sale of Equity Method Investment
Gain on sale of equity method investment consists of the gain resulting from the sale of our ownership interest in SUPERNAP International, inclusive of foreign currency translation gains realized.
Other
Other primarily consists of other items that have impacted our results of operations such as interest income on our cash equivalents and gains and losses resulting from other transactions.
Income Taxes
Switch, Ltd. is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. As a partnership, Switch, Ltd. is not subject to U.S. federal and certain state and local income taxes. Any taxable income or loss generated by Switch, Ltd. is passed through to, and included in the taxable income or loss of, its members, including us, on a pro rata basis. We are subject to U.S. federal income taxes, in addition to state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income or loss generated by Switch, Ltd.
Noncontrolling Interest
We consolidate the financial results of Switch, Ltd. and report a noncontrolling interest on our consolidated statements of comprehensive income, representing the portion of net income or loss and comprehensive income or loss attributable to the noncontrolling interest. The weighted average ownership percentages during the period are used to calculate the net income or loss and other comprehensive income or loss attributable to Switch, Inc. and the noncontrolling interest.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 54
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations:
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 55
The following table sets forth the consolidated statements of income data presented as a percentage of revenue. Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $80.5 million, or 16%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to $27.4 million contributed by Data Foundry, with 13% of the remaining increase attributable to revenue from new customers initiating service after December 31, 2020, and 87% attributable to increased revenue from existing customers. Our revenue churn rate, which we define as the reduction in recurring revenue attributable to customer terminations or non-renewal of expired contracts, divided by revenue at the beginning of the period, was 0.6% and 0.9% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 56
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $60.2 million, or 22%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $29.9 million in depreciation and amortization expense due to additional property and equipment being placed into service and $25.2 million in facilities costs due to increased utility rates. Accordingly, gross margin decreased by 280 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $24.7 million, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $8.2 million in legal fees, $4.6 million in costs incurred related to the acquisition of Data Foundry, an increase of $4.5 million in salaries and related employee expense largely due to an increase in headcount associated with the acquisition of Data Foundry, and an increase of $3.5 million in depreciation and amortization expense due to the amortization of acquired customer relationships.
Other Income (Expense)
________________________________________
NM - Not meaningful
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $17.9 million, or 60%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in our weighted average debt outstanding from our senior unsecured notes and our weighted average interest rate from 2.97% during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 3.31% during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain (Loss) on Swaps
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a gain on swaps of $0.6 million, compared to a loss on swaps of $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily driven by changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps largely from the fluctuation in market interest rates, partially offset by a $4.9 million loss related to power swaps settled during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 57
Other
Other increased by $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to non-recurring license fee income of $2.8 million recorded pursuant to a technology license agreement.
Income Tax Expense
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred income tax expense of $2.7 million, compared to $4.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Income tax expense is driven by our allocable share of Switch, Ltd.’s income before income taxes.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was the result of a decrease in net income and a decrease in ownership by noncontrolling interest holders during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For a discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Switch, Inc. is a holding company and has no material assets other than its ownership of Common Units. As such, we have no independent means of generating revenue or cash flow, and our ability to pay our taxes or declare and pay dividends in the future, if any, will be dependent upon the financial results and cash flows of Switch, Ltd. and its subsidiaries and any distributions we receive from Switch, Ltd. The terms of the amended and restated credit agreement and the indentures governing our senior unsecured notes limit the ability of Switch, Ltd., among other things, to incur additional debt, incur additional liens, encumbrances or contingent liabilities, and pay distributions or make certain other restricted payments.
Cash Sources
We have historically relied primarily on cash flows from operations, borrowings under our credit facilities, and issuances of notes. We regularly explore financing alternatives, including new credit agreements, unsecured and secured note issuances, and equity financing.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $48.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and our total indebtedness was approximately $1.69 billion (excluding debt issuance costs and original issue discount) consisting of (i) $1.10 billion principal from our senior unsecured notes, (ii) $529.0 million principal from our credit facilities, $129.0 million of which is accruing interest at an underlying variable interest rate of 1.85% and $400.0 million of which is effectively fixed at 4.48% pursuant to interest rate swap agreements, and (iii) $57.4 million from our finance lease liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, we had access to $363.1 million in additional liquidity from our revolving credit facility, net of outstanding letters of credit.
Senior Unsecured Notes
On September 17, 2020, we issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 3.75% senior unsecured notes due 2028. The notes bear interest at the rate of 3.75% per annum and mature on September 15, 2028. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on March 15, 2021.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 58
On June 7, 2021, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.125% senior unsecured notes due 2029. The notes bear interest at the rate of 4.125% per annum and mature on June 15, 2029. Interest on the notes is payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning on December 15, 2021.
The indentures to the notes contain covenants that, subject to exceptions and qualifications, among other things, limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness and guarantee indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase or redeem our capital stock, prepay, redeem or repurchase certain indebtedness, issue certain preferred stock or similar equity securities, make loans and investments, dispose of assets, incur liens, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into agreements restricting our ability to pay dividends, and consolidate, merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets.
Credit Agreement
We are party to an amended and restated credit agreement (as amended on December 28, 2017, September 17, 2020, and July 29, 2021) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, and certain other lenders, consisting of a $400.0 million term loan facility, maturing in July 2028, and a $500.0 million revolving credit facility, maturing in July 2026. The term loan facility is subject to quarterly principal amortization payments of $1.0 million, beginning on December 31, 2021, followed by a final payment of $373.0 million upon maturity.
The amended credit agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants customary for such financings, including, but not limited to, limitations, subject to specified exceptions and baskets, on incurring additional debt, incurring additional liens, encumbrances or contingent liabilities, making investments in other persons or property, selling or disposing of our assets, merging with or acquiring other companies, liquidating or dissolving ourselves or any of the subsidiary guarantors, engaging in any business that is not otherwise a related line of business, engaging in certain transactions with affiliates, paying dividends or making certain other restricted payments, and making loans, advances or guarantees. The terms of the amended credit agreement also require compliance with the consolidated secured leverage ratio (as defined in the amended credit agreement) of 4.00 to 1.00 for each fiscal quarter.
We were in compliance with all applicable covenants as of December 31, 2021.
See Note 7 “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements for more information on the components of our long-term debt.
Cash Uses
For the year ending December 31, 2022, we expect to incur $510 million to $560 million in capital expenditures for development and construction projects related to our expansion (excluding acquisitions of land); however, the exact amount will depend on a number of factors. We believe we have sufficient cash and access to liquidity, coupled with anticipated cash generated from operating activities, to satisfy our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months, including completion of our development projects. We also believe that our financial resources will allow us to manage the anticipated impact of COVID-19 and its variants on our business operations for the foreseeable future, which could include reductions in revenue and delays in payments from customers and partners. The challenges posed by COVID-19 and its variants on our business are expected to evolve. Consequently, we will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to COVID-19 and its variants, including the Delta variant.
In addition, we are obligated to make payments under the TRA. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded a liability under the TRA of $395.6 million. Although the actual timing and amount of any payments we make under the TRA will vary, we expect those payments will be significant. Any payments we make under the TRA will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us or to Switch, Ltd. and, to the extent we are unable to make payments under the TRA for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid by us.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 59
The following table summarizes current and long-term material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021, which we expect to fund primarily with operating cash flows:________________________________________
(1)Represents principal payments only. We will pay interest on outstanding indebtedness based on the rates and terms summarized in Note 7 “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements.
(2)Represents interest expected to be incurred on our long-term debt based on amounts outstanding and interest rates as of December 31, 2021, including the impact of interest rate swaps, as summarized in Note 7 “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements. Actual rates will vary.
(3)Represents principal and imputed interest. See Note 8 “Leases” to our consolidated financial statements.
(4)Represents minimum operating lease payments, excluding potential lease renewals. See Note 8 “Leases” to our consolidated financial statements.
(5)Represents primarily commitments for leases not yet commenced, construction-related purchase orders, and power purchase and portfolio energy credit agreements for our data centers. See Note 8 “Leases” and Note 10 “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements.
Payments under the TRA are excluded in the table above as we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of the payments of the liability; however, no amounts are expected to be paid within the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash from operating activities is primarily generated from operating income from our colocation and connectivity services.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $260.8 million, compared to $236.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $24.5 million was primarily due to increased operations in our data center facilities, changes in our working capital accounts, and non-recurring license fee income of $2.8 million recorded pursuant to a technology license agreement.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $865.5 million, primarily consisting of $411.8 million related to the acquisition of Data Foundry, net of cash acquired, and capital expenditures of $455.7 million related to the expansion of our data center facilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $349.1 million, primarily consisting of capital expenditures of $347.0 million related to the expansion of our data center facilities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $564.2 million, primarily consisting of $625.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of our senior unsecured notes, net of original issue discount, and net borrowings under our credit facilities, partially offset by $27.8 million in dividends paid, $22.5
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 60
million in distributions paid to noncontrolling interest, and $6.8 million for the payment of tax withholdings upon settlement of restricted stock unit awards.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $178.8 million, primarily consisting of $705.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of our senior unsecured notes, net of original issue discount, and borrowings on our revolving credit facility, partially offset by $465.2 million for the repayment of borrowings outstanding under our credit facilities, $21.1 million in distributions paid to noncontrolling interest, $20.0 million for the repurchase of Common Units, and $17.3 million in dividends paid.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We generally derive more than 95% of our revenue from recurring revenue streams, consisting primarily of (1) colocation, which includes the licensing and leasing of cabinet space and power and (2) connectivity services, which include cross-connects, broadband services, and external connectivity. The remainder of our revenue is from non-recurring revenue, which primarily includes installation services related to a customer’s initial deployment. The majority of our revenue contracts are classified as licenses and accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, with the exception of certain contracts that contain lease components and are accounted for in accordance with ASC 842, Leases.
We recognize revenue when control of these goods and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Revenue from recurring revenue streams is generally billed monthly and recognized using a time-based measurement of progress as customers receive service benefits evenly throughout the term of the contract, which is generally three to five years. Non-recurring installation fees, although generally paid in a lump sum upon installation, are deferred and recognized ratably over the contract term, which is determined using a portfolio approach. Non-recurring installation fees are not assessed as performance obligations as they are determined to be immaterial in the context of the contract with the customer. Revenue is generally recognized on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent, largely because we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the contract, take title to services, bear credit risk, and have discretion in establishing the price when selling to the customer.
For contracts with customers that contain multiple performance obligations, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct or as a series of distinct obligations if the individual performance obligations meet the series criteria. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. The transaction price of a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The standalone selling price is determined by maximizing observable inputs such as overall pricing objectives, customer credit history, and other factors. Other judgments include determining if any variable consideration should be included in the total contract value of the arrangement, such as price increases. Any variable consideration included in the total contract value of the arrangement is allocated to each distinct obligation, or series of distinct obligations, in an amount that depicts the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the underlying goods or services to the customer. We have also made the accounting policy election to exclude taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected by us from a customer from our measurement of the transaction price.
Occasionally, we enter into contracts with customers for data center space and office space, which contain lease components. Our leases with customers are generally classified as operating leases and lease payments are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Lease revenue related to data center space is included within colocation revenue, while lease revenue related to office space is included within other revenue.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 61
Contract Balances
We generally invoice customers in monthly installments payable in advance. The difference between the timing of revenue recognition, and the timing of billings and cash collections results in the recognition of accounts receivable, contract assets, and deferred revenue (contract liabilities) on our consolidated balance sheets. Receivables are recorded at invoice amounts, net of allowance for credit losses, and are recognized in the period when we have transferred goods or provided services to our customers, and when our right to consideration for that transfer is unconditional. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although terms generally include a requirement of payment within 15 to 30 days of the invoice date. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. We assess collectability based on a number of factors, including past transaction history with the customer and the creditworthiness of the customer.
A contract asset exists when we have transferred products or provided services to our customers, but customer payment is contingent upon future satisfaction of a performance obligation. Certain contracts include terms related to price arrangements and allocations of consideration to multiple performance obligations recognized over differing periods of time. We generally recognize revenue ratably over the contract term, which could potentially give rise to contract assets during certain periods of the contract term.
Deferred revenue represents amounts that are recognized when we have an unconditional right to a payment, and it has been either billed to, or collected from, customers prior to transferring control of the underlying good or service to the customer.
Contract Costs
Contract costs include our incremental direct costs of either obtaining or fulfilling a contract, which primarily consist of sales commissions and bonuses. Contract costs are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period of benefit. We have elected to apply the practical expedient to expense contract costs when incurred if the amortization period is one year or less.
Incremental Borrowing Rate
We recognize right-of-use lease liabilities for all leases other than those with a term of 12 months or less as we have elected to apply the short-term recognition exemption. These lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease and are measured based on the present value of fixed lease payments over the lease term.
As our lessee leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate estimated based on information available at the commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. When determining the incremental borrowing rate, we assess multiple variables such as lease term, collateral, economic conditions, and credit-worthiness. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate using a benchmark senior unsecured yield curve for debt instruments adjusted for our credit quality, market conditions, tenor of lease contracts, and collateral.
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity-based compensation includes stock options, performance-vesting restricted stock units, restricted stock, and restricted stock units awarded to employees in periods subsequent to our IPO and incentive units awarded to employees and members in periods prior to our IPO. We measure equity-based compensation expense at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize the expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We use the straight-line method to recognize compensation expense for equity awards with service conditions and the accelerated attribution method for equity awards with performance conditions.
We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which utilizes various inputs and assumptions, some of which are subjective. Key inputs we use in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model are the stock price on the date of grant, expected stock price volatility, expected term of the award, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield. We estimate expected volatility by using a weighted average of the historical volatility of our common stock and the historical volatilities of a peer group comprised of publicly-traded companies in the same industry. We estimate the expected term of stock option awards using the “simplified” method; whereby, the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the stock option. The risk-free interest rate is based on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the stock option awards at the time of grant. The expected dividend yield is based on our estimate of annual dividends expected to be paid at the time of grant.
We estimate the fair value of performance-vesting restricted stock unit awards using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The performance-vesting restricted stock unit awards vest at the end of a specified contractual service
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 62
period but only result in the issuance of shares upon the satisfaction of market conditions based on our total stock return relative that of a group of our peers. The expected term for performance-vesting restricted stock unit awards granted is the time period from the grant date to the end of the contractual service period, which is generally a three-year measurement period. We estimate the expected volatility by using a weighted average of the historical volatility of our common stock and the historical volatility of a peer group comprised of publicly-traded companies in a specified market index. The risk-free interest rate is based on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the performance-vesting restricted unit awards. The expected dividend rate is zero as the performance-vesting restricted unit awards are entitled to participate in dividends paid during the contractual service period. Our restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards are measured based on the fair market value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant.
Equity awards prior to our IPO generally had only a service condition and certain of these awards also had a performance condition. The service-based condition of those equity awards was satisfied over a period of up to five years. We estimated the fair value of these equity-based awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of highly complex and subjective variables.
Our assumptions were as follows:
•Expected volatility. As we had not been a public company and did not have a trading history for our incentive units, the expected price volatility of the incentive units was estimated by analyzing the volatility of companies in the same industry and selecting volatility within the range.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate was based on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the equity awards.
•Expected term. The expected term of the equity award was calculated by analyzing the historical exercise data and obtaining the weighted average of the holding period for the equity awards.
•Expected dividend yield. The expected dividend rate was determined at the grant date for each equity award. Because the underlying incentive units were not publicly traded, the fair value of the incentive units was estimated on each grant date by a board of managers of Switch, Ltd. for historical periods prior to our IPO. In order to determine the fair value of the incentive units, the board of managers considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of the incentive units prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The board of managers exercised reasonable judgment and considered several objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our incentive units including:
▪our historical and expected operating and financial performance;
▪current business conditions;
▪our stage of development and business strategy;
▪the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of our company given prevailing market conditions and the nature and history of our business;
▪market multiples of comparable companies in our industry;
▪the lack of an active public market for our incentive units;
▪the market performance of comparable publicly traded peer companies; and
▪macroeconomic conditions.
In determining the fair value of the incentive units, we estimated the enterprise value of our business primarily using a weighted average approach of a combination of the following three methods: (i) publicly traded data center company multiples; (ii) data center precedent transaction multiples; and (iii) the discounted cash flow method based on our five-year forecast. The weighting of these three methods varied over time. Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that were highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities related to the expected future tax consequences arising from temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities based on enacted statutory tax rates
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 63
applicable to the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. Any effects of changes in income tax rates or laws are included in income tax expense in the period of enactment. We reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on the evidence available, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In making the assessment under the more likely than not standard, appropriate consideration must be given to all positive and negative evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets. The assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carry forward periods by jurisdiction, our experience with loss carryforwards not expiring unutilized and all tax planning alternatives that may be available. A valuation allowance is recognized if under applicable accounting standards we determine it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets would not be realized.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with our IPO, we entered into a TRA with Switch, Ltd. and the Members. In the event that such parties exchange any or all of their Common Units for Class A common stock, we are contractually committed to pay such holders 85% of the tax benefits realized by us as a result of such transactions. The timing and amount of aggregate payments due under the TRA are contingent upon the taxable income we generate each year and the tax rate then applicable. We recognize obligations under the TRA after concluding that it is probable that we would have sufficient future taxable income to utilize the related tax benefits. The projection of future taxable income involves judgment and actual taxable income may differ from our estimates, which could impact the timing of payments under the TRA. If we determine in the future that we will not be able to fully utilize all or part of the related tax benefits, we would reduce the portion of the liability related to the tax benefits not expected to be utilized and record the offsetting benefit on our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. We calculate the liability under the TRA using a complex TRA model, which includes a significant assumption related to the fair market value of property and equipment.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, under which all assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. We estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed from business combinations using fair value measurement methods such as the income approach, market approach, and cost approach. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
We measure working capital accounts and other assets at the existing carrying values. Due to the nature of these accounts, there are no functional, technological, or economic considerations resulting in a difference in fair values from carrying values.
Definite-lived intangible assets acquired include customer relationships. We measure the fair value of customer relationships using the multi-period excess earnings method under the income approach. The multi-period excess earnings method measures the discounted present value of estimated future cash flows attributable to customer relationships, net of charges for the contributory use of other identifiable assets.
We measure the fair value of certain computer equipment using the comparable match method and the percent of cost method under the market approach as such equipment is widely available on an active market. The market approach estimates fair value based on market prices in actual transactions and on asking prices for assets currently available for sale. We apply the comparable match method by assigning a value to an asset based on an analysis of similar assets using a measure of utility as the basis comparison. We apply the percent of cost method using trade-in values for measured assets to establish the ratio of the selling price to the current cost of an asset at the time of sale.
We measure other acquired property and equipment using the cost approach. The cost approach estimates fair value by determining the current cost of replacing property and equipment, net of any depreciation resulting from physical deterioration, functional obsolescence, and economic obsolescence.
In applying these fair value measurement methods, we use significant estimates and assumptions such as future expected cash flows, including revenue, profit margin, attrition rate, and discount rate. Future cash flows and growth rates are estimated based on expected customer growth and expansion. We determine the discount rate based on an implied internal rate of return analysis as well as a weighted-average cost of capital analysis.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 64
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws, which statements involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements generally relate to future events or our future financial or operating performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements because they contain word such as “may,” “will,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “could,” “intends,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these words or other similar terms or expressions that concern our expectations, strategy, plans or intentions. Forward-looking statements contained in this Form 10-K include, but are not limited to, statements about:
•our goals and strategies;
•our expectations regarding our plans to pursue a conversion to a REIT, including the timing related to such conversion;
•our expansion plans, including timing for such plans;
•our expectation regarding the acquisition of Data Foundry and certain real property interests used in connection with Data Foundry’s operations, including any future expansion opportunities in Texas;
•our future business development, financial condition and results of operations;
•our anticipated levels of capital expenditures;
•the expected growth of the data center market;
•our belief regarding the anticipated impact of COVID-19 and its variants on our business operations;
•our belief that our financial resources will allow us to manage the anticipated impact of COVID-19 and its variants;
•our beliefs regarding our design technology and its advantages to our business and financial results;
•our beliefs regarding opportunities that exist in the data center market due to current industry limitations;
•our expectations regarding opportunities to grow penetration of existing customers and attract new customers;
•our beliefs regarding our competitive strengths and the value of our brand;
•our expectations regarding our revenue streams and drivers and types of future revenue;
•our expectations regarding our future expenses, including anticipated increases;
•our expectations regarding demand for, and market acceptance of, our services, including any new services;
•our expectations regarding our customer growth rate;
•our beliefs regarding the sufficiency of our cash and access to liquidity, and cash generated from operating activities, to satisfy our working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months;
•our intentions regarding sources of financing for our operations and capital expenditures;
•the network effects associated with our business;
•our plans to further invest in and grow our business, and our ability to effectively manage our growth and associated investments;
•our expectations regarding construction projects and the estimated timelines, additional floorspace, and renewable power available to such data centers;
•our ability to timely and effectively scale and adapt our existing technology;
•our ability to successfully enter new markets;
•our expectations to enter into joint ventures, strategic collaborations and other similar arrangements;
•our beliefs regarding our ability to achieve reduced variability of power costs as an unbundled purchaser of energy;
•our beliefs that we have the necessary permits and approvals to operate our business and that our properties are in substantial compliance with applicable laws;
•our ability to maintain, protect and enhance our intellectual property and not infringe upon others’ intellectual property;
•our beliefs regarding the adequacy of our insurance coverage;
•our beliefs regarding the merits of pending litigation or our ability to potentially settle any litigation;
•our beliefs regarding the effectiveness of efforts to improve our internal control over financial reporting;
•our expectations regarding payment of dividends;
•our expectations regarding payments under the TRA, contingent upon our taxable income and the applicable tax rate;
•our expectations regarding the recognition of our remaining performance obligations in future periods;
•our expectations regarding our interest rate and power swaps;
•our expectations regarding our ability to realize deferred tax assets; and
•our expectations regarding the reissuance of retired shares of Class B common stock.
Switch, Inc. | 2021 Form 10-K | 65
We qualify all of our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements. The forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are only predictions. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. The events and circumstances reflected in our forward-looking statements may not be achieved or occur and actual results could differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, some of which cannot be predicted or quantified, you should not rely on these forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those risks discussed in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors and throughout Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of this Form 10-K. In addition, you should consult other disclosures made by us (such as in our other filings with the SEC or in company press releases) for other factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected by us.
Except as required by applicable law, we do not plan to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements contained herein, whether as a result of any new information, future events, changed circumstances or otherwise.