ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Please see the sections entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and "Risk Factors" above for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
SolarWinds is a leading provider of simple, powerful, and secure information technology, or IT, management software. Our solutions give organizations worldwide, regardless of type, size or complexity, the power to accelerate business transformation in today's hybrid IT environments. We combine customer-driven products with an "inside-first" sales model to grow our business while also generating significant cash flow.
We offer a broad portfolio of solutions designed to help technology professionals to monitor, manage and optimize networks, systems, desktops, applications, storage, databases, website infrastructures and IT service desks. We intend to continue to innovate and invest in areas of product development that bring new products to market and enhance the functionality, ease of use and integration of our current products. We believe this will strengthen the overall value proposition of our products in any IT environment.
On February 5, 2016, we were acquired by affiliates of Silver Lake Group, L.L.C and Thoma Bravo, LLC in a take private transaction, or the Take Private. We applied purchase accounting on the date of the Take Private. In October 2018, we completed our initial public offering, or IPO, and once again become a publicly traded company.
Spin-off of N-able Business
On July 19, 2021, we completed the previously announced separation and distribution of our managed service provider (“MSP” or “N-able”) business into a newly created and separately traded public company, N-able, Inc. We refer to this transaction as the “Separation.” The Separation was completed by means of a distribution in which each holder of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, received one share of N-able’s common stock, par value $0.001, for every two shares of our common stock held of record as of the close of business on July 12, 2021. After the distribution, we do not beneficially own any shares of common stock in N-able and no longer consolidate N-able into our financial results for periods ending after July 19, 2021. As a result, N-able's historical financial results through the Separation are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations.
We incurred significant costs in connection with the Separation which we refer to as “spin-off costs.” We incurred $31.6 million and $12.2 million of costs in connection with the Separation during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are primarily reflected in our consolidated statements of operations as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Of these amounts, the spin-off costs included in continuing operations were $4.4 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We do not expect to incur significant costs in 2022 as a result of the Separation.
See Note 3. Discontinued Operations in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the Separation.
Cyber Incident
As previously disclosed, we were the victim of a cyberattack on our Orion Software Platform and internal systems, or the “Cyber Incident.” We, together with our partners, have undertaken extensive measures to investigate, contain, eradicate, and remediate the Cyber Incident. In addition, as part of our “Secure by Design” initiative, we continue to work with industry experts to implement enhanced security practices designed to further strengthen and protect our products and environment against these and other types of attacks in the future.
Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded pretax gross expenses related to the Cyber Incident of $49.1 million, partially offset by insurance receipts and expected insurance proceeds for costs we believe are reimbursable and probable of recovery under our cybersecurity insurance coverage of $15.0 million. We have included $2.2 million of these gross expenses in cost of recurring revenue, $1.6 million in sales and marketing expense and $45.3 million in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $3.5 million of pretax expenses related to the Cyber Incident and included $0.1 million of these expenses in cost of recurring revenue, $0.3 million in sales and marketing expense and $3.2 million in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
General and administrative expense is presented net of insurance proceeds in the consolidated statements of operations. Expenses include one-time costs to investigate and remediate the Cyber Incident, and legal and other professional services related thereto, and consulting services being provided to customers at no charge, all of which were expensed as incurred. Our "Secure By Design" initiatives, which include costs to enhance our security measures across our systems and our software development and build environments, have increased and we expect will continue to increase our expenses. We currently estimate that the ongoing costs associated with our "Secure By Design" initiatives will be approximately $20 million on an annual basis. These costs will primarily be included in research and development expense, as well as general and administrative expense.
Litigation, Claims and Government Investigations
As a result of the Cyber Incident, we are subject to numerous lawsuits and investigations or inquiries as described in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Risks Related to Cybersecurity and the Cyber Incident and Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. While we will incur costs and other expenses associated with these proceedings and investigations, it is not possible to estimate the amount of any loss or range of possible loss that might result from adverse judgments, settlements, penalties or other resolutions of such proceedings and investigations based on the early stage thereof, the fact that alleged damages have not been specified, the uncertainty as to the certification of a class or classes and the size of any certified class, as applicable, and the lack of resolution on significant factual and legal issues. We will continue to evaluate information as it becomes known and will record an estimate for losses at the time or times when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable.
Future Costs
We expect to continue to incur additional legal and other professional services costs and expenses associated with the Cyber Incident in future periods. We expect to recognize these expenses as services are received. Costs related to the Cyber Incident that will be incurred in future periods may include increased expenses associated with ongoing claims, investigations and inquiries, and any new claims, investigations and inquiries, as well as increased customer support activities and other related matters. See Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information related to the legal proceedings and governmental investigations related to the Cyber Incident. While we will incur costs and other expenses associated with these proceedings and investigations, it is not possible to estimate the amount of any loss or range of possible loss that might result from adverse judgments, settlements, penalties or other resolutions of such proceedings and investigations based on the early stage thereof, the fact that alleged damages have not been specified, the uncertainty as to the certification of a class or classes and the size of any certified class, as applicable, and the lack of resolution on significant factual and legal issues.
In addition, we expect to incur increased expenses for insurance, finance, compliance activities, and to meet increased legal and regulatory requirements. We are also providing, at our cost, free third-party support services to customers related to the Cyber Incident. In addition, in connection with the Separation, we entered into a separation and distribution agreement and related agreements with N-able to govern the Separation and related transactions and the relationship between the respective companies going forward. The separation and distribution agreement provides for certain indemnity and liability obligations, including that we will indemnify N-able for all liabilities based upon, arising out of or related to the Cyber Incident other than certain specified expenses for which N-able will be responsible. Although the ultimate magnitude and timing of expenses or other impacts to our business or reputation related to the Cyber Incident are uncertain, they could be significant. We also expect to continue to incur increased expenses and capital investments related to our “Secure By Design” initiatives.
Insurance Coverage
We maintain $15 million of cybersecurity insurance coverage to limit our exposure to losses such as those related to the Cyber Incident, which we renewed in June 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded a loss recovery asset of $5.0 million for insurance proceeds deemed probable of recovery which is included in prepaid and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheet and received payments of $10.0 million for costs incurred. In addition, we maintain $50 million of directors and officers liability insurance coverage to reduce our exposure to our indemnification obligations for certain expenses incurred by our directors and officers, including as a result of the legal proceedings related to the Cyber Incident.
Impacts of COVID-19
The impact from the rapidly changing market and economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic on our business continues to be uncertain. We initially responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by executing our business continuity plan and transitioning nearly all of our workforce to a remote working environment to prioritize the safety of our personnel. A significant portion of our workforce continues working remotely, and for those returning to the office we have implemented mask policies at our locations as warranted by state and local guidelines. While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has contributed to a decline in our license revenue, based on current conditions, we do not expect to experience a significant ongoing impact on our financial results in future periods due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we are unable to predict with a level of precision the longer term impact it may have on our business, results of operations and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic, virus mutations and variants, the availability and efficacy of vaccines and boosters, the willingness of individuals to obtain vaccines and boosters, the pandemic's impact to the business of our customers and their end-customers and other factors identified in “Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business, consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
Business Highlights
Below are our key business highlights from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Customers
Our approach, which we call the "The SolarWinds Model," allows us to both sell to a broad group of potential customers and close large transactions with significant customers. As of December 31, 2021, we had over 300,000 customers after giving effect to the Separation. While some customers may spend as little as $100 with us over a twelve-month period, we had 829 customers who spent more than $100,000 with us for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 786 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as adjusted to exclude customers of the N-able business.
We define customers as individuals or entities that have purchased one or more of our products under a unique customer identification number since our inception for our perpetual license products and individuals or entities that have an active subscription for at least one of our subscription products. Each unique customer identification number constitutes a separate customer regardless of the amount purchased. We may have multiple purchasers of our products within a single organization, each of which may be assigned a unique customer identification number and deemed a separate customer.
Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR)
We use Subscription Annual Recurring Revenue, or Subscription ARR, and Total Annual Recurring Revenue, or Total ARR, to better understand and assess the performance of our business, as our mix of revenue generated from recurring revenue has increased in recent years. Subscription ARR and Total ARR each provides a normalized view of customer retention, renewal and expansion, as well as growth from new customers. Subscription ARR and Total ARR should each be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue, and are not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items.
_______
(1)Subscription ARR represents the annualized recurring value of all active subscription contracts at the end of a reporting period.
(2)Total ARR represents the sum of Subscription ARR and the annualized value of all maintenance contracts related to perpetual licenses active at the end of a reporting period.
The growth in Subscription ARR was primarily driven by sales of our time-based subscription offerings, including sales of our database monitoring and service desk solutions. Total ARR increased slightly due to growth in Subscription ARR which was partially offset by a decline in new perpetual license sales in 2020 and 2021 and lower maintenance renewal rates in 2021 related to the Cyber Incident.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of recurring revenue and perpetual license revenue.
•Recurring Revenue. The significant majority of our revenue is recurring and consists of subscription and maintenance revenue.
•Subscription Revenue. We primarily derive subscription revenue from fees received for subscriptions to our SaaS offerings, and to a lesser extent, our time-based license arrangements. We recognize revenue for SaaS offerings ratably over the subscription term once the service is made available to the customer or when we have the right to invoice services performed. We also offer time-based subscription offerings for many of our products historically sold as perpetual licenses, such as our network, systems and database management products, to give customers additional flexibility when purchasing our products. The time-based subscription offerings are recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the on-premise software and support is recognized ratably over the contract period. We generally invoice subscription agreements in advance over the subscription period on either a monthly or annual basis and to a lesser extent, monthly based on usage. Our subscription revenue grows as customers add new subscription products, upgrade the capacity level of their existing subscription products or increase the usage of their subscription products.
•Maintenance Revenue. We derive maintenance revenue from the sale of maintenance services associated with our perpetual license products. Perpetual license customers pay for maintenance services based on the products they have purchased. We recognize maintenance revenue ratably on a daily basis over the contract period. Our maintenance revenue grows when we renew existing maintenance contracts and add new perpetual license customers, and as existing customers add new products. In addition, we typically implement annual price increases for our maintenance services. Customers typically renew their maintenance contracts at our standard list maintenance renewal pricing for their applicable products. We generally invoice maintenance contracts annually in advance.
•License Revenue. We derive license revenue from sales of perpetual licenses of our on-premises network, systems, storage and database management products to new and existing customers. We include one year of maintenance services as part of our customers’ initial license purchase. License revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the electronic license key. We allocate revenue to the license component based upon our estimated standalone selling prices, which is derived by evaluating our historical pricing and discounting practices in observable bundled transactions.
We plan to continue to sell perpetual licenses for our network, systems and database management products and not require customers to transition to a subscription pricing model discussed above. The subscription pricing option, and our continued efforts to increase subscription revenue, may impact the mix of license and recurring revenue, but this impact is difficult to predict at this time due to uncertainty regarding the level of customer adoption of the new subscription pricing options. We expect a continued shift in the mix between license and recurring revenue in each quarter as new customers purchase these on-premise subscription offerings. Our license sales and maintenance renewal rates may decline or fluctuate in future periods as customers transition to our subscription offerings and as a result of the Cyber Incident.
Cost of Revenue
•Cost of Recurring Revenue. Cost of recurring revenue consists of technical support personnel costs, public cloud infrastructure and hosting fees and an allocation of overhead costs for our subscription revenue and maintenance services. Allocated costs consist of certain facilities, depreciation, benefits and IT costs allocated based on headcount.
•Amortization of Acquired Technologies. Amortization of acquired technologies primarily consists of amortization related to capitalized costs of technologies acquired in connection with the Take Private, and to a lesser extent, acquired technologies from our other acquisitions.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consists of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses as well as amortization of acquired intangibles. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, sales commissions, stock-based compensation and an allocation of overhead costs based on headcount. The total number of employees as of December 31, 2021 was 2,147, as compared to 2,163 as of December 31, 2020, as adjusted to exclude employees of the N-able business.
We expect our operating expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we make long-term investments in our business, including increasing our selling efforts toward enterprise customers. Our operating expenses in future periods also
may increase in absolute dollars and fluctuate as a percentage of revenue as a result of any future acquisitions and any further decisions to increase our investment in our business. In addition, the separation of the N-able business resulted in dis-synergies associated with increased overhead costs and duplicate hiring for 2021. We intend to continue to grant equity awards to employees and directors, which will result in additional stock-based compensation expense in future periods.
•Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of related personnel costs, including our sales, marketing and maintenance renewal and subscription retention teams. Sales and marketing expenses also includes the cost of digital marketing programs such as paid search, search engine optimization and management, website maintenance and design. We expect to continue to hire personnel globally to drive new sales and maintenance renewals.
•Research and Development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of related personnel costs. We expect to continue to grow our research and development organization, particularly internationally.
•General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and other administrative personnel, general restructuring charges, acquisition costs, certain Cyber Incident costs, professional fees and other general corporate expenses. The Cyber Incident has resulted in increased general and administrative expenses which we expect to continue in 2022.
•Amortization of Acquired Intangibles. We amortize to operating expenses the capitalized costs of intangible assets acquired in connection with the Take Private and our other acquisitions.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) primarily consists of interest expense and gains (losses) resulting from changes in exchange rates on foreign currency denominated accounts. We expect interest expense may increase as a result of anticipated interest rate increases since our borrowings outstanding under our credit agreement currently bear interest at variable rates.
Foreign Currency
As a global company, we face exposure to adverse movements in foreign currency exchange rates. Fluctuations in foreign currencies impact the amount of total assets, liabilities, revenue, operating expenses and cash flows that we report for our foreign subsidiaries upon the translation of these amounts into U.S. dollars. See “