ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis is the Company’s analysis of its financial performance and of significant trends that may affect future performance. It should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes, and supplemental oil and gas disclosures included elsewhere in this report. It contains forward-looking statements including, without limitation, statements relating to the Company’s plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions that are made pursuant to the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In many cases you can identify forward-looking statements by words such as “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “project,” “estimate,” “continue,” “potential,” “should,” “could,” “may,” “will,” “objective,” “guidance,” “outlook,” “effort,” “expect,” “believe,” “predict,” “budget,” “projection,” “goal,” “forecast,” “target” or similar words. Unless required to do so under the federal securities laws, the Company does not undertake to update, revise or correct any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Readers are cautioned that such forward-looking statements should be read in conjunction with the Company’s disclosures under the heading: “Cautionary Statement about Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report. Also, see the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under the heading “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
Background
We are an independent energy company engaged in natural gas, oil and NGLs exploration, development and production, which we refer to as “E&P.” We are also focused on creating and capturing additional value through our marketing business, which we call “Marketing”. We conduct most of our businesses through subsidiaries, and we currently operate exclusively in the Appalachian and Haynesville natural gas basins in the lower 48 United States.
E&P. Our primary business is the exploration for and production of natural gas as well as associated NGLs and oil, with our ongoing operations focused on the development of unconventional natural gas reservoirs located in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Ohio and Louisiana. Our operations in Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Ohio, which we refer to as “Appalachia,” are focused on the Marcellus Shale, the Utica and the Upper Devonian unconventional natural gas and liquids reservoirs. Our operations in Louisiana, which we refer to as “Haynesville,” are primarily focused on the Haynesville and Bossier natural gas reservoirs. We also have drilling rigs located in Appalachia and Haynesville, and we provide certain oilfield products and services, principally serving our E&P operations through vertical integration. In just over a year, we have completed three strategic acquisitions which have added scale to our operations and have laid the foundation for our future:
•On November 13, 2020, we closed on the Montage Merger, which increased our footprint in West Virginia and Pennsylvania and expanded our operations into Ohio.
•On September 1, 2021, we closed on the Indigo Merger, which established our natural gas operations in the Haynesville and Bossier Shales in Louisiana.
•On December 31, 2021, we closed on the GEPH Merger, which expanded our operations in the Haynesville.
The Indigo Merger and GEPH Merger are the result of our strategy to diversify our operations by expanding our portfolio beyond Appalachia into the Haynesville and Bossier formations, giving us additional exposure to the LNG corridor and other markets on the U.S. Gulf Coast. This expansion lowered our enterprise business risk, expanded our economic inventory, opportunity set and business optionality and enabled immediate cost structure savings. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements of this Annual Report for more information on the Mergers.
Marketing. Our marketing activities capture opportunities that arise through the marketing and transportation of natural gas, oil, and NGLs primarily produced in our E&P operations.
Focus in 2021. We took several steps in late 2020 and throughout 2021 towards achieving our strategic objectives of increasing scale in our operations, improving our margins, generating free cash flow and reducing our debt leverage metrics. We began the year having completed our first strategic business merger with the acquisition of Montage, which expanded our natural gas and liquids production footprint in Appalachia. During 2021, we completed two additional strategic mergers with the acquisitions of Indigo and GEPH, which diversified our asset portfolio into the Haynesville and Bossier formations of Louisiana with access to the LNG corridor and other U.S. Gulf Coast markets. Recovering commodity prices during 2021 along with the increase in production volumes primarily associated with the Mergers, combined with our continued capital discipline to invest at levels which are designed to maintain our daily production consistent with the end of the prior year, have accelerated the generation of free cash flow. Through our disciplined capital investing, the Mergers have already had, and are expected to continue to have, a positive impact on our business and financial results by producing free cash flow, which we expect to use to pay down debt, resulting in the strengthening of our balance sheet and improvement in our debt leverage metrics.
During 2021, we were also able to successfully finance the Indigo Merger and the GEPH Merger while also reducing our revolver balance and re-financing and extending our debt maturities on a large portion of our near-term senior notes at more favorable interest rates. These financings lowered our overall cost of debt and extended our weighted-average time to maturity.
Generating free cash flow is an important part of our strategy to strengthen our balance sheet, and our long-term goal is to incorporate a cash return component into our overall economic return for shareholders. Our near-term strategic goal is to utilize our free cash flow to reduce our debt, thereby improving our leverage metrics and financial strength. As we approach our target leverage ratio and total debt ranges, we intend to expand our uses of free cash flow to include the return of capital to our shareholders. Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities, adjusted for (i) changes in assets and liabilities and (ii) cash transaction costs associated with mergers and restructuring, less capital investments. Free cash flow is used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. We believe free cash flow can provide an indicator of excess cash flow available to a company for the repayment of debt or for other general corporate purposes, as it disregards the timing of settlements of operating assets and liabilities.
Natural gas, oil and NGL price fluctuations present challenges to our industry and our Company, as do changes in laws, regulations and investor sentiment and other key factors described under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Although we currently expect to maintain a rolling three-year derivative portfolio, there can be no assurance that we will be able to add derivative positions to cover our expected production at favorable prices. See “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” in