Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Information
The Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the audited financial statements and accompanying notes, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur for the full fiscal year or any other future period.
Overview
Business
Synlogic is a clinical-stage biotechnology company advancing a new paradigm of biotherapeutics through its unique and proprietary approach to synthetic biology. Synthetic biology leverages engineering principles to enable the design of new biological systems, genetic circuits and molecular components. Synlogic is delivering the power of synthetic biology to medicine, combining the precision of engineering with rational drug development to develop what are called Synthetic Biotics. Synthetic Biotics are a novel drug modality that that uses programmable, precision genetic engineering of well-characterized probiotics to exert localized activity for therapeutic benefit, with a focus on metabolic and immunologic diseases.
Our Drug Candidate Pipeline
Synlogic’s pipeline includes its lead program in phenylketonuria (PKU), which has demonstrated proof of concept and we plan to start a pivotal, Phase 3 study in the second half of 2022. Our pipeline also includes novel drug candidates designed to treat homocystinuria (HCU) and enteric hyperoxaluria. Synlogic is also working with Roche in a research collaboration focused on the discovery of a novel Synthetic Biotic for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and with Ginkgo Bioworks, Inc. (Ginkgo) on additional undisclosed preclinical assets, combining Synlogic’s approach to Synthetic Biotics with Ginkgo’s Codebase and Foundry services.
Metabolic Disease
There are a number of metabolic diseases involving a lack of certain enzymes that are responsible for metabolizing commonly occurring byproducts of digestion. The absence of these enzymes is caused by either a genetic mutation characterized by a dysfunctional metabolic pathway, such as PKU or HCU, or organ dysfunction, such as enteric hyperoxaluria. In patients with these diseases, the absence of certain enzymes causes metabolites to accumulate to in the gut and systemically throughout the body. In patients with PKU and HCU, these metabolites build up to toxic levels resulting in serious health consequences, including irreversible neurological dysfunction.
PKU
Overview
Our PKU program includes two development candidates, SYNB1618 and SYNB1934. SYNB1618 and SYNB1934 are orally administered, non-systemically absorbed drug candidates being studied as potential treatments for PKU, a genetic disease caused by potentially neurotoxic levels of the amino acid Phe. Treatment options for PKU are currently limited due to efficacy and safety, with an estimated 80% of US patients remaining in need of treatment, and many of those who are treated in need of additional Phe-lowering. We designed our drug candidates to reduce levels of Phe in people with PKU using precision genetic engineering of the well-characterized probiotic E. coli Nissle. Findings to date support the potential for an efficacious, safe, convenient, and flexible treatment option for PKU and SYNB1618 has received both Orphan Drug and Fast Track designations by the FDA. Both SYNB1618 and SYNB1934 are being studied in the Phase 2 SynPheny-1 study, with data expected in the first half of 2022, and initiation of the Phase 3 program to begin in the second half of 2022.
We completed a Phase 1/2a clinical trial of an early liquid formulation of SYNB1618 and announced top-line data from healthy volunteers evaluated in this study in September 2018. In July 2019, we announced data that demonstrated that SYNB1618 was safe and well-tolerated and achieved proof-of-mechanism of strain activity in both healthy volunteers and patients with PKU. Following the study using the liquid formulation, we developed a solid oral lyophilized formulation of SYNB1618. We have evaluated this oral formulation in a bridging study in healthy volunteers. The study of this more patient- and commercialization-appropriate presentation of SYNB1618 demonstrated activity and improved tolerability over the liquid formulation.
We initiated a Phase 2 clinical trial with SYNB1618 in the third quarter of 2020, referred to as the SynPheny-1 Study. The SynPheny-1 Study is designed to evaluate safety and tolerability of a solid oral formulation of SYNB1618 as well as its potential to lower blood Phe levels in adult PKU patients. In September 2021, an interim analysis of the ongoing SynPheny-1 study found that SYNB1618 demonstrated statistically significant reductions in blood Phe levels.
Our second development candidate for PKU, SYNB1934, was evolved from SYNB1618 to potentially provide increased Phe lowering activity for patients living with PKU. In July 2021, we initiated clinical studies of a solid oral formulation of SYNB1934 following preclinical in vivo and in vitro studies demonstrating an approximately two-fold improvement in the ability of SYNB1934 to break down Phe compared to SYNB1618.
In September 2021, we announced results from the head-to-head portion of the Phase 1 study. SYNB1934 showed an approximately two-fold higher activity level than SYNB1618 in a head-to-head comparison based on biomarkers of Phe consumption. Additionally, based on this interim analysis, SYNB1934 demonstrated a safety and tolerability profile similar to other Synthetic Biotic medicines, including SYNB1618, at equivalent doses.
SYNB1934 clinical results were consistent with preclinical data and previously presented prospective biomarker-driven modeling. We believe that the increased activity of SYNB1934, relative to SYNB1618, could provide the opportunity to optimize the clinical profile based on individual patient needs. Accordingly, we added an arm evaluating SYNB1934 to the ongoing SynPheny-1 Phase 2 study.
The SynPheny-1 Phase 2 study is continuing to the final analysis with both a SYNB1618 and a SYNB1934 arm. Upon completion of the study, we intend to initiate a pivotal Phase 3 study of the preferred strain, which will be selected based on the clinical data from both programs.
Homocystinuria
Homocystinuria (HCU) is a rare inherited metabolic disorder that affects the metabolism of the amino acid methionine, a protein found in many foods including meat, fish, and dairy products. HCU is caused by a genetic defect which results in the absence of an enzyme known as cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS). When CBS is absent, homocysteine and other toxic chemicals and their byproducts, including methionine, build up in the blood and urine. Elevated homocysteine levels are associated with a multisystem disorder, including impairments of the eye (ectopia lentis and/or severe myopia), skeletal system (excessive height, long limbs, scoliosis, pectus excavatum), vascular system (thromboembolism), and CNS (development delay and intellectual disability).
In November 2021 we announced the nomination of SYNB1353, a novel, orally administered, non-systemically absorbed live biotherapeutic drug candidate engineered to consume methionine in the GI tract thereby lowering tHcy in HCU patients and potentially allowing an increase in natural protein intake. SYNB1353 was developed as part of a research collaboration with Ginkgo and is currently in IND-enabling studies. We hold worldwide development and commercialization rights to SYNB1353, which is expected to begin clinical development and report Phase 1 data in healthy volunteers in the second half of 2022.
Enteric Hyperoxaluria
Enteric hyperoxaluria is an acquired metabolic disorder with no approved treatment options. It is caused by increased absorption of dietary oxalate, which is present in many common foods including leafy greens, nuts, and chocolate. Enteric hyperoxaluria often occurs as a result of a primary insult to the bowel, such as inflammatory bowel disease, short bowel syndrome, or surgical procedures such as Roux-en-Y bariatric weight-loss surgery. The disorder may cause dangerously high levels of urinary oxalate and progressive kidney damage. In May 2020, we announced the nomination of a clinical candidate for enteric hyperoxaluria, SYNB8802. We initiated a Phase 1 clinical trial of SYNB8802 in the fourth quarter of 2020. SYNB8802 will be assessed for safety and tolerability, strain kinetics, changes in plasma and urine biomarkers of strain activity, and the potential to reduce urinary oxalate in the Phase 1 clinical study. In 2021, Synlogic reported positive proof-of-mechanism for SYNB8802 from a Phase 1b study that demonstrated lowering of urinary and fecal oxalate levels in healthy volunteers with diet-induced hyperoxaluria. Data from a proof-of-concept study assessing the lowering of urinary oxalate in patients who have undergone Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery is expected in 2022.
Additional Pipeline Programs in Metabolic & Immunological Diseases
The Synthetic Biotic approach is particularly well-suited for addressing known disease targets that have been associated with validated biological pathways in metabolic and immunological diseases. For metabolic diseases, we are applying our learnings from PKU, HCU and enteric hyperoxaluria to new areas, including hyperuricemia and gout, and we expect to disclose additional details on these and other programs as they move through preclinical development.
IBD is a group of diseases characterized by significant local inflammation in the GI tract typically driven by T cells, activated macrophages and compromised function of the epithelial barrier. IBD pathogenesis is linked to both genetic and environmental factors and may be caused by altered interactions between gut microbes and the intestinal immune system. Compromised gut barrier function also plays a central role in autoimmune diseases pathogenesis. A single layer of epithelial cells separates the luminal contents of the gut from the host circulatory system and the immune cells in the body. Disrupting the epithelial layer can lead to pathological exposure of foreign antigens from the lumen resulting in increased susceptibility to autoimmune disorders. The interplay between the gut microbiota and the host is thought to play a key role in the maintenance of the epithelial barrier as well as homeostatic immunity. Thus, enhancing barrier function and reducing inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract are potential therapeutic mechanisms for the treatment or prevention of autoimmune disorders. Our Synthetic Biotic platform allows for the effective programming of E. coli Nissle to execute these functions, including the metabolic production of factors such as short chain fatty acids to enhance barrier function, and secreting proteins, such as immunomodulatory cytokines.
Current approaches to treat IBD are focused on therapeutics that modulate the immune system and suppress inflammation. These therapies include steroids, such as prednisone, and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors, such as Humira® (adalimumab). However, these approaches are associated with systemic immunosuppression, which includes greater susceptibility to infectious diseases and cancer. According to the CDC, in 2015 an estimated three million adults in the United States are reported as being diagnosed with IBD. In June of 2021 we entered into a research collaboration agreement with Roche for the discovery of a novel Synthetic Biotic for the treatment of IBD. In addition, we continue to advance additional, wholly-owned preclinical research efforts in IBD.
Among immune conditions, working to treat IBD allows us to leverage knowledge and expertise gained from our oral metabolic programs to develop living medicines that can act locally at the site of disease in the gut. Because our approach is based on local delivery to the site of inflammation and not on systemic administration, we anticipate that our Synthetic Biotics may offer an attractive safety profile in this therapeutic category, where safety is a particularly desirable attribute in a product profile compared to options available today.
In November 2021, we announced that we are not planning further studies for immuno-oncology, allowing us to focus on advancing a portfolio of investigational Synthetic Biotics that are orally administrated, and developed for diseases which, similar to PKU and enteric hyperoxaluria, have a toxic metabolite found in the GI tract.
In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie S.à.r.l. (AbbVie) to develop Synthetic Biotic medicines for the treatment of types of inflammatory bowel diseases, including Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Upon termination, we regained all rights to develop these and new IBD Synthetic Biotic medicines for all effectors targeting IBD. This allows us to fully leverage our expertise in strain engineering, quantitative biology, regulatory, and manufacturing to expand our wholly owned GI-based program portfolio to include IBD. We further regained the rights to partner these IBD programs. We may enter into additional strategic alliances in the future to maximize the value of our programs and our Synthetic Biotic platform.
We developed a portfolio of Synthetic Biotic medicines to treat certain cancers which were designed to modify the tumor microenvironment, activate the immune system and result in tumor reduction. These Synthetic Biotic medicines could be used in
combination with other cancer therapies such as checkpoint inhibitors. Our Synthetic Biotic clinical immuno-oncology (IO) candidate is SYNB1891, an intratumorally administered Synthetic Biotic medicine engineered to act as a dual innate and adaptive immune activator. While SYNB1020 was well tolerated in Phase 1b/2a study, the study showed it did not lower blood ammonia in patients with cirrhosis. On November 10, 2021, we announced that our Phase 1 study of SYNB1891 in combination with PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor patients with advanced solid tumors or lymphoma had completed enrollment and no further studies are planned for SYNB1891.
We currently operate in one reportable business segment-the discovery and development of Synthetic Biotic medicines. To date, we have dedicated substantially all of our activities to the research and development of our product candidates. As of December 31, 2021, we have received approximately $426.0 million in proceeds as we financed our operations primarily through the sale of preferred stock, common stock, preferred units, warrants, payments received under the Roche Collaboration and Option agreement, the AbbVie collaboration agreement, interest earned on investments, and cash received in the Merger.
We have not generated any revenue to date from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. We have incurred net losses of approximately $60.6 million and $59.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $290.9 million and $230.3 million, respectively, and we expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future as we develop our product candidates. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•
complete preclinical studies, initiate and complete clinical trials for product candidates;
•
contract to manufacture product candidates or manufacture product candidates internally;
•
advance research and development related activities to expand our product pipeline;
•
seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
•
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•
hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, commercial and management personnel;
•
expand our existing infrastructure and secure space in a facility to support continued growth in our research and development efforts; and
•
add operational and finance personnel to support product development efforts and to support operating as a public company.
We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates, either alone or in collaboration with third parties. Additionally, we expect to utilize third-party contract research organizations (CROs) and contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) to carry out our clinical development and manufacturing activities, and we do not yet have a commercial organization. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings, collaborations or licenses, finance lease transactions or other available financing transactions. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds through these or other means when needed. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if it will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product revenue, we may not become profitable.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to affect economies and business around the world. The extent and duration of such effects remain uncertain and difficult to predict, particularly as virus variants continue to spread. We are actively monitoring and managing our response and assessing actual and potential impacts to our operating results and financial condition, as well as developments in our business, which could further impact the developments, trends and expectations described below. See the risk factor related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, “A pandemic, epidemic, or outbreak of an infectious disease, such as COVID-19 may materially and adversely affect our business and our financial results” described in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Overview
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was generated from our collaboration agreement with Roche. In June 2021, we announced that we entered into the Roche Collaboration and Option Agreement for the discovery of novel Synthetic Biotic medicines for the treatment of IBD. The collaboration agreement contains multiple performance obligations, including research and development services towards the achievement of milestones and an exclusive option for Roche to negotiate a definitive collaboration and license agreement for further development of a product candidate. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, and previous years was from our collaboration agreement with AbbVie. In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie, and as such, we do not expect further revenue from AbbVie. See Note 10, Collaboration Agreements: Roche Collaboration and Collaboration Agreements: AbbVie Collaboration in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full discussion of these arrangements.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates, including the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies and product development, which are expensed as they are incurred. These expenses consist primarily of:
•
compensation, benefits and other employee related expenses;
•
supplies to support our internal research and development efforts;
•
research and development related facility and depreciation costs;
•
leased manufacturing space; and
•
third-party contract costs relating to research, process and formulation development, preclinical and clinical studies and regulatory operations.
The lengthy process of securing regulatory approvals for new drugs requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any delay or failure to obtain regulatory approvals would materially adversely affect our product candidate development efforts and our business overall. Given the inherent uncertainties of pharmaceutical product development, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the likelihood, timing or cost of obtaining regulatory approval and marketing our product candidates and thus, when, if ever, our product candidates will generate revenues and cash flows.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to a number of risks. Refer to the risk factors under the heading Risks Related to the Development of Our Product Candidates in Part II, Item 1A, found elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
When we invest in our pipeline, the commitment of funding for each subsequent stage of our development programs is dependent upon the receipt of clear, supportive data. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which additional programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific and clinical data of each product candidate, as well as the competitive landscape and ongoing assessments of such product candidate’s commercial potential. We expect our research and development costs will be substantial for the foreseeable future. We expect costs associated with our drug development candidates to increase as the programs progress through clinical trials and new programs progress toward IND and into development.
We track direct research and development expenses, consisting principally of external costs, such as costs associated with contract research organizations and manufacturing of preclinical and clinical drug product and other outsourced research and development expenses, to specific product programs. Costs related to specific product candidates are tracked upon the selection of a product candidate. We do not allocate employee and consulting-related costs, costs associated with our platform and facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product candidate programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product candidate programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified. The table below summarizes our research and development expenses by categories of costs for the periods presented (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses for personnel in our administrative, finance, legal, information technology, investor relations, business development and human resource functions. Other general and administrative costs include the legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, facility and information technology infrastructure costs, directors’ and officers’ insurance, professional fees for accounting, tax, legal and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of the first product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and investment income consists of income earned on investments. Interest expense consists of expense related to our finance leases. Other expense consists primarily of gains and losses on foreign currency invoices.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods and related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition and research and development expenses are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. These critical estimates and assumptions are based on our historical experience, our observance of trends in the industry, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the application of the following accounting policies, each of which require significant judgments and estimates on the part of management, are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We evaluate collaboration agreements with respect to FASB ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, considering the nature and contractual terms of the arrangement and the nature of our business operations to determine the classification of the transactions. When we are an active participant in the activity and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the
commercial success of the collaboration, we will record our transactions on a gross basis in the consolidated financial statements and describe the rights and obligations under the collaborative arrangement in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five-step analysis: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step analysis to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We may enter into collaboration agreements for research and development services, under which we may license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement of certain costs; customer option exercise fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Variable consideration is constrained until it is deemed to not be at a significant risk of reversal.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements for which the collaboration partner is also a customer, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: a) the number of performance obligations based on the determination under step (ii) above; b) the transaction price under step (iii) above; and c) the contract term and pattern of satisfaction of the performance obligations under step (v) above. We use significant judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration, except for royalties, should be included in the transaction price as described further below. The transaction price is allocated to the goods and services we expect to provide. We use estimates to determine the timing of satisfaction of performance obligations, which may include the use of full-time equivalent time as a measure of satisfaction of performance obligations.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current deferred revenue. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
In assessing whether a promise or performance obligation is distinct from the other promises, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the customer and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, we consider whether the customer can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promises, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For licenses that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Research and Development Services
If an arrangement is determined to contain a promise or obligation for us to perform research and development services, we must determine whether these services are distinct from the other promises in the arrangement. In assessing whether the services are distinct from the other promises, we consider the capabilities of the customer to perform these same services. In addition, we consider whether the customer can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promise, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For research and development services that are combined with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring
progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. The estimates we use to record revenue relating to the combined performance obligation on an over time basis, include input methods such as full-time equivalent time incurred compared to the full-time equivalent time expected to be incurred in the future to satisfy the performance obligation, which require management judgment. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. With this method, we must estimate total inputs required to satisfy a performance obligation and measure efforts expended to date to determine revenue recognition. This estimate of remaining inputs is subjective, as the research is novel, and therefore efforts to be successful may be different than the estimated efforts at the balance sheet date.
Customer Options
If an arrangement is determined to contain customer options that allow the customer to acquire additional goods or services, the goods and services underlying the customer options are not considered to be performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement, as they are contingent upon option exercise. We evaluate the customer options for material rights, that is, the option to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a discount. If the customer options are determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on an alternative approach when the goods or services are both (i) similar to the original goods and services in the contract and (ii) provided in accordance with the terms of the original contract. Under this alternative, we allocate the total amount of consideration expected to be received from the customer to the total goods or services expected to be provided to the customer. Amounts allocated to a material right are not recognized as revenue until the option is exercised and the performance obligation is satisfied.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether a significant reversal of cumulative revenue provided in conjunction with achieving the milestones is probable and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. For other milestones, we evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjusts our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on a level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Contract Costs
We recognize as an asset the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if the costs are expected to be recovered. As a practical expedient, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. To date, we have not incurred any incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer.
Research and Development Expense
All research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses comprise costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including compensation, benefits and other employee costs; equity-based compensation expense; laboratory and clinical supplies and other direct expenses; facilities expenses; overhead expenses; fees for contractual services, including preclinical studies, clinical trials, clinical manufacturing and raw materials; and other external expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments for research and development activities are capitalized and expensed over the related service period or as goods are received and services are performed. When third-party service providers’ billing terms do not coincide with our period-end, we are required to make estimates of our obligations to those third parties, including clinical trial costs, contractual service costs and costs for supply of our drug candidates, incurred in a given accounting period and record accruals at the end of the period. We base our estimates on the completion status of the research and development programs and the associated estimate of unbilled costs.
Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our consolidated financial results.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to services performed under the Roche collaboration. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to the recognition of deferred revenue from services performed and payments received under the AbbVie collaboration. In May 2020, we announced the termination of our collaboration with AbbVie.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $47.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $47.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $0.4 million was due to a decrease of $12.5 million of non-clinical costs, including a decrease in non-clinical costs of $5.4 million for SYNB1618 as it advanced into the clinic, and $2.3 million for Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD), which we stopped conducting research on to prioritize other metabolic disorders. This decrease in non-clinical costs was offset by an increase of $8.1 million of clinical development costs, comprised of $4.6 million for SYNB8802, $3.0 million for SYNB1934, $0.4 million for SYNB1891 and $0.1 million for SYNB1618, as well as an increase of $0.3 million of manufacturing costs. There were additional increases of $2.7 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses, $0.8 million in professional services and $0.2 million in research and development support costs.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense was $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.9 million was primarily due to an increase of $1.4 million in professional services, $0.4 million in corporate fees and $0.3 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses associated with increased headcount. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in support costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million compared to $1.3 million for the corresponding period in 2020. The decrease in other income (expense) of $1.1 million was related to a decrease in interest and investment income related to lower interest income generated by our investment account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since our inception on March 14, 2014 and as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $290.9 million. We have financed our operations to date primarily through the sale of preferred stock, common stock, preferred units and warrants, payments received under collaboration agreements, including the technology collaboration with Ginkgo, the Roche Collaboration and Option agreement, and the previous collaboration agreement with AbbVie, interest earned on investments, and cash received in the Merger. At December 31, 2021, we had $136.6 million in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities. Our cash and cash equivalents include amounts held in money market funds, stated at cost plus unrealized gain and loss, which approximates fair market value. Our available-for-sale securities include amounts held in corporate debt securities, commercial paper and U.S. government agency securities and treasuries. We invest cash in excess of immediate requirements in accordance with our investment policy, which limits the amounts we may invest in any one type of investment and requires all investments held by us to maintain minimum ratings from Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations so as to primarily achieve liquidity and capital preservation.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance increased $36.2 million. This increase was primarily due to the sale of our common stock in underwritten public offerings in April and September 2021 and proceeds from the sale of our common stock in the at-the-market (ATM) offering program. These increases were offset by the cash used to operate our business, including payments related to, among other things, research and development and general and administrative expenses as we continue to invest in our primary drug candidates and support the development of our proprietary platform.
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for each of the periods below:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in operating activities was $52.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The primary use of cash was our net loss of $60.6 million, changes in our assets and liabilities of $0.2 million, partially offset by $8.2 million of non-cash items primarily including depreciation, equity-based compensation, and the right of use asset. The changes in our assets and liabilities include decreases in prepaid research and development expenses, as a result of the work being completed on the Ginkgo collaboration, decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets, decreases in the operating lease liability, increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses, and increased deferred revenue.
Net cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash used in operating activities was $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary use of cash was our net loss of $59.2 million, which was partially offset by $8.3 million of non-cash items primarily including depreciation, equity-based compensation, and the right of use asset. There was an increase in working capital of $11.4 million, primarily related to decreases in prepaid research and development expenses, as result of our June 2019 services agreement with Ginkgo, decreases in prepaid expense and other current assets, offset by decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, operating lease liability and deferred revenue.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $53.3 million and resulted primarily from the purchases of marketable securities of $167.9 million and property and equipment of $0.7 million. This was offset by the proceeds from maturity of marketable securities of $114.0 million and proceeds from redemption of marketable securities of $1.3 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.5 million and resulted primarily from the proceeds from maturity of marketable securities of $90.8 million and proceeds from redemption of marketable securities of $28.5 million. This was offset by the purchases of marketable securities of $86.5 million and property and equipment of $0.4 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $89.4 million, primarily related to net proceeds of $81.0 million from the sale of our common stock in underwritten public offerings in April and September 2021, $8.0 million from the sale of our common stock in the ATM offering program, and proceeds of $0.4 million from exercise of stock options and ESPP contributions, offset by payments of withholding taxes for employees relating to restricted stock awards.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $13.4 million, primarily related to net proceeds of $13.5 million from the sale of our common stock in the ATM offering program, offset by payments on our finance leases.
Funding Requirements
To date, we have not commercialized any products and have not achieved profitability. We anticipate that we will continue to incur substantial net losses for the next several years as we further develop our product candidates, invest in our proprietary platform technology and operate as a publicly traded company.
We are currently generating revenue from our Roche collaboration and have historically generated revenue from our AbbVie collaboration (which was terminated in May 2020) but have not generated any product revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any product revenue unless we receive regulatory approval for our product candidates, if ever. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially and negatively as a result of a number of factors, including the factors discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate precisely the amounts of capital outlays and operating expenditures necessary to complete the development of, and to obtain regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Our funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the following:
•
the success of our research and development efforts;
•
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•
the progress, timing and costs involved in developing manufacturing processes and agreements with third-party manufacturers;
•
the rate of progress and cost of our commercialization activities;
•
the expenses we incur in marketing and selling our product candidates;
•
the revenue generated by sales of our product candidates;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technological developments;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•
the terms and timing of any additional collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the acquisition of businesses, products and technologies;
•
our need to implement additional infrastructure and internal systems;
•
our need to add personnel and financial and management information systems to support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts, and to enable us to operate as a public company;
•
the extent to which our business is adversely impacted by the effects of the coronavirus outbreak or by other health epidemics or pandemics; and
•
other risks and uncertainties, including those listed under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
We also have certain significant contractual obligations and commitments that require funding. Our commitments for operating leases relate to our lease of office and laboratory space at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts and the cGMP clean-room space leased from the Azzur Group, LLC, in Waltham, Massachusetts.
In July 2017, we entered into an agreement to lease 41,346 square feet of laboratory and office space at 301 Binney Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Annual rent is $3.4 million. The ten-year lease commenced in January 2018 and contains provisions for a free-rent period, annual rent increases and an allowance for tenant improvements. Additionally, we have paid for a tenant improvement investment of $2.9 million. In conjunction with the lease, we established a letter of credit of a $1.0 million.
On December 7, 2018, Synlogic Operating Company, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Statement of Work (the First SOW) with Azzur Group, LLC (Azzur) pursuant to a Master Contract Services Agreement (the Master Services Agreement), dated September 8, 2018, between the Company and Azzur.
Pursuant to the First SOW, Azzur agreed to provide the Company with access to, and the use of, an approximately 700 square foot cleanroom space to be constructed in Waltham, Massachusetts (the Azzur Suite), for a period of 44 months, from May 1, 2019 to December 31, 2022 (the Initial Term). Azzur also agreed to provide the Company with storage space and personnel support at the Azzur Suite. The total estimated project cost during the Initial Term for access to, and use of, the cleanroom and storage space, and the personnel support and other services, was $4.8 million.
In April 2021, Synlogic entered into a new agreement (the Second SOW) with Azzur which replaced the First SOW. Pursuant to the Second SOW, Synlogic was granted access to, and use of, the Azzur Suite for a period of 20 months, from May 2021 to December 2022 (the Second Term). The Company determined that the agreement contained an embedded lease because the Company controls the use of the Azzur Suite. Accordingly, the fixed and in-substance fixed consideration under the agreement was used to remeasure the right-of-use (ROU) asset and lease liability at the effective date of the Second SOW.
The Company may terminate the Second SOW on three months’ prior written notice at any time during the Term. In addition, either party may terminate the Master Services Agreement (including the SOWs) due to a breach by the other party and failure to cure. The Company is reasonably certain not to exercise the termination option through March 2023.
As we are a clinical stage company, we expect our most significant clinical trial expenditures will be with CROs and CMOs. These contracts generally are cancellable, with notice, at our option and do not have cancellation penalties.
As an early-stage company, we are subject to a number of risks common to other life science companies, including, but not limited to, the ability to raise additional capital, development by our competitors of new technological innovations, risk of failure in preclinical studies, the safety and efficacy of our product candidates in clinical trials, the regulatory approval process, the ability to efficiently manufacture our products, market acceptance of our products once approved, lack of marketing and sales history, dependence on key personnel and protection of proprietary technology. Our therapeutic programs are currently pre-commercial,
spanning discovery through early development and will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization of any product candidates. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. There can be no assurance that our research and development will be successfully completed, that adequate protection for our intellectual property will be obtained, that any products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval or that any approved products will be commercially viable. Even if our product development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales. We may never achieve profitability, and unless and until we do, we will continue to need to raise additional capital or obtain financing from other sources, such as strategic collaborations or alliances. If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in those types of relationships. We enter into guarantees in the ordinary course of business related to the guarantee of our performance and the performance of our subsidiaries.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please read Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.