ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “SVF Investment Corp. 3,” “SVF Investment Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to SVF Investment Corp. 3. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”, “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statement and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form
10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K,
words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 11, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is SVF Sponsor III (DE) LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on March 8, 2021. On March 11, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 32,000,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Public Shares”), including the 4,000,000 Public Shares as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at an offering price of $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of $320.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $18.1 million, of which approximately $11.2 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. On April 22, 2021, the underwriters made a payment to us in an amount of $640,000 to reimburse certain of our expenses in connection with the initial public offering.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 1,040,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Private Placement Shares”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $10.4 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, management agreed that an amount equal to at least $10.00 per Public Share sold in the Initial Public Offering, including the proceeds of the Private Placement Shares, will be held in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Shares, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination.
However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 11, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to fund Regulatory Withdrawals (as defined in our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association), subject to an annual limit of $250,000, for a maximum of 24 months and/or to pay its income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one
basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we had approximately $813,000 held outside the trust account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and $320,016,430 held inside the trust account. We cannot assure you that our plan to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $813,000 in our operating bank account, and working capital deficit of approximately $2.5 million.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the payment by our Sponsor of $25,000 for certain offering costs on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, and borrowings under our promissory note with our Sponsor of $300,000 as well as additional advances of approximately $114,000. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs will be satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor may, but is not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans. On August 10, 2021 our Sponsor agreed to loan us $2.0 million as the Working Capital Loan. On November 9, 2021 we agreed with our Sponsor to amend this loan to increase the commitment by $1.0 million.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination with 24 months from closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 11, 2023, in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time which is considered to be one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after March 11, 2023. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to March 11, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $6.5 million, which consisted of approximately $6.4 million in general and administrative expenses, including $100,000 of general and administrative expenses to related party, partly offset by approximately $16,000 in income from investments held in the Trust Account.
For the period from December 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $19,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on NASDAQ through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us by an affiliate of our Sponsor. We incurred $100,000 of such expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $100,000 is due to the Sponsor and is included in due to related party on the accompanying balance sheets. There was no balance due to related party at December 31, 2020.
In addition, our Sponsor, officers and directors, or our respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to our Sponsor, executive officers or directors, or our affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Business Combination will be made using funds held outside the Trust Account. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $500,000 is due to the Sponsor’s affiliates and is included in due to related party on the accompanying balance sheets. There was no balance under this agreement at December 31, 2020.
Registration and Shareholder Rights Agreement
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares, and any shares that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion of the Founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders had certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the prospectus to purchase up to 4,000,000 additional shares at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on March 11, 2021.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Class A ordinary share, or $6.4 million in the aggregate paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $11.2 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Forward Purchase Agreement
The Company entered into a forward purchase agreement (a “Forward Purchase Agreement”) with the forward purchase investor (the “Forward Purchase Investor”), which provides for the purchase of $150 million of forward purchase shares (the “Forward Purchase Shares”), for $10.00 per share, in a private placement to close substantially concurrently with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The Forward Purchase Agreement also provided that the Forward Purchase Investor may elect to purchase up to an additional $50 million of Forward Purchase Shares, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share. Any elections to purchase up to 5,000,000 additional Forward Purchase Shares will take place in one or more private placements in such amounts and at such time as the Forward Purchase Investor determines, but no later than simultaneously with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The Forward Purchase Investor has elected to purchase 5,000,000 additional Forward Purchase Shares for aggregate proceeds of $50,000,000 immediately prior to the Closing. The Company and the Forward Purchase Investor may determine, by mutual agreement, to increase the number of additional Forward Purchase Shares at any time prior to the initial Business Combination. The obligations under the Forward Purchase Agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the Public Shareholders. The Forward Purchase Shares will be issued only in connection with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The proceeds from the sale of Forward Purchase Shares may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, expenses in connection with the initial Business Combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Critical Accounting Policies
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying audited statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity (deficit). Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at the Initial Public Offering, 32,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of our accompanying balance sheets.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Income and losses are shared pro rata between Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption and non-redeemable
ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period. Non-redeemable
ordinary shares include Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares as these shares do not have any redemption features.
Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
“Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):Accounting
for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplified accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removed certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplified the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 on
January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.