Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements related to future events and our future financial performance that are based on current expectations and subject to risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many important factors, including those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including a year-to-year comparison between 2021 and 2020. For a full discussion related to the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview of Our Business and Services
We are the only fully integrated biopharmaceutical solutions organization purpose-built to accelerate customer success. We lead with a product development mindset, strategically blending clinical development, medical affairs, and commercial capabilities to address modern market realities for customers in the biopharmaceutical, biotechnology, and healthcare industries. We offer both stand-alone and integrated biopharmaceutical product development solutions ranging from early phase (Phase I) clinical trials to the full commercialization of biopharmaceutical products, with the goal of increasing the likelihood of regulatory approval and commercial success.
Our operations are divided into two reportable segments, Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions. Our Clinical Solutions segment offers comprehensive global services for the development of diagnostics, drugs, biologics, devices, and digital therapeutics that span Phases I to IV of clinical development. The segment is organized around clinical pharmacology and bioanalytical services, workforce deployment, full-service clinical studies, real world evidence, and consulting. Our Commercial Solutions segment provides commercialization services, including deployment solutions, communication solutions (public relations, advertising, and medical communications), and consulting services. We integrate our clinical and commercial capabilities into customized solutions by sharing knowledge, data, and insights. This collaboration across the development and commercialization continuum facilitates unique insights into patient populations, therapeutic environments, product timelines, and the competitive landscape. For further discussion, refer to Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We acquired the following companies during 2021:
•
StudyKIK, a leading clinical trial recruitment and retention company, expanding our portfolio of patient-direct, technology-enabled solutions. StudyKIK supports patient recruitment, patient retention, eConsent Solutions, Telemedicine Video Calling, and study companion mobile applications to expedite clinical trials, which we believe will result in benefits to customers including accelerated patient enrollment and retention, extensive patient population-based insights, improved site, sponsor, and physician experiences, and reduced patient burden.
•
RxDataScience, a specialist organization that helps biopharmaceutical customers solve challenging problems through advanced analytics, data management, and artificial intelligence. RxDataScience is well aligned to our lab to life model offering advanced analytic solutions across the entire product development spectrum from clinical through commercial.
Prior period segment results have been recast to reflect the transfer of the Kinapse Regulatory and Operations Consulting service lines from Commercial Solutions to Clinical Solutions to align with management reporting in 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic repercussions have significantly impacted, and are expected to continue to impact, our business and our operations. Within Clinical Solutions, the pandemic has accelerated the adoption of virtual engagement with sites and patients, creating increased demand for decentralized solutions capabilities. As a result, we have continued to experience reduced travel and other reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses related to lower physical monitoring visits for Clinical Solutions relative to pre-pandemic levels. We have also experienced a reduction in the costs associated with investigational medicinal products, which has also resulted in lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. Within Commercial Solutions, we have continued to experience fewer field team visits to healthcare providers and increased virtual investigator meetings. Therefore, we expect reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses as a percentage of revenue to remain lower relative to pre-pandemic levels. With the spread of COVID-19 variants, the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact our business and results of operations. See Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the potential impact of the pandemic on our business.
New Business Awards and Backlog
We add new business awards to backlog when we enter into a contract or when we receive a written commitment from the customer selecting us as a service provider, provided that:
•
collection of the award value is probable;
•
the project or projects are expected to commence within a certain period of time from the end of the quarter in which the award was granted;
•
project contingencies such as the outcome of other clinical trials, funding approvals, or other events, are not anticipated to prevent the project or projects from commencing in accordance with the expected timeline;
•
the customer has entered or intends to enter into a comprehensive contract as soon as practicable; and
•
for awards related to deployment solutions and functional service provider offerings, a maximum of twelve months of services are included in the award value.
In addition, we continually evaluate our backlog to determine if any of the previously awarded work is no longer expected to be performed, regardless of whether we have received formal cancellation notice from the customer. If we determine that any previously awarded work is no longer probable of being performed, we remove the value from our backlog based on the risk of cancellation. We recognize revenue from these awards as services are performed, provided we have received proper authorization from the customer.
We report new business awards for our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments as well as backlog for our Clinical Solutions segment and the deployment solutions offering within our Commercial Solutions segment. We do not report backlog for the remaining service offerings in the Commercial Solutions segment.
Backlog
Our backlog consists of anticipated future revenue from business awards that either have not started, or that are in process and have not been completed. Our backlog also reflects any cancellation or adjustment activity related to these awards. The average duration of our contracts will fluctuate from period to period based on the contracts comprising our backlog at any given time. The majority of our contracts contain early termination provisions that typically require notice periods ranging from 30 to 90 days.
Our backlog as of December 31 was as follows (in millions):
We expect approximately $4.68 billion of our backlog as of December 31, 2021 will be recognized as revenue during 2022. We adjust the amount of our backlog each quarter for the effects of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Net New Business Awards
New business awards, net of cancellations, were as follows (in millions):
New business awards have varied and may continue to vary significantly from year to year. Fluctuations in our net new business award levels often result from the fact that we may receive a small number of relatively large orders in any given reporting period. Because of these large orders, our backlog and net new business awards in a reporting period may reach levels that are not sustainable in subsequent reporting periods.
We believe that our backlog and net new business awards might not be consistent indicators of future revenue because they have been, and likely will continue to be, affected by a number of factors, including the variable size and duration of projects, many of which are performed over several years, and changes to the scope of work during the course of projects. Additionally, projects may be canceled or delayed by the customer or regulatory authorities. Net new business awards and backlog have been and we expect will continue to be affected by the broad effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets, as well as various other risks and uncertainties detailed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted our business and results of operations, and is expected to continue to do so” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We generally do not have a contractual right to the full amount of the awards reflected in our backlog. If a customer cancels an award, we might be reimbursed for the costs we have incurred. As we increasingly compete for and enter into large contracts that are more global in nature, we expect that the rate at which our backlog and net new business awards convert into revenue is likely to decrease, and the duration of projects and the period over which related revenue is recognized to lengthen. For more information about risks related to our backlog see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - Our backlog might not be indicative of our future revenues, and we might not realize all of the anticipated future revenue reflected in our backlog” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth amounts from our consolidated financial statements along with dollar and percentage changes (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenue increased by $797.2 million, or 18.1%, to $5.21 billion from $4.42 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by growth in both our Clinical Solutions and Commercial Solutions segments as discussed below.
No single customer accounted for greater than 10% of our total consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. Revenue from our top five customers accounted for approximately 22% of revenue for both of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue for each of our segments was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Clinical Solutions
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue attributable to our Clinical Solutions segment increased compared to the prior year, primarily driven by recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the acquisitions of Synteract and Illingworth Research that were completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. The recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic includes increased project start-ups, including larger pharmaceutical customer relationships and COVID-19 projects that generally have higher reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue was positively impacted by $40.9 million from foreign currency exchange rates fluctuations compared to the prior year.
We experienced reduced impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic to our Clinical Solutions revenue during 2021 as compared to 2020 as governments eased restrictions. Future impacts are dependent on the continuation of the pandemic including the potential spread of COVID-19 variants. We believe the primary ongoing impact to revenue relates to increased demand for decentralized solutions capabilities including remote monitoring, which results in lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. Therefore, we expect reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses as a percentage of revenue to remain lower relative to pre-pandemic levels.
Commercial Solutions
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue attributable to our Commercial Solutions segment increased compared to the prior year, primarily driven by recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and strength in new project start-ups. The revenue increases were partially offset by decreases related to the divestiture of our medication adherence business in the fourth quarter of 2020.
We experienced reduced impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic to our Commercial Solutions revenue during 2021 as compared to 2020 as governments eased restrictions. Future impacts are dependent on the continuation of the pandemic including the potential spread of COVID-19 variants. We believe the primary ongoing impacts to revenue relate to declines in field team visits to healthcare providers and increased virtual investigator meetings, which result in lower reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. Therefore, we expect reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses as a percentage of revenue to remain lower relative to pre-pandemic levels.
Direct Costs
Direct costs consist principally of compensation expense and benefits associated with our employees and other employee-related costs, and reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses directly related to delivering on our projects. While we have some ability to manage the majority of these costs relative to the amount of contracted services we have during any given period, direct costs as a percentage of revenue can vary from period to period. Such fluctuations are due to a variety of factors, including, among others: (i) the level of staff utilization on our projects; (ii) adjustments to the timing of work on specific customer contracts; (iii) the experience mix of personnel assigned to projects; (iv) the service mix and pricing of our contracts; and (v) the timing of the incurrence of reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses. Relative to pre-pandemic levels, we continue to experience reduced travel and other reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses related to lower physical monitoring visits for Clinical Solutions, as well as fewer field team visits to healthcare providers and investigator meetings for Commercial Solutions.
Direct costs were as follows (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our direct costs increased by $596.3 million, or 17.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by higher reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, impacts from acquisitions, and the end of temporary cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic implemented in the prior year. These increases were partially offset by decreases from business divestitures in 2020.
Clinical Solutions
Direct costs for our Clinical Solutions segment, excluding share-based compensation expense, were as follows (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Clinical Solutions segment direct costs increased by $492.7 million, or 19.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by impacts from acquisitions, higher reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, the end of temporary cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic implemented in the prior year, and negative impacts of foreign exchange rate fluctuations. These increases were partially offset by positive impacts from our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
Gross margins for our Clinical Solutions segment were 25.0% and 24.7% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margin was higher during 2021 as compared to the prior year primarily due to revenue growth and positive impacts from our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative, partially offset by higher reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses, the end of temporary cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic implemented in the prior year, and negative impacts of foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
Commercial Solutions
Direct costs for our Commercial Solutions segment, excluding share-based compensation expense, were as follows (dollars in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our Commercial Solutions segment direct costs increased by $101.8 million, or 11.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the end of temporary cost management strategies implemented in the prior year, partially offset by the divestiture of our medication adherence business in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Gross margins for our Commercial Solutions segment were 20.6% and 20.7% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margin was lower during 2021 as compared to the prior year primarily due to higher costs in the current year primarily driven by recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, including higher reimbursable out-of-pocket expenses and the end of temporary cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic implemented in the prior year, partially offset by revenue growth.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the prior year primarily due to acquisitions, including higher transaction and integration-related expenses, and the end of temporary cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic implemented in the prior year. Transaction and integration-related expenses are no longer reported separately and are included in selling, general, and administrative expenses. These increases were partially offset by positive impacts from our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
Restructuring and Other Costs
Restructuring and other costs were $22.8 million and $29.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The costs incurred during 2021 were primarily related to our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative as we continue the ongoing evaluations of our workforce and facilities infrastructure needs in an effort to optimize our resources. The costs incurred during 2020 were primarily related to our cost management strategies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as our ForwardBound initiative.
Restructuring and other costs consisted of the following (in thousands):
We expect to continue to incur costs related to the restructuring of our operations in order to achieve cost savings and targeted synergies related to our acquisitions. However, the timing and the amount of these costs depends on various factors, including, but not limited to, identifying and realizing synergy opportunities and executing the integration of our combined operations. We may also continue to incur additional restructuring and other costs during and beyond 2022 related to our ForwardBound margin enhancement initiative.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Total depreciation and amortization expense was $235.6 million and $222.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in total depreciation and amortization expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the acquisitions that were completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by decreases due to fully amortized intangible assets from prior acquisitions.
Total Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net consisted of the following (dollars in thousands):
Total other expense, net was $74.1 million and $89.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in total other expense, net in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in interest expense, primarily related to reductions in our higher interest rate debt as a result of debt prepayments and refinancing transactions and lower interest rates on our variable interest rate debt. Other (income) expense, net primarily consists of foreign currency gains and losses that result from exchange rate fluctuations on our monetary asset balances denominated in currencies other than our functional currency, other gains and losses related to investments, and contingent consideration related to divested businesses.
The loss on extinguishment of debt was $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These losses were incurred primarily as a result of our debt prepayments and refinancing transactions.
Income Tax Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $80.3 million, on pre-tax income of $315.2 million. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 varied from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to foreign income inclusions such as the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) provisions, state and local taxes on U.S. income, and research and general business credits.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $10.9 million, on pre-tax income of $203.7 million. The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 varied from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the recognition of U.S. federal and foreign unrecognized tax benefits, changes to income tax valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, and tax benefits recognized related to the elections to retroactively apply regulations relative to the GILTI high-tax exclusion and Section 163(j) CFC group election for interest deductibility.
We currently maintain valuation allowances against a portion of our state deferred tax assets and a portion of our foreign deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. We intend to continue to maintain valuation allowances on these deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Key measures of our liquidity were as follows as of December 31 (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we had $106.5 million of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash was held within the U.S. In addition, we had $585.8 million (net of $14.2 million in outstanding letters of credit (“LOCs”)) available for borrowing under our $600.0 million Revolver, of which $135.8 million was available for LOCs.
We have historically funded our operations and growth, including acquisitions, primarily with our working capital, cash flow from operations and funds available through various borrowing arrangements. Our principal liquidity requirements are to fund our debt service obligations, capital expenditures, expansion of service offerings, possible acquisitions, integration and restructuring costs, geographic expansion, stock repurchases, working capital, and other general corporate expenses. Cash from operations also could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets, as well as other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and funds available under the Revolver will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs, capital expenditures, scheduled debt and interest payments, income tax obligations, and other currently anticipated liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months.
We may seek to raise additional capital, particularly in the event of a sustained market deterioration, which could be in the form of bonds, convertible debt, or equity. If we obtain additional capital by issuing equity, the interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we incur additional indebtedness, that indebtedness may contain significant financial and other covenants that may significantly restrict our operations. We cannot assure you that we could obtain any refinancing or additional financing we may seek on favorable terms or at all.
Contractual Obligations
In addition to the indebtedness and related interest payments, operating leases, deferred compensation, commitments to unconsolidated affiliates, contingent obligations assumed in business combinations, and uncertain tax positions discussed elsewhere, we signed a non-cancellable purchase obligation of $22.1 million during the fourth quarter of 2021, with equal quarterly payments due over the next four years, beginning in the third quarter of 2022.
Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $2.84 billion of total principal indebtedness (including $54.8 million in finance lease obligations), consisting of $1.79 billion in term loan debt, $600.0 million under the Notes, and $400.0 million in borrowings against our accounts receivable financing agreement. Approximately $1.03 billion of our indebtedness (excluding finance leases) was subject to variable interest rates.
Credit Agreement
We are party to a credit agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”) that included a $1.55 billion Term Loan A facility (“Term Loan A”) that has two tranches, tranche one that matures on March 26, 2024 and tranche two that matures on August 1, 2024, a $1.60 billion Term Loan B facility (“Term Loan B”) that was paid in full during the second quarter of 2021, and a $600.0 million Revolver that matures on August 1, 2024. The Revolver includes LOCs with a sublimit of $150.0 million.
On June 30, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we entered into Amendment No. 5 (the “Fifth Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. The Fifth Amendment modified the Credit Agreement to increase Term Loan A in an aggregate principal amount of $495.0 million (“Incremental Term Loan A”). Incremental Term Loan A was funded on the Closing Date, and the proceeds were used, along with cash on hand, to repay the outstanding Term Loan B in full under the Credit Agreement and to pay fees and expenses in connection with the Fifth Amendment and the incurrence of Incremental Term Loan A. Incremental Term Loan A has the same terms as Term Loan A under the Credit Agreement, and is subject to the same covenants. We recorded an additional discount of $0.5 million against the Term Loan A borrowings in connection with the Fifth Amendment, which is being amortized as a component of interest expense using the effective interest method over the term of Term Loan A.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made $166.8 million and $560.5 million of voluntary prepayments against Term Loan A and Term Loan B, respectively, that were applied to future mandatory principal payments due. As a result of these and previous voluntary prepayments, we are not required to make a mandatory payment against the principal balance of Term Loan A until October 2023 and Term Loan B has been paid in full. In connection with these prepayments, we recorded a $3.6 million loss on extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
In February 2021, as a result of our First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) being less than or equal to 2.5x, the Adjusted Eurocurrency Rate Spread (as defined in the Credit Agreement) on Term Loan A and the Revolver decreased from 1.50% to 1.25%. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the Term Loan A and the Revolver was 1.35%.
Our ability to make payments on our indebtedness and to fund planned capital expenditures and necessary working capital will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future. Our ability to meet our cash needs through cash flows from operations will depend on the demand for our services, as well as general economic, financial, competitive, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control, including the broad effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and major financial markets. Our business may not generate cash flow in an amount sufficient to enable us to pay the principal of, or interest on, our indebtedness, or to fund our other liquidity needs, including working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, investments, and other general corporate requirements. If we cannot fund our liquidity needs, we will have to take actions such as reducing or delaying capital expenditures, acquisitions or investments, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our debt, reducing the scope of our operations and growth plans, or seeking additional capital. We cannot assure you that any of these remedies could, if necessary, be affected on commercially reasonable terms, or at all, or that they would permit us to meet our scheduled debt service obligations. The Credit Agreement contains covenant restrictions that limit our ability to direct the use of proceeds from any disposition of assets and, as a result, we may not be allowed to use the proceeds from any such dispositions to satisfy all current debt service obligations.
Revolver and Letters of Credit
The Revolver includes LOCs with a sublimit of $150.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding Revolver borrowings and $14.2 million of LOCs outstanding, leaving $585.8 million of available borrowings under the Revolver, including $135.8 million available for LOCs.
The lease agreement for our corporate headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina includes a provision that may require us to issue a LOC to the landlord based on our debt rating issued by Moody’s Investors Service (or other nationally-recognized debt rating agency, such as S&P Global Ratings). As of December 31, 2021, our debt rating was such that no LOC is currently required. Any LOCs issued in accordance with the aforementioned requirements could be issued under our Revolver, and if issued under our Revolver, would reduce our available borrowing capacity by the same amount.
We pay a quarterly commitment fee between 0.25% and 0.375% on the average daily unused balance of the Revolver based on the “First Lien Leverage Ratio” at the adjustment date. Fees are charged on all outstanding LOCs at an annual rate equal to the margin in effect on Eurocurrency Rate revolving loans plus participation and fronting fees.
The Notes
On November 24, 2020, we completed the issuance and sale of the Notes, with an aggregate principal amount of $600.0 million, which bears interest at a rate of 3.625% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears beginning on July 15, 2021, and matures on January 15, 2029. The Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture (the “Indenture”), which provides, among other things, that the Notes are senior unsecured obligations of us and are guaranteed, jointly and severally, on a senior unsecured basis, by certain of our subsidiaries.
We may redeem some or all of the Notes at any time prior to January 15, 2024 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed plus a “make-whole” premium and accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, prior to July 15, 2023, we may redeem up to 40% of the original principal amount of the Notes with proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 103.625% of the aggregate principal amount of such Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest. On or after January 15, 2024, we may redeem some or all of the Notes at the redemption prices set forth in the Indenture plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Indenture contains covenants that limit the ability of us and our restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, (1) incur additional liens, (2) engage in certain sale and leaseback transactions, and (3) conduct mergers, consolidations, or asset sales. These covenants are subject to exceptions and qualifications set forth in the Indenture.
If we sell certain of our assets or experience specific kinds of changes of control, we are required to offer to repurchase the Notes at a repurchase price equal to (1) par plus any accrued and unpaid interest in the case of an asset sale or (2) 101% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus any accrued and unpaid interest in the case of a change of control.
Debt Covenants
The Credit Agreement contains usual and customary restrictive covenants that among other things, place limitations on our ability to pay dividends or make other restricted payments; prepay, redeem or purchase debt; incur liens; make loans and investments; incur additional indebtedness; amend or otherwise alter debt and other material arrangements; make acquisitions and dispose of assets; transact with affiliates; and engage in transactions that are not related to our existing business. Each of the restrictive covenants is subject to important exceptions and qualifications that would allow us to engage in these activities under certain conditions, including our ability to: (i) pay dividends each year in an amount up to the greater of (a) 6% of the net cash proceeds received by us from any public offering and (b) 5% of our market capitalization; and (ii) pay unlimited dividends if our Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is no greater than 3.0 to 1.0. In addition, the Credit Agreement requires us to maintain a maximum First Lien Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of no more than 4.5 to 1.0 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter from and after March 31, 2020.
The Indenture also contains customary events of default, including (1) failure to make required payments, (2) failure to comply with certain covenants, (3) failure to pay certain other indebtedness, (4) certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, and (5) failure to pay certain judgments. An event of default under the Indenture allows either the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes, as applicable, issued under such Indenture, to accelerate the amounts due under the Notes, or in the case of a bankruptcy or insolvency, will automatically cause the acceleration of the amounts due under the Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable debt covenants.
Accounts Receivable Financing Agreement
Under our accounts receivable financing agreement, certain of our consolidated subsidiaries sell accounts receivable and unbilled services (including contract assets) balances to a wholly-owned, bankruptcy-remote special purpose entity (“SPE”), which is the borrower under the facility. The facility is without recourse to us or any subsidiaries of ours other than the SPE, other than with respect to limited indemnity obligations of the selling entities and the servicer of the receivables in respect of the character of the receivables sold by them and the performance of the servicing duties.
On January 28, 2021, we amended our accounts receivable financing agreement to increase the amount we can borrow from $300.0 million to $365.0 million and drew down the additional $65.0 million to partially fund the Term Loan A and Term Loan B voluntary prepayments. Accordingly, there was no incremental impact on our total debt.
On October 13, 2021, we further amended our accounts receivable financing agreement to increase the amount we can borrow from $365.0 million to $400.0 million, extended the maturity to October 2024, and drew down the additional $35.0 million. At the same time, we paid down $35.0 million on facilities under our Credit Agreement, resulting in no net impact on leverage.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $400.0 million of outstanding borrowings under this agreement with no remaining borrowing capacity available.
This agreement is secured by a lien on certain receivables and other assets, and we have guaranteed the performance of the obligations of existing and future subsidiaries that sell and service the accounts receivable under this agreement. The available borrowing capacity varies monthly according to the levels of our eligible accounts receivable and unbilled receivables. Loans under this agreement will accrue interest at a reserve-adjusted LIBOR rate or a base rate equal to the higher of (i) the applicable lender’s prime rate and (ii) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the accounts receivable financing agreement was 1.05%.
Interest Rates
We have entered into various interest rate swaps to mitigate our exposure to changes in interest rates on our term loans. As of December 31, 2021, the percentage of our total principal debt (excluding finance leases) that is subject to fixed interest rates was approximately 63%. Each quarter-point increase or decrease in the applicable floating interest rate as of December 31, 2021 would change our annual interest expense by approximately $2.6 million.
We do not expect the transition from LIBOR to impact our debt agreements during 2022 and therefore we are under no obligation to amend these agreements in 2022.
2021 Stock Repurchase Program
On November 17, 2020, our Board authorized the repurchase of up to an aggregate of $300.0 million of our Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share, to be executed from time to time in open market transactions effected through a broker at prevailing market prices, in block trades, or through privately negotiated transactions through December 31, 2022. The 2021 Stock Repurchase Program took effect on January 1, 2021. Share repurchases are funded primarily with our working capital, cash flow from operations, and funds available through various borrowing arrangements.
The 2021 Stock Repurchase Program does not obligate us to repurchase any particular amount of our Class A common stock, and may be modified, extended, suspended, or discontinued at any time. The timing and amount of repurchases are determined by our management based on a variety of factors such as the market price of our Class A common stock, our corporate cash requirements, and overall market conditions. The 2021 Stock Repurchase Program is subject to applicable legal requirements, including federal and state securities laws and applicable Nasdaq rules. We may also repurchase shares of our Class A common stock pursuant to a trading plan meeting the requirements of Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which would permit shares of our Class A common stock to be repurchased when we might otherwise be precluded from doing so by law.
The following table sets forth repurchase activity under the 2021 Stock Repurchase Program from inception through December 31, 2021:
As of December 31, 2021, we had remaining authorization to repurchase up to approximately $182.5 million of shares of our common stock under the 2021 Stock Repurchase Program.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
Our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities were as follows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities increased by $24.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to higher cash-related net income, partially offset by negative changes in operating assets and liabilities relative to the prior year including payment of certain taxes deferred in 2020 as permitted by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Fluctuations in accounts receivable, unbilled services (including contract assets), and deferred revenue occur on a regular basis as we perform services, achieve milestones or other billing criteria, send invoices to customers, and collect outstanding accounts receivable. This activity varies by individual customer and contract. We attempt to negotiate payment terms that provide for payment of services prior to or soon after the provision of services, but the levels of accounts receivable, unbilled services (including contract assets), and deferred revenue can vary significantly from period to period.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $340.3 million in cash for investing activities, which consisted of $278.9 million of payments related to acquisitions, including StudyKIK and RxDataScience, and $56.8 million for purchases of property and equipment. We continue to closely monitor our capital expenditures, especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, while making strategic investments in the development of our information technology infrastructure to meet the needs of our workforce, enable efficiencies, reduce business continuity risks, and conform to changes in governing rules and regulations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $504.1 million in cash for investing activities, which primarily consisted of $456.5 million of cash paid for the acquisitions of Synteract and Illingworth Research. Additionally, we used $50.0 million in cash for purchases of property and equipment and $15.6 million in cash for investments in unconsolidated affiliates, partially offset by cash received of $18.0 million for the sale of our medication adherence business.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $277.6 million in cash for financing activities, which consisted primarily of net repayments of long-term debt and repurchases of our common stock. These payments were partially offset by proceeds from our accounts receivable financing arrangement.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $178.3 million in cash, primarily resulting from a net increase in long-term debt from the issuance of the Notes, partially offset by repayments of other long-term debt, repurchases of our common stock, and contingent consideration payments.
Inflation
The majority of our long-term contracts include inflation or cost of living adjustments for the portion of the services to be performed beyond the year in which services begin. In the event actual inflation rates are greater than our contractual inflation rates or cost of living adjustments, generally our contracts allow for increases to our inflationary assumptions to offset.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses during the period, as well as disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to revenue recognition, valuation of goodwill and identifiable intangibles, and tax-related contingencies and valuation allowances. These estimates are based on the information available to management at the time these estimates, judgments, and assumptions are made. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Acquisitions
We account for acquisitions in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, using the acquisition method of accounting. The purchase price, or total consideration transferred, is determined as the fair value of assets exchanged, equity instruments issued, and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. The acquisition method of accounting requires that the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree are measured and recorded at their fair values on the date of an acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets.
Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred. The consolidated financial statements reflect the results of operations of the acquiree from the date of the acquisition. For additional information, see Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplemental Data - Note 3 - Acquisitions, Divestitures, and Investments.”
Revenue Recognition
We adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all the related amendments (“new revenue standard” or “ASC 606”) on January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method for all contracts not completed as of the date of adoption. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when, or as, a customer obtains control of promised services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services.
The majority of our Clinical Solutions segment revenue is for service offerings that range in duration from a few months to several years and typically represent a single performance obligation. Revenue for these service contracts is recognized over time using an input measure of progress. The input measure reflects costs (including investigator payments and pass-through costs) incurred to date relative to total estimated costs to complete the contract (“cost-to-cost measure of progress”). Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress methodology, revenue is recorded proportionally to costs incurred. Contract costs principally include direct labor, investigator payments, and pass-through costs. The estimate of total revenue and costs to completion requires significant judgment. Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project future outcomes of events that often span several years, as well as on evaluations and updates made on an ongoing basis. These estimates are reviewed periodically and any adjustments are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period they become known. Updates and adjustments to estimates are likely to result in variability in revenue recognized from period to period and may cause unexpected variability in our operating results. In addition, in certain instances a customer contract may include forms of variable consideration such as incentive fees, volume rebates or other provisions that can increase or decrease the transaction price. This variable consideration is generally awarded upon achievement of certain performance metrics, program milestones or cost targets. For the purposes of revenue recognition, variable consideration is assessed on a contract-by-contract basis and the amount to be recorded is estimated based on the assessment of our anticipated performance and consideration of all information that is reasonably available. Variable consideration is recognized as revenue if and when it is deemed probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved in the future.
The largest of the service offerings within the Commercial Solutions segment relates to Deployment Solutions. Deployment Solutions contracts consist of services to promote and sell commercial products on behalf of a customer. The remaining Commercial Solutions contracts are generally short-term, month-to-month contracts or time and materials contracts. As such, Commercial Solutions revenue is generally recognized as services are performed for the amount we estimate we are entitled to for the period. For contracts billed on a fixed price basis, revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion of labor costs expended to total labor costs expected to complete the contract.
Most of our contracts can be terminated by the customer without cause with a notice period that generally ranges from 30 to 90 days. In the event of termination, our contracts generally provide that the customer pay us for: (i) fees earned through the termination date; (ii) fees and expenses for winding down the project, which include both fees incurred and actual expenses; (iii) non-cancellable expenditures; and (iv) in some cases, a fee to cover a portion of the remaining professional fees on the project. Our long-term clinical trial contracts contain implied substantive termination penalties because of the significant wind-down cost of terminating a clinical trial. These provisions for termination penalties result in these types of contracts being treated as long-term for revenue recognition purposes.
Changes in the scope of work are common, especially under long-term contracts, and generally result in a renegotiation of future contract pricing terms and change in contract transaction price. If the customer does not agree to a contract modification, we could bear the risk of cost overruns. Most of our contract modifications are for services that are not distinct from the services under the existing contract due to the significant integration service provided in the context of the contract and therefore result in a cumulative catch-up adjustment to revenue at the date of contract modification.
Timing of Billing and Performance
Differences in the timing of revenue recognition and associated billings and cash collections result in recording of billed accounts receivable, unbilled accounts receivable, contract assets, and deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheet. Amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Billings generally occur subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in recording of unbilled accounts receivable in instances where the right to bill is contingent solely on the passage of time (e.g., in the following month) and contract assets in instances where the right to bill is associated with a contingency (e.g., achievement of a milestone).
Accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value. Unbilled accounts receivable (including contract assets) arise when services have been rendered for which revenue has been recognized but the customers have not been billed. In general, prerequisites for billings and payments are established by contractual provisions, including predetermined payment schedules, which may or may not correspond to the timing of the performance of services under the contract. Contract assets include unbilled amounts typically resulting from revenue recognized in excess of the amounts billed to the customer for which the right to payment is subject to factors other than the passage of time. These amounts may not exceed their net realizable value. Contract assets are generally classified as current. Deferred revenue represents contract liabilities and consists of customer payments received in advance of performance and billings in excess of revenue recognized, net of revenue recognized from the balance at the beginning of the period. Contract assets and deferred revenue are presented on the balance sheet on a net contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, in acquisitions. In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, goodwill is not subject to amortization but must be tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment level. This test requires us to determine if the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than its carrying amount.
The impairment analysis requires significant judgments, estimates and assumptions. There is no assurance that the actual future earnings or cash flows of the reporting units will not decline significantly from the projections used in the impairment analysis. Goodwill impairment charges may be recognized in future periods in one or more of the reporting units to the extent changes in factors or circumstances occur, including deterioration in the macroeconomic environment, industry, deterioration in our performance or our future projections, or changes in plans for one or more of our reporting units.
We completed our annual impairment test for potential impairment as of October 1, 2021 for all four of our reporting units, determining that there were no impairments. Our goodwill is principally related to the Merger completed on August 1, 2017. Depending on the extent to which future developments negatively impact our results of operations and financial outlook, an interim impairment test may be required in the future.
Intangible assets consist of customer relationships, acquired backlog, trade names, trademarks, patient communities, and acquired technologies. We amortize intangible assets related to customer relationships, trade names, trademarks, patient communities, and acquired technologies on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Intangible assets related to acquired backlog are amortized based on our expectations of the timing of when revenue associated with the backlog is expected to be recognized.
We review intangible assets at the end of each reporting period to determine if facts and circumstances indicate that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated or that the carrying amount of the assets might not be recoverable. If such facts and circumstances exist, we assess the recoverability of identified assets by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their remaining lives to their respective carrying amounts. Impairments, if any, are based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets and occur in the period in which the impairment determination is made.
Income Taxes
The majority of our U.S. subsidiaries file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return, while certain U.S. subsidiaries, including recently acquired entities, may file separate U.S. federal tax returns. Our subsidiaries in international jurisdictions file tax returns in their respective jurisdictions.
We provide for income taxes on all transactions that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements. Specifically, we estimate our tax liability based on current tax laws in the statutory jurisdictions in which we operate. Accordingly, the impact of changes in income tax laws on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recognized in net earnings in the period during which such changes are enacted. We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities and for tax benefit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect in the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
We provide valuation allowances against deferred tax assets for amounts that are not considered more likely than not to be realized. The valuation of the deferred tax asset is dependent on, among other things, our ability to generate a sufficient level of future taxable income. In estimating future taxable income, we have considered both positive and negative evidence, such as historical and forecasted results of operations, and have considered the implementation of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. If the objectively verifiable negative evidence outweighs any available positive evidence (or the only available positive is subjective and cannot be verified), then a valuation allowance will likely be deemed necessary. If a valuation allowance is deemed to be unnecessary, such allowance is released and any related benefit is recognized in the period of the change.
We recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if we believe it is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. Judgment is required in determining what constitutes an individual tax position, as well as the assessment of the outcome of each tax position. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating tax positions and tax benefits. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in domestic and foreign jurisdictions. We evaluate uncertain tax positions pursuant to the more likely than not standard, and benefits related to such uncertain tax positions are recognized as the largest amount of benefit, determined on a cumulative probability basis, to be realized upon ultimate settlement of the position. If the calculation of the liability related to uncertain tax positions proves to be more or less than the ultimate settlement, a tax expense or benefit, respectively, would result. Unrecognized tax benefits are presented as either a reduction to a deferred tax asset or as a separate liability.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 1 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.