Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition should be read together with the other financial information and consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a diversified provider of truck components, oil and gas pipeline components and aerospace and defense electronics. We offer a wide range of manufactured products, often under multi-year sole-source contracts.
We are organized into two business segments, Sypris Technologies and Sypris Electronics. Sypris Technologies, which is comprised of Sypris Technologies, Inc. and its subsidiaries, generates revenue primarily from the sale of forged, machined, welded and heat-treated steel components primarily for heavy commercial vehicle and high-pressure energy pipeline applications. Sypris Electronics, which is comprised of Sypris Electronics, LLC, generates revenue primarily through circuit card and full “box build” manufacturing, high reliability manufacturing, systems assembly and integration, design for manufacturability and design to specification work.
We focus on those markets where we believe we have the expertise, qualifications and leadership position to sustain a competitive advantage. We target our resources to support the needs of industry participants that embrace technological innovation and flexibility, coupled with multi-year contractual relationships, as a strategic component of their supply chain management. These contracts, many of which are sole-source by part number, have historically created opportunities to invest in leading-edge processes or technologies to help our customers remain competitive. The productivity and innovation that can result from such investments helps to differentiate us from our competition when it comes to cost, quality, reliability and customer service.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and may continue to result, in significant economic disruption and has and may continue to adversely affect our business. As of the date of this filing, significant uncertainty exists concerning the continued impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the two years since the outbreak, the pandemic has dramatically impacted the global health and economic environment, including millions of confirmed cases and deaths, business slowdowns or shutdowns, labor shortfalls, supply chain challenges, regulatory challenges, and market volatility. The Company has continued to operate at each location and sought to remain compliant with government regulations imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company began to experience lower revenue late in the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, followed by a more significant impact in the second quarter of 2020, especially within the Sypris Technologies segment. Towards the end of the second quarter of 2020, some state and local jurisdictions started to lift mandatory stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders and gradually started to ease restrictions.
Over the course of 2021, COVID-19 case rates and the health and economic impacts of the pandemic fluctuated dramatically in different communities in the U.S. and globally, particularly with the spread of new variants. We continued to see a prolonged impact on the economy, our industries, and our company, with increased challenges for customers and suppliers, labor shortages, supply chain challenges, and increasing inflation, among other impacts. We expect these and other impacts to continue and they could worsen, depending on the future course of the pandemic and actions taken in connection with it.
While the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial position in 2020 and 2021, management implemented actions to mitigate the financial impact, to protect the health of its employees and to comply with government regulations at each of our locations.
We implemented modifications beginning in the second quarter of 2020 to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business continued to operate during this uncertain time. With respect to liquidity, we evaluated and took actions to reduce costs and spending across our organization. This included reducing hiring activities, reducing compensation of our Chairman, President and CEO, certain other senior leadership and corporate personnel and our Board of Directors, and limiting discretionary spending. In addition, under the CARES Act, we deferred certain payroll taxes into future years. We also reduced spending on capital investment projects in 2020 and managed working capital to preserve liquidity during this crisis. In addition to these activities, during the second quarter of 2020, the Company secured a $3.6 million term loan with BMO, pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. Proceeds from the PPP Loan have been used to retain workers and maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments. On June 28, 2021, the Company received notice from BMO that our application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan had been approved. The loan forgiveness request in the amount of $3.6 million was applied to the Company’s entire outstanding PPP Loan balance with BMO. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan and accrued interest in the amount of $3.6 million.
Factors deriving from the COVID-19 response that have and may continue to negatively impact sales and gross margin in the future include, but are not limited to: limitations on the ability of our suppliers to manufacture, or procure from manufacturers, the material components we utilize in the manufacture of the products we sell, or to meet delivery requirements and commitments; limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring employees to remain at home; limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business and purchase our products; and limitations on the ability of our customers to pay us on a timely basis. While we are unable to determine or predict the nature, duration or scope of the overall impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources, we will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers and shareholders.
Sypris Technologies Outlook
Demand in the North American Class 4-8 commercial vehicle market began to recover in the second half of 2020 following an anticipated market decline in the first half of 2020 that was deepened by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Market conditions have improved since then and have remained favorable through 2021 for commercial vehicles in addition to the automotive, sport utility vehicle and off-highway markets served by Sypris Technologies. The outlook for 2022 for the commercial vehicle market indicates stronger demand with production expected to be up 12% over 2021 due to an anticipated improving economic outlook and cyclical growth. Additionally, we believe that the market diversification Sypris Technologies has accomplished over recent years by adding new programs in the automotive, sport-utility and off-highway markets has benefited and will continue to benefit the Company as demand for our products in these markets has experienced less volatility since 2020 than the Class 8 commercial vehicle market.
Reduced travel, business closures, and other economic impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic suppressed near-term oil and natural gas demand, which has adversely impacted the oil and gas markets served by our Tube Turns® brand of engineered product lines. This is causing major pipeline developers to significantly scale back near-term capital investments in new pipeline infrastructure. This has resulted in reduced demand for our products for the oil and gas markets during the second half of 2020 and into 2021. As commodity prices improve and activity increases, we currently expect customer demand to increase in 2022 compared to 2021. However, the conflict between Russia and Ukraine could lead to disruption, instability and volatility in global markets and industries that could negatively impact our operations.
We will continue to pursue new business in a wide variety of markets from light automotive to new energy related product lines to achieve a more balanced portfolio across our customers, markets and products.
Sypris Electronics Outlook
In accordance with the DoD guidance issued in March 2020 designating the Defense Industrial Base as a critical infrastructure workforce, our Sypris Electronics production facility continued to operate in support of essential products and services required to meet national security commitments to the U.S. Government and the U.S. military.
The U.S. Government has taken actions in response to COVID-19 to increase progress payments in new and existing contracts and accelerate contract awards through increased use of Undefinitized Contracting Actions (UCAs) to provide cash flow and liquidity for companies in the Defense Industrial Base, including large prime contractors and smaller suppliers. Certain of the large prime contractors are implementing multiple actions to help support certain suppliers affected by COVID-19, including accelerating payments to subcontractors, such as Sypris Electronics.
The majority of the government aerospace and defense programs that we support require specific components that are sole-sourced to specific suppliers; therefore, the resolution of supplier constraints requires coordination with our customers or the end-users of the products. We have partnered with our customers to qualify alternative components or suppliers and will continue to focus on our supply chain to attempt to mitigate the impact of supply component shortages on our business. While the COVID-19 outbreak did not have a material impact on our supply chain in 2020 or the first half of 2021, electronic component shortages impacted our second half of 2021 results and may continue to be a challenge during 2022. We may not be successful in addressing these shortages and other supply chain issues.
During 2020 and 2021, we announced new program awards for Sypris Electronics, with certain programs continuing into 2023. In addition to contract awards from DoD prime contractors related to weapons systems, electronic warfare and infrared countermeasures in our traditional aerospace and defense markets, we have also been awarded subcontracts related to the communication and navigation markets, which align with our advanced capabilities for delivering products for complex, high cost of failure platforms.
On May 28, 2021, the President of the United States submitted to Congress the President’s fiscal year (FY) 2022 budget request, which proposes $753 billion for total national defense spending including $715 billion for the DoD, a 1.6% increase above the FY 2021 enacted amounts for both total national defense and the DoD (a U.S. Government fiscal year starts on October 1 and ends on September 30). This is the first budget over the past decade that is not restricted by the discretionary spending caps under the Budget Control Act of 2011. The budget also proposes to end the use of Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) as a separate fund to finance overseas operations.
However, the U.S. Government has not yet enacted an annual budget for FY 2022. To avert a government shutdown, on September 30, 2021, a continuing resolution funding measure was enacted to finance all U.S. Government activities through December 3, 2021. The continuing resolution was further extended through March 15, 2022. Under the continuing resolution, partial-year funding at amounts consistent with appropriated levels for FY 2021 are available, subject to certain restrictions, but new spending initiatives are not authorized. Importantly, our key programs continue to be supported and funded despite the continuing resolution financing mechanism. However, during periods covered by continuing resolutions or in the event of a government shutdown, we may experience delays in procurement of products and services due to lack of funding, and those delays may affect our results of operations. In the coming months, Congress will need to approve or revise the President’s FY 2022 budget proposal through enactment of appropriations bills and other policy legislation, which would then require final approval from the President in order for the FY 2022 budget to become law and complete the budget process.
In addition to the FY 2022 budget, the U.S. Government continues to face a variety of fiscal and monetary policy issues, including rising debt levels. The legal limit on U.S. debt, commonly known as the debt ceiling, was reinstated on August 1, 2021, after a two-year suspension. In October 2021, the statutory debt limit was increased by $480 billion and, in December 2021, was further increased by $2.5 trillion, which is currently expected to allow the Treasury Department to finance the government into 2023. If the debt ceiling is not raised further, the U.S. Government may not be able to pay for expenditures or fulfill its funding obligations and there could be significant disruption to all discretionary programs, including discretionary programs in which we participate.
It remains uncertain when the government will approve FY 2022 appropriations and what government programs will be funded and at what levels. We expect to compete for follow-on business opportunities as a subcontractor on future builds of several existing government programs. However, the federal budget and debt ceiling are expected to continue to be the subject of considerable uncertainty and the impact on demand for our products and services and our business are difficult to predict.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported. Changes in facts and circumstances could have a significant impact on the resulting estimated amounts included in our consolidated financial statements. We believe the following critical accounting estimates are those estimates made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We also have other policies that we consider to be key accounting policies, such as our policies for revenue recognition for Sypris Technologies, including cost of sales; however, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting estimates because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty. The following discussion of accounting estimates is intended to supplement the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies presented as Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Net Revenue and Cost of Sales. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control of a promised product or rendering a service to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for the product or service (the “transaction price”). The Company’s transaction price in its contracts with customers is generally fixed; no payment discounts, rebates or refunds are included within its contracts. The Company does not provide service-type warranties, nor does it allow customer returns. In connection with the sale of various parts to customers, the Company is subject to typical assurance warranty obligations covering the compliance of the electronics parts produced to agreed-upon specifications (See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Customer returns, when they occur, relate to quality rework issues and are not connected to any repurchase obligation of the Company.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or render a service to a customer and is the unit of account to which the transaction price is allocated under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. When a contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the individual performance obligations using the price at which the promised goods or services would be sold to customers on a standalone basis. For most sales within our Sypris Technologies segment and a portion of sales within Sypris Electronics, control transfers to the customer at a point in time. Indicators that control has transferred to the customer include the Company having a present right to payment, the customer obtaining legal title and the customer having the significant risks and rewards of ownership. The Company’s principal terms of sale are FOB Shipping Point, or equivalent, and, as such, the Company primarily transfers control and records revenue for product sales upon shipment.
For contracts where Sypris Electronics serves as a subcontractor for aerospace and defense companies under federally funded programs, we generally recognize revenue over time as we perform due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. This continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contracts that allow the customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in process. Because control is transferred over time, revenue and gross profit is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We use labor hours incurred as a measure of progress for these contracts because it best depicts the Company’s performance of the obligation to the customer, which occurs as we incur labor on our contracts. Under this measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of labor hours incurred to date to the total estimated labor hours at completion of the performance obligation.
Long-lived asset impairment. We perform periodic impairment analysis on our long-lived amortizable assets whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. When indicators are present, we compare the estimated future undiscounted net cash flows of the operations to which the assets relate to their carrying amount. If the operations are unable to recover the carrying amount of their assets, the long-lived assets are written down to their estimated fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, third party appraisals or other methods that provide appropriate estimates of value. A considerable amount of management judgment and assumptions are required in performing the impairment test, principally in determining whether an adverse event or circumstance has triggered the need for an impairment review. The Company did not have any long-lived assets measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Pension Plan Funded Status. Our U.S. defined benefit pension plans are closed to new entrants and an insignificant amount of service-related cost was recorded in 2021 related to a small number of participants who are still accruing benefits in the Louisville Hourly and Salaried Plans. Changes in our net obligations are principally attributable to changing discount rates and the performance of plan assets. Pension obligations are valued using discount rates established annually in consultation with our outside actuarial advisers using a theoretical bond portfolio, adjusted according to the timing of expected cash flows for our future obligations. Plan liabilities at December 31, 2021 are based upon a discount rate of 2.70% which reflects the Above Mean Mercer Yield Curve rate as of December 31, 2021 rounded to the nearest 5th basis point. Declining discount rates increase the present value of future pension obligations; a 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate would increase our U.S. pension liability by about $0.7 million. As indicated above, when establishing the expected long-term rate of return on our U.S. pension plan assets, we consider historical performance and forward looking return estimates reflective of our portfolio mix and investment strategy. Based on the most recent analysis of projected portfolio returns, we concluded that the use of 1.80% for the Louisville Hourly Plan, 2.95% for the Marion Plan and 2.60% for the Louisville Salaried Plan as the expected return on our U.S. pension plan assets for 2021 was appropriate. A change in the assumed rate of return on plan assets of 100 basis points would result in a $0.3 million change in the estimated 2021 pension expense.
At December 31, 2021, we have $11.2 million of unrecognized losses relating to our U.S. pension plans. Actuarial gains and losses, which are primarily the result of changes in the discount rate and other assumptions and differences between actual and expected asset returns, are deferred in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income and amortized to expense following the corridor approach. We use the average remaining service period of active participants unless almost all of the plan’s participants are inactive, in which case we use the average remaining life expectancy for all active and inactive participants.
Based on the current funded status of our U.S. plans, we expect to contribute approximately $0.1 million during 2022, which represents the minimum funding amounts required by federal law.
Reserve for Excess, Obsolete and Scrap Inventory. We record inventory at the lower of cost, determined under the first-in, first-out method, or net realizable value, and we reserve for excess, obsolete or scrap inventory. These reserves are primarily based upon management’s assessment of the salability of the inventory, historical usage of raw materials, historical demand for finished goods and estimated future usage and demand. An improper assessment of salability or improper estimate of future usage or demand, or significant changes in usage or demand could result in significant changes in the reserves and a positive or a negative impact on our consolidated results of operations in the period the change occurs.
Stock-based Compensation. We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with the fair value recognition provisions using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method, which requires the input of several subjective assumptions. The Company uses historical Company and industry data to estimate the expected price volatility. Due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected term of the stock options, the Company uses the simplified method to estimate the expected term. Under the simplified method, the expected term of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have not paid dividends nor do we anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the estimated life of the option. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur. Changes in the subjective assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate of stock-based compensation and consequently, the related expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes as required by the provisions of ASC 740, Income Taxes, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the tax effects of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities measured using enacted tax rates.
Management judgment is required in determining income tax expense and the related balance sheet amounts. In addition, under ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, judgments are required concerning the ultimate outcome of uncertain income tax positions. Actual income taxes paid may vary from estimates, depending upon changes in income tax laws, actual results of operations and the final audit of tax returns by taxing authorities. Tax assessments may arise several years after tax returns have been filed. We believe that our recorded income tax liabilities adequately provide for the probable outcome of these assessments.
Deferred tax assets are also recorded for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. However, ASC 740 requires that a valuation allowance be recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This assessment is largely dependent upon projected near-term profitability including the effects of tax planning. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined separately for each tax jurisdiction in which we conduct our operations or otherwise incur taxable income or losses. The Company evaluates its deferred tax position on a quarterly basis and valuation allowances are provided as necessary. During this evaluation, the Company reviews its forecast of income in conjunction with other positive and negative evidence surrounding the realizability of its deferred tax assets to determine if a valuation allowance is needed. Based on its current forecast, the Company believes it will have sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets recorded by its Mexican subsidiary. Therefore, the Company reversed its valuation allowance recorded in prior years against certain Mexican net deferred tax assets and recognized an income tax benefit of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Based on its current forecast, the Company has established a valuation allowance against all U.S. deferred tax assets. Until an appropriate level and characterization of profitability is attained, the Company expects to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets related to future U.S. tax benefits. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to reduce the valuation allowance would increase net income in the period that such determination is made.
Results of Operations
We operate in two segments, Sypris Technologies and Sypris Electronics. The table presented below compares our segment and consolidated results of operations from 2021 to 2020. The table presents the results for each year, the change in those results from one year to another in both dollars and percentage change and the results for each year as a percentage of net revenue.
●
The first two columns in each table show the absolute results for each period presented.
●
The columns entitled “Year-Over-Year Change” and “Year-Over-Year Percentage Change” show the change in results, both in dollars and percentages. These two columns show favorable changes as positive and unfavorable changes as negative. For example, when our net revenue increases from one period to the next, that change is shown as a positive number in both columns. Conversely, when expenses increase from one period to the next, that change is shown as a negative number in both columns.
●
The last two columns in each table show the results for each period as a percentage of net revenue. In these two columns, the cost of sales and gross profit for each are given as a percentage of each segment’s net revenue. These amounts are shown in italics.
In addition, as used in the table, “NM” means “not meaningful.”
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue. Sypris Technologies derives its revenue from the sale of forged and finished steel components and subassemblies and high-pressure closures and other fabricated products. Net revenue for Sypris Technologies increased $16.4 million from the prior year to $61.7 million in 2021 primarily as a result of the rebound in the commercial vehicle market from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic experienced during 2020. The net revenue increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to increased sales volumes of $14.3 million attributable to the commercial vehicle market and $2.6 million from the automotive, sport utility vehicle and off-highway markets partially offset by decreased energy related product sales of $0.5 million. Revenue for Sypris Technologies is expected to increase in 2022, primarily attributable to the expected improvement in the commercial vehicle market.
Sypris Electronics derives its revenue primarily from circuit card and full “box build” manufacturing, high reliability manufacturing and systems assembly and integration. Net revenue for Sypris Electronics decreased $1.3 million to $35.7 million in 2021. The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the completion of a program during the prior year. The follow-on to this program has been awarded and shipments resumed during the fourth quarter of 2021. Certain programs have also been impacted by material availability as receipts of a limited number of specific parts necessary to complete the build of the products were delayed or, in other instances, required us to resource and obtain alternative parts or use alternative suppliers. The order backlog for Sypris Electronics is expected to support a stable revenue rate during the 2022, but revenue could continue to be impacted by material availability.
Gross Profit. Sypris Technologies’ gross profit increased $2.0 million to $8.1 million in 2021 as compared to $6.2 million in the prior year. The net increase in volumes contributed to an increase in gross profit of $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the prior year. Partially offsetting this increase were inflationary cost increases, unfavorable product mix, increased operating supply spend, additional equipment maintenance expenses in support of the increase in revenue in 2021 and expected growth in 2022 and unfavorable labor productivity experienced in the first quarter of 2021 as new production workers were being trained and ongoing labor challenges associated with the COVID19 pandemic.
Sypris Electronics’ gross profit increased $0.5 million to $6.4 million as compared to $5.9 million in the prior year. The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of a favorable revenue mix during the year. Sypris Electronics secured favorable pricing from a customer on certain units shipped during 2021 on one of its multi-year programs. Additionally, a price increase was enacted during 2021 on another key multi-year program that will continue into 2022. Sypris Electronics also completed a program during 2021 that had component yield issues during the production phase of the program that negatively impacted margins.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense increased $0.6 million to $12.6 million in 2021 as compared to $12.0 million in 2020. The increase in selling general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of higher employee medical insurance claim expense and an increase in headcount to support the increase in volumes for Sypris Technologies. Selling, general and administrative expense decreased as a percentage of revenue to 12.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 14.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net, was $0.6 million in 2021 as compared to $0.5 million for 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized pension expense of $0.6 million. Foreign currency related expenses were not material for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company completed the sale of the Broadway Plant real estate for $1.7 million and other idle assets for $0.3 million and recognized net gains of $0.8 million (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The $0.8 million gain on disposal was offset by a loss on the abandonment of assets of $0.6 million and pension expense of $0.7 million. Foreign currency related expenses were not material for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Forgiveness of PPP Loan and related interest.  On June 28, 2021, the Company received notice from BMO that BMO had received confirmation from the SBA that the application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan had been approved. The loan forgiveness request in the amount of $3.6 million was applied to the Company’s entire outstanding PPP Loan balance with BMO. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan and accrued interest in the amount of $3.6 million.
Income Taxes. The 2021 income tax provision consists of current tax expense of $0.1 million and deferred tax expense of $1.0 million. The 2020 income tax provision consists of current tax expense of $0.1 million and a deferred tax benefit of $3.1 million. The current tax expense in 2021 and 2020 includes taxes paid by our Mexican subsidiary and domestic state income taxes and adjustments. The 2020 deferred tax benefit includes a $3.7 million benefit from the change in the valuation allowance for our Mexican subsidiary, partially offset by net changes in the foreign deferred tax assets during the year.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined separately for each tax jurisdiction in which we conduct our operations or otherwise incur taxable income or losses. The Company evaluates its deferred tax position on a quarterly basis and valuation allowances are provided as necessary. During this evaluation, the Company reviews its forecast of income in conjunction with other positive and negative evidence surrounding the realizability of its deferred tax assets to determine if a valuation allowance is needed. Based on its current forecast, the Company believes it will have sufficient future taxable income to realize the deferred tax assets recorded by its Mexican subsidiary. Therefore, the Company reversed its valuation allowance recorded in prior years against certain Mexican net deferred tax assets and recognized an income tax benefit of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Based on its current forecast, the Company has established a valuation allowance against all U.S. deferred tax assets. Until an appropriate level and characterization of profitability is attained, the Company expects to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on its net deferred tax assets related to future U.S. tax benefits. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, an adjustment to reduce the valuation allowance would increase net income in the period that such determination is made.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Paycheck Protection Program. As described above, the Company secured the PPP Loan under the CARES Act during the second quarter of 2020. Proceeds from the PPP Loan were used to retain workers and maintain payroll and make lease and utility payments. The PPP Loan was evidenced by a promissory note in favor of BMO, as lender, with a principal amount of $3.6 million that bears interest at a fixed annual rate of 1.00%.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company applied for forgiveness of the PPP Loan, with the amount which may be forgiven equal to the sum of payroll costs, covered rent and mortgage obligations, and covered utility payments incurred by the Company during the 24-week period beginning upon receipt of funds from the PPP Loan, subject to limitations and calculated in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act.
On June 28, 2021, the Company received notice from BMO that BMO had received confirmation from the SBA that the application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan had been approved. The loan forgiveness request in the amount of $3.6 million was applied to the Company’s entire outstanding PPP Loan balance with BMO. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP Loan and accrued interest in the amount of $3.6 million.
Cash Balance. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $11.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which $5.5 million was held in jurisdictions outside of the U.S. that, if repatriated, could result in withholding taxes. We expect existing cash and cash flows from operations to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities, such as capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months and beyond. Significant changes from our current forecasts, including, but not limited to: (i) meaningful shortfalls in our projected revenues, (ii) unexpected costs or expenses, and/or (iii) operating difficulties which cause unexpected delays in scheduled shipments, could require us to seek additional funding or force us to make further reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Material Cash Requirements
Gill Family Capital Management Note. The Company has received the benefit of cash infusions from GFCM in the form of secured promissory note obligations totaling $6.5 million in principal as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (the “Note”). GFCM is an entity controlled by the Company’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Jeffrey T. Gill and one of our directors, R. Scott Gill. GFCM, Jeffrey T. Gill and R. Scott Gill are significant beneficial stockholders of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, our principal commitment under the Note was $2.5 million due on April 1, 2023, $2.0 million on April 1, 2024 and the balance on April 1, 2026. Interest on the Note is reset on April 1 of each year, at the greater of 8.0% or 500 basis points above the five-year Treasury note average during the preceding 90-day period, in each case, payable quarterly. The Note allows for up to an 18-month deferral of payment for up to 60% of the interest due on the portion of the notes maturing in April of 2023 and 2024. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company provided notice to GFCM of its intention to elect to defer the specified portion of the interest payments due beginning on April 6, 2020. All accrued but unpaid interest was paid on January 4, 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company amended its secured promissory note obligation with GFCM to: (i) extend the maturity dates by one year for $2.5 million of the obligation from April 1, 2022 to April 1, 2023; and (ii) extend the allowance for up to an 18-month deferral of payment for up to 60% of the interest due on the notes maturing in April of 2023 and 2024. All other terms of the Note, as amended, remain in place. The Note provides for a first security interest in substantially all of the Company’s assets, including those in Mexico (see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Finance Lease Obligations. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $4.5 million outstanding under finance lease obligations for both property and machinery and equipment at its Sypris Technologies locations with maturities through 2025 and a weighted average interest rate of 8.5%.
Equipment Financing Obligations. As of December, 2021, the Company had $1.2 million outstanding under equipment financing facilities, with effective interest rates ranging from 4.4% to 8.1% and payments due through 2026.
Purchase Commitments. We had purchase commitments totaling approximately $14.7 million at December 31, 2021, primarily for inventory.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $4.2 million in 2021, as compared to $3.6 million in 2020. The aggregate increase in accounts receivable in 2021 resulted in a usage of cash of $1.3 million as a result of the increase in revenue for Sypris Technologies and an early payment by a customer at the end of 2020. The increase in inventory in 2021 resulted in a usage of cash of $14.0 million. The increase in inventory is primarily in support of new programs for Sypris Electronics which are expected to drive increased revenue in 2022. Sypris Electronics received prepayments from customers to fund the majority of the increase in inventory during 2021. The customer prepayments to fund the purchase of specific program inventory are recognized as contract liabilities and are the primary component of the increase in accrued and other liabilities that provided a source of cash of $11.1 million during 2021. The increased inventory buy also contributed to an increase in accounts payable, providing a source of cash of $5.3 million in 2021.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $2.8 million in 2021 as compared to net cash provided of $0.4 million in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December, 31, 2021 was comprised of capital expenditures of $2.8 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December, 31, 2020 includes proceeds of $2.0 million from the sale of idle assets by Sypris Technologies during the period partially offset by capital expenditures of $1.5 million.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.3 million in 2021 as compared to net cash provided of $2.7 million in 2020. Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 included principal payments on finance lease and equipment financing obligations of $0.7 million and payments of $0.6 million for minimum statutory tax withholdings on stock-based compensation. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 included proceeds of $3.6 million under the PPP Loan, as described above, partially offset by finance lease payments of $0.7 million and payments of $0.1 million for minimum statutory tax withholdings on stock-based compensation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption and effects on our results of operations and financial condition.