ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITIONS AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction the audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis here and throughout the Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including but not limited to, risks described in the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
Overview of the Company’s Subsidiaries
The Company is a technology company focused on Ethereum mining and the Ethereum blockchain and information technology solutions primarily in the public sector segments including federal, state and local governments. The Company has two wholly owned subsidiaries: TTM Digital Assets & Technologies, Inc. (“TTM Digital”) and Sysorex Government Services, Inc. (“SGS”).
TTM Digital
TTM Digital is a digital asset technology and mining company that owns and operates a large number of specialized cryptocurrency mining processors and is currently focused on the Ethereum blockchain ecosystem. Following the Merger, the business of TTM Digital has become a business segment of the Company.
TTM Digital was originally formed as a Delaware limited liability company on June 28, 2017, under the name of TTM Ventures LLC. Thereafter, on March 30, 2021, it filed a certificate of conversion to a non-Delaware entity with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware together with Articles of Conversion and Articles of Incorporation with the Nevada Secretary of State filed on the same date. As a result, of such conversion, TTM Digital has become a Nevada corporation under the name of “TTM Digital Assets & Technologies, Inc.”
In the fall of 2021, the Company made the decision to divest certain mining equipment and the data center of the TTM Digital reporting unit (“TTM Assets”) and commenced discussions with a third party to execute an asset sale in the spring of 2022. . On March 24, 2022, Company executed with a third party an agreement which includes certain binding and non-binding provisions. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company and the third party agreed to certain terms related to the Company’s sale of approximately 75% of its Ethereum mining assets and certain associated real property. The TTM Assets to be sold will not include the Company’s Ether funds generated prior to and held at Closing and any graphics processing units or associated assets maintained and operated by the Company at a co-located facility in North Carolina. The definitive terms of the sale of TTM Assets will be set forth in definitive transaction agreements (the “Definitive Documentation”) to be executed by the parties.
The Closing of the TTM Asset sale transaction (the “Closing”) shall occur, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the Closing conditions set forth in Definitive Documentation no later than May 24, 2022, unless mutually extended in writing by the parties, subject to the parties’ meeting certain Closing conditions to be agreed upon in the Definitive Documentation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Definitive Documentation shall also include an outside date that is not more than three (3) months after the date of the execution thereof unless mutually extended in writing by the parties to allow the parties to obtain regulatory approvals, required consents, and shareholders approvals.
The Definitive Documentation will include certain other terms and conditions which are customary in asset sale and real property sale agreements.
Even with the partial sale of TTM Assets, the Company intends to stay in the blockchain industry. The Company will continue to mine Ethereum and through the Ethereum blockchain expand into decentralized applications (dApps), targeting decentralized financing (DeFi), and Non-fungible tokens (NFTs). Through expansion within this space, Sysorex will develop intellectual property that becomes Company assets. Our plan is to target the largest potential customer, the U.S. Government, by developing decentralized solutions that reduces costs, increases security, and expands transparency using blockchain technology. On March 9, 2022, President Biden issued the “Executive Order on Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets. This executive order provides the framework for U.S. Congress to establish laws and regulations around blockchain technology.
Sysorex Government Services
SGS is a provider of information technology solutions from multiple vendors, including hardware products, software, services, including warranty and maintenance support, offered through our dedicated sales force, ecommerce channels, existing federal contracts and service team. Since our founding, we have served our customers by offering products and services from key industry vendors such as Aruba, Cisco, Dell, GETAC, Lenovo, Microsoft, Panasonic, Samsung, Symantec, VMware and others. We provide our customers with comprehensive solutions incorporating leading products and services across a variety of technology practices and platforms such as cyber, cloud, networking, security, and mobility. We utilize our professional services, consulting services and partners to develop and implement these solutions. Our sales and marketing efforts in collaboration with our vendor partners, allow us to reach multiple customer public sector segments including federal, state and local governments, as well as educational institutions.
The financial statements present the consolidated results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of Sysorex and its subsidiaries. These financial statements were prepared on a consolidated basis because the operations were under common control. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated between the consolidated entities.
Basis of Presentation
In connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 4 of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Known Trends or Uncertainties
TTM Digital has an evolving business model which is subject to various uncertainties. As digital assets and blockchain technology become more widely utilized on a mass scale, we anticipate that the services and products associated with the technologies will continue to evolve. To successfully continue in the industry, our business model may need to evolve to reflect the trends of the industry. Over time, we may modify aspects of our business model relating to our strategy. We cannot offer any assurance that we will be successful or that the future industry or business operation changes will not result in harm to our business. We may not be able to manage growth effectively, which could damage our reputation, limit our growth and negatively affect our operating results. Management cannot provide any assurances that we will identify all emerging trends and growth opportunities in this business sector, and we may lose out on those opportunities to current or future competitors. As anticipated, any such circumstances could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, or operations. There is a possibility of digital asset mining algorithms transitioning to proof-of-stake validation and other mining-related risks, which could make us less competitive and ultimately adversely affect our business and our ability to generate revenues. When and if Ethereum switches to “proof-of-stake” our GPUs will no longer be able to mine Ethereum. TTM Digital will mine other coins with the GPUs. At that time, instead of mining with GPUs, the amount of Ethereum accumulated in our treasury will be used to stake to the network in the “proof-of-stake model” Proof-of-stake will earn the Company rewards based on the amount of Ethereum you have. Additionally, on August 5, 2021, the London Hard Fork protocol (EIP 1559) went into effect which includes changes in Ethereum’s handling of transaction fees. EIP 1559 improves the efficiency of commissions, mainly on the user side. At the block level, EIP 1’59's scheme allows the base fee to vary by up to 12.5% from block to block, allowing users to predict and pay a relatively accurate fee based on the rules to improve the user experience. This comes at the expense of Ethereum miners by not providing the base fee as part of the block reward for mining a block. EIP 1559 is designed to make Ethereum less inflationary by taking or “burning” ETH out of circulation, which is the excess ETH leftover from the lower transaction fee. These changes could have an impact on the Company’s future potential Ethereum revenue stream due to less Ethereum being distributed per mined block, if not offset by an increase in the value of ETH and/or additional transaction tipping, the process by which a user can pay an additional amount to ensure a transaction is processed very quickly.
SGS experiences variability in our net sales and operating results on a quarterly basis as a result of many factors. SGS experiences some seasonal trends in our sales of technology solutions to government and educational institutions. For example, the fiscal year-ends of U.S. Public Sector customers vary for those in the federal government space and those in the state and local government and educational institution (“SLED”) space. SGS generally sees an increase in our second quarter sales related to customers in the U.S. SLED sector and in our third quarter sales related to customers in the federal government space as these customers close out their budgets for their fiscal year (June 30th and December 31st, respectively). SGS may also experience variability in our gross profit and gross profit margin as a result of changes in the various vendor programs we participate in and its effect on the amount of vendor consideration we receive from a particular vendor or their authorized distributor/wholesaler, may be impacted by a number of events outside of our control.
Material Changes
On April 8, 2021, the Company, TTM Digital, “MergerSub”, entered into the Merger Agreement. Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the parties agreed that Sysorex would acquire TTM Digital by way of a reverse triangular merger, subject to certain closing conditions. On the Effective Time, the closing conditions delineated in the Merger Agreement were satisfied and the Merger closed. At the Effective Time, the MergerSub was merged with and into TTM Digital with TTM Digital surviving the Merger.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the shareholders of TTM Digital received a right to receive an aggregate of 124,218,268 Merger Shares in exchange for their shares of TTM Digital. Simultaneously, upon the issuance of the Merger Shares to the TTM Digital shareholders, Sysorex was issued all of the authorized capital of TTM Digital and TTM Digital became a wholly owned subsidiary of Sysorex. The Merger resulted in a change of control, with the shareholders of TTM Digital receiving that number of Merger Shares equal to approximately eighty percent (80%) of the outstanding shares of capital stock of Sysorex including the effect of the Sysorex Recapitalization as discussed in TTM Digital Reverse Merger and Sysorex Recapitalization.
Effective on April 1, 2021, TTM Digital entered into an Asset Contribution and Exchange Agreement to acquire 3,130 GPUs, and thereafter a Purchase Order on April 1, 2021, for a lease-to-buy financing arrangement to acquire 1,344 GPUs with CoreWeave, with both CoreWeave agreements closing on or after April 1, 2021. In connection with the Contribution and Exchange Agreement, TTM Digital issued equity to the sellers representing 28.65% of the pre-merger equity outstanding for TTM Digital and agreed to installment payments of $2.2 million over 180 days subject to acceleration based on the completion of certain corporate events. Additionally, the parties entered a service agreement on the same date providing for installation and configuration, operation, and management of the mining systems of TTM Digital by CoreWeave. It includes the use of the management software to monitor, maintain, troubleshoot, and communicate with the hosting service providers as well as certain physical repairs. As part of the arrangement, the Company made an initial down payment of $100,000 which was applied to future invoices. The ongoing fee is determined based on the number of specific mining systems under the Service Agreement. Based on the number and type of units at the arrangement’s inception, monthly costs are expected to be $32,400. All third-party software costs associated with the Services and operation of the equipment will be passed through to the Company. The initial term of the agreement expires on June 30, 2022 and shall automatically renew thereafter for successive one (1)-year terms unless either party terminates within sixty (60) days of the then current term.
On July 7, 2021, the Company consummated the initial closing of a private placement offering (the “Offering”) pursuant to the terms and conditions of a Securities Purchase Agreement. At the initial closing the Company sold the purchasers (i) 12.5% Original Issue Discount Convertible Debentures in an aggregate principal amount of $9,990,000 and (ii) warrants to purchase up to 3,534,751 shares of common stock of the Company. The Company received total gross proceeds of $8,880,000 taking into account the 12.5% discount before deducting placement agent fees and expenses of approximately $913,000. The Debentures mature on July 7, 2022, subject to a three-month extension upon mutual agreement of the Company and the holder. We believe we are currently in default under the terms of our secured convertible notes.
On August 13, 2021, the Company consummated the second closing of the offering pursuant to the same terms and conditions of the Securities Purchase Agreement dated July 7, 2021. At the second closing, the Company sold the purchasers (i) 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Debentures in an aggregate principal amount of $3,976,875 and (ii) warrants to purchase up to 1,862,279 shares of common stock of the Company. The Company received a total of $3,535,000 in gross proceeds following the second closing taking into account the 12 % discount before deducting placement agent fees and expenses of approximately $354,000. The Debentures mature on August 13, 2022, subject to a three-month extension upon mutual agreement of the Company and the holder. We believe we are currently in default under the terms of our secured convertible notes.
On September 26, 2021, the Company acquired a 5% minority interest in Style Hunter, Inc. (“Hunt”). The Hunt issued 613,723 shares of its common stock: par value $0.0001 per share for $0.81470 per share for a total price of $500,000. The Company shall have a one-time option to purchase an additional $500,000 of the Common Stock (“Option”) on or before the 360-day anniversary of Closing Date as follows: (i) if the Buyer exercises its Option prior to the 90-day anniversary of Closing Date the per-share purchase price of the additional shares of Common Stock (the “Option Price”) shall be $0.81470 (a $10,000,000 Company valuation), (ii) if the Buyer exercises its Option after the 90-day anniversary of Closing Date, but prior to the 180-day anniversary of Closing Date, the Option Price will be $1.22200 (a $15,000,000 Company valuation), or (iii) if the Buyer exercises its option after the 180-day anniversary of Closing the Option Price will be $2.03670 (a $25,000,000 Company valuation).
On November 2, 2021, the Company through a wholly owned subsidiary of TTM Digital executed a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (“Up North Agreement”) with BWP Holdings, LLC (“BWP”) whereby the Company acquired the remaining 50.0% membership interest (“Transferred Membership Interest”) in Up North Hosting LLC (“Up North”) that it did not already own to bring its ownership in Up North to 100.0% (“UNH Acquisition”). In addition to the Transferred membership Interest the Company acquired certain data mining equipment of BWP (“Bitworks Equipment” and collectively the “Acquisition”) that was resident in the Up North data center facility. Total transaction consideration paid for the acquired interests of Up North and the Bitworks Equipment were $1.0 million and the issuance of 1.0 million shares of restricted common stock, $0.00001 par value of the Company.
In the fall of 2021, the Company made the decision to divest certain mining equipment and the data center of the TTM Assets and commenced discussions with a third party to execute an asset sale in the spring of 2022. On March 24, 2022, the Company executed with a third party an agreement which includes certain binding and non-binding provisions. Pursuant to the agreement, the Company and the third party agreed to certain terms related to the Company’s sale of approximately 75% of its Ethereum mining assets and certain associated real property. The TTM Assets to be sold will not include the Company’s Ether funds generated prior to and held at Closing (as hereinafter defined) and any graphics processing units or associated assets maintained and operated by the Company at a co-located facility in North Carolina. The definitive terms of the sale of TTM Assets will be set forth in definitive transaction agreements (the “Definitive Documentation”) to be executed by the parties.
The Closing of the TTM Asset sale transaction (the “Closing”) shall occur, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the Closing conditions set forth in Definitive Documentation no later than May 24, 2022, unless mutually extended in writing by the parties, subject to the parties’ meeting certain Closing conditions to be agreed upon in the Definitive Documentation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Definitive Documentation shall also include an outside date that is not more than three (3) months after the date of the execution thereof unless mutually extended in writing by the parties to allow the parties to obtain regulatory approvals, required consents, and shareholders approvals.
Summary of TTM Digital Mining Result
The following is a discussion on continuing and discontinued operations is discussed further in the following sections, Liquidity and Capital Resources as of December 31, 2021, and 2020.
The following table presents the roll forward of digital asset activity from both continuing and discontinued operations during the respective periods:
* Of the $12.5 million revenue from mining, $4.4 million in continuing operations and $8.1 million in discontinued operations. The $1.8 million in 2020 is included in discontinued operations.
Discussion of Results of Operations of TTM Digital for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
For the year ending 2021, TTM Digital reported $12.5 million in revenues, ($4.4 million in continuing operations and $8.1 million in discontinued operations). TTM Digital reported $1.3 million in mining costs ($0.5 in continuing operations and $0.8 million in discontinued operations), $0.2 million in sales and marketing costs (continuing operations), $6.3 million in general and administrative costs (continuing operations), ($6.0 million in continuing operations and $0.3 million in discontinued operations), $0.3 million in management fees (continuing operations), $4.1 million in amortization and depreciation costs ($2.5 million in continuing operations and $1.6 million in discontinued operations), $3.2 million of fixed asset impairment ( continuing operations), $0.7 million of digital asset impairment (continuing operations), $6.6 million in loss contingency on debt default (continuing operations), $22.0 million in merger charges (continuing operations), $2.0 million in restructuring fees (continuing operations), $0.08 in other net income and expenses ($0.012 million in other income from continuing operations and $0.1 million in other expenses in discontinued operations), resulting in a net loss from operations of $13.3 million ($18.5 million net loss from continuing operations and $5.2 million net income from discontinued operations).
For the year ending 2020, TTM reported its results as discontinued operations. TTM Digital reported $1.8 million in revenues. TTM Digital reported $0.4 million in mining costs, $0.1 million in management fees, $0.8 million in depreciation costs, resulting in a net income from operations of $0.5 million.
TTM Digital margins are affected by new and existing competitors in the digital asset mining industry. As an increasing number of new miners enter the Ethereum network, and as existing miners acquire additional mining equipment, the total rewards per miner decrease and the difficulty to obtain mining equipment increases. Margins are also affected by increases in natural gas prices. At times of peak usage on the power grid, and in times of inclement weather, natural gas prices tend to rise. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2021, there were significant merger and acquisition related costs due to the triangular reverse merger with Sysorex Inc.
Discussion of Results of Operations of SGS for the year ended December 31, 2021
SGS operates on the resale of technology products and associated services related to those products. These products are resold through several contracts with the federal government in SGS’ portfolio of contracts. SGS suppliers include wholesale distributors of major technology products, small niche product suppliers, services from specialized partners, and services from SGS’ own resources.
The lifecycle of an order includes: solicitation of a requirement form the customer, quotation or proposal in response to the solicitation, evaluation of quote or proposal by the customer, awarding an order to SGS based on favorable evaluation, customer order is then entered in as a sales order, the SGS system then issues purchase orders to suppliers, suppliers delivers the goods to the customer and performs any services necessary to complete order obligations, customer provides acceptance, and SGS issues an invoice to the customer. Once a customer accepts the invoice the dollar amount is guaranteed and backed by the U.S. Treasury. Post invoice obligation may include warranty, maintenance, and telephonic support either directly by SGS or through the OEM directly. From acceptance until the period of performance is completed (warranty, maintenance, and/or telephonic support), SGS is responsible for the operability of the delivered goods. Once the period of performance is completed, the customer will contact SGS to complete a contract closeout.
For the year ending 2021, the SGS reported $8.3 million in revenues. This includes approximately 70% of revenues coming from the Company’s top two customers. SGS reported $6.9 million in product and services costs, $0.8 million in sales and marketing costs, $3.4 million in general and administrative costs, $0.4 million in amortization costs, resulting in a loss from operations of $3.2 million. See Note 4 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for discussion of the accounting treatment under ASC 606 included in the notes to the financial statements. Based on the two contracts, the Company acted as the agent and is required to record the costs against the related revenues, resulting in a reduced revenue line, offset by a reduced cost of goods sold line in the financial statements.
SGS margins are affected by the diversity of our supplier. Supplier diversity allows companies such as SGS to seek better cost through competition of multiple suppliers of the same product. Currently, SGS does not have the supplier diversity that is required to increase margin. SGS is on a prepay basis with many suppliers and this requires SGS to finance cash advances to suppliers from our finance source, South Star credit facility. Our financial source charges high fees and interest, which also affects our net margin.
Liquidity and Capital Resources as of December 31, 2021
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an approximate cash balance of $0.6 million, working capital deficit of approximately $13.2 million, and an accumulated deficit of approximately $40.9 million. The aforementioned factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the next twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
The Company does not believe that its capital resources as of December 31, 2021, its ability to mine cryptocurrency, availability on the SGS SouthStar credit facility to finance purchase orders and invoices, reauthorization of key vendors and credit limitation improvements will be sufficient to fund planned operations. As a result, the Company will need additional funds to support its obligations for the next twelve months. The Company is exploring a number of possible solutions to its financing needs, including efforts to raise additional capital as needed, through the issuance of equity, equity-linked or debt securities, as well as possible transactions with other companies, strategic partnerships, and other mechanisms for addressing our financial condition. On March 24, 2022, Company executed an agreement with a third party to certain terms related to the Company’s sale of approximately 75% of its Ethereum mining assets and certain associated real property which is expected to close on May 24, 2022. There can be no assurance that the Company will consummate the sale.
Our capital resources and operating results, continuing and discontinued operations, as of and through December 31, 2021, consist of the:
1) An overall working capital deficit of $13.2 million,
2) Cash and cash equivalents of $0.6 million, of
3) Net cash used in operating activities of $(8.5) million,
4) Net cash provided by investing activities of $2.2 million, and
5) Net cash provided in financing activities of $6.9 million.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $(8.5) million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash was consumed from operations by the net loss of $(46.0) million, plus non-cash and one-time items of $41.3 million, consisting primarily of merger charges of $22.0 million, non-employee compensation costs of $2.6 million, in shares issued in exchange for services, restructuring fees of $2.0 million, loss contingency for debt default of $6.6 million, impairment of mining assets of $3.2 million, impairment of digital assets of $0.7 million, and depreciation and amortization of $4.2 million and cash flows provided by discontinued operations of $1.3 million, offset by changes in assets and liabilities of $(5.1) million.
Investing Activities:
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $2.2 million, primarily driven from proceeds from the sale of digital assets of $3.7 million, offset by investing cash flows from discontinued operations of $1.5 million.
Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $6.9 million. The net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was from the repayment of loans of $4.3 million and offset by proceeds received for convertible debt of $12.4 million and payments for convertible debt transaction costs of $1.2 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources as of December 31, 2021, Compared to December 31, 2020
The Company’s net cash flow used in operating, investing and financing activities, continuing and discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, and certain balances as of the end of those periods are as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities:
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $(8,473). Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted of the following (in thousands):
The non-cash income and expenses of $41,257 consisted of (in thousands):
The net proceeds of cash due to changes in operating assets and liabilities totaled $(3,719) and consisted of the following (in thousands):
Operating cash flows - discontinued operations of approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily driven by net income of $5.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.6 million and a gain on sale of mining equipment of $0.2 million, equity in earnings of equity method investments of $0.1 million, offset by decreases in digital assets of $6.1 million and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $11.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $(0.5) million were primary driven by a net loss from continuing operations of $0.1 million, decreases in digital assets of $1.0 million offset by operating cash flows - discontinued operations of $0.6 million.
Operating cash flows - discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, is primarily driven by net income of $0.6 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.8 million, offset by decreases in digital assets of $0.7 million and a decrease in accrued liabilities of $0.1 million.
Investing Activities:
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $2.2 million, primarily driven from proceeds from the sale of digital assets of $3.6 million, offset by investing cash flows - discontinued operations of $1.4 million.
Investing cash flows - discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily driven by purchase of mining equipment of $0.5 million, UpNorth business combination of $0.3 million, investments in UpNorth of $0.1 million and an investment in Style Hunter of $0.5 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $0.03 million, primarily driven from proceeds from the sale of digital assets of $0.55 million and investing cash flow - discontinued operations of $0.6 million.
Investing cash flows - discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, is primarily driven by purchase of mining equipment of $0.9 million offset by proceeds from the sale of mining equipment of $0.3 million.
Financing Activities:
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, of $6.9 million was from the proceeds received for convertible debt of $12.4 million and offset by the payments for convertible debt transaction costs of $1.2 million and the repayment of loans of $4.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $0.6 million, primarily driven by proceeds received from the issuance of members’ interest.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We believe the following accounting estimates to be the most critical estimates we used in preparing our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Digital Assets
Digital assets, (predominantly Ethereum) are included in current assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The classification of digital assets as a current asset has been made after the Company’s consideration of the consistent daily trading volume on cryptocurrency exchange markets, there are no limitations or restrictions on Company’s ability to sell Ethereum, and the pattern of actual sales of Ethereum by the Company. Cryptocurrencies purchased are recorded at cost and cryptocurrencies awarded to the Company through its mining activities are accounted for in connection with the Company’s revenue recognition policy.
Digital assets held are accounted for as intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment annually, or more frequently, when events or changes in circumstances occur indicating that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived asset is impaired. Impairment exists when the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is measured using the quoted price of the digital asset at the time its fair value is being measured. In testing for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. If it is determined that it is not more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative impairment test is not necessary. If the Company concludes otherwise, it is required to perform a quantitative impairment test. To the extent an impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment losses is not permitted. The Company recorded a $0.7 million impairment charge during the year ended December 31, 2021. No impairment was taken during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company accounts for its gains or losses in accordance with the first in first out (FIFO) method of accounting. The Company recognized realized gains (losses) through the sale and disbursement of digital assets during the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 of $0.1 million and $0.04 million, respectively.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
Management reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. An impairment loss of $3.3 million was recorded for long-lived assets during the period ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized:
● Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
● Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
● Determination of the transaction price
● Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
● Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Mining Revenue
TTM Digital has entered into mining pools with the operators to provide computing power to the mining pool. The Company is entitled to a fractional share of the fixed cryptocurrency award the mining pool operator receives (less transaction fees to the mining pool operator) for successfully adding a block to the blockchain. The Company’s fractional share is based on the proportion of computing power the Company contributed to the mining pool operator to the total computing power contributed by all mining pool participants in solving the current algorithm. Providing computing power in digital asset transaction verification services is an output of the Company’s ordinary activities. The provision of such computing power is the only performance obligation in the Company’s arrangement with mining pool operators The transaction consideration the Company receives, if any, is non-cash consideration. The transaction price of the Company’s share of the cryptocurrency award is measured at fair value on the date received, which is not materially different than the fair value at the time the Company has earned the award from the mining pool. The consideration is all variable under the definition within ASC 606. Because it is not probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur, the consideration is constrained until the Company successfully places a block and the Company receives confirmation of the consideration it will receive, at which time revenue is recognized. There is no significant financing component in these transactions.
Hardware and Software Revenue Recognition
SGS is a primary resale channel for a large group of vendors and suppliers, including original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”), software publishers and wholesale distributors.
The Company accounts for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are established, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. The Company evaluates the following indicators amongst others when determining whether it is acting as a principal in the transaction and recording revenue on a gross basis: (i) the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide the specified product or service, (ii) the Company has inventory risk before the specified good or service has been transferred to a customer or after transfer of control to the customer and (iii) the Company has discretion in establishing the price for the specified good or service. If the terms of a transaction do not indicate the Company is acting as a principal in the transaction, then the Company is acting as an agent in the transaction and the associated revenues are recognized on a net basis.
The Company recognizes revenue once control has passed to the customer. The following indicators are evaluated in determining when control has passed to the customer: (i) the Company has a right to payment for the product or service, (ii) the customer has legal title to the product, (iii) the Company has transferred physical possession of the product to the customer, (iv) the customer has the significant risk and rewards of ownership of the product and (v) the customer has accepted the product. The Company’s products can be delivered to customers in a variety of ways, including (i) as physical product shipped from the Company’s warehouse, (ii) via drop-shipment by the vendor or supplier or (iii) via electronic delivery of keys for software licenses. The Company’s shipping terms typically specify F.O.B. destination.
The Company leverages drop-shipment arrangements with many of its vendors and suppliers to deliver products to its customers without having to physically hold the inventory at its warehouse. The Company is the principal in the transaction and recognizes revenue for drop-shipment arrangements on a gross basis.
The Company may provide integration of products from multiple vendors as a solution it sells to the customer. In this arrangement, the Company provides direct warranty to the customer with the Company’s own personnel as the customer requires warranty on the solution and not individual vendor products. This type of warranty is sold integral to the overall solution quoted to the customer. The Company considers these service-type warranties to be performance obligations of the principal from the underlying products that make up a solution and therefore is acting as a principal in the transaction and records revenue on a gross basis at the point of sale.
License and Maintenance Services Revenue Recognition
SGS provides a customized design and configuration solution for its customers and in this capacity resells hardware, software and other IT equipment license and maintenance services in exchange for fixed fees. The Company selects the vendors and sells the products and services, including maintenance services, that best fit the customer’s needs. For sales of maintenance services and warranties, the customer obtains control at the point in time that the services to be provided by a third-party vendor are purchased by the customer and therefore the Company’s performance obligation to provide the overall systems solution is satisfied at that time. The Company’s customers generally pay within 30 to 60 days from the receipt of a customer-approved invoice.
For resale of services, including maintenance services, warranties, and extended warranties, the Company is acting as an agent as the primary activity for those services are fulfilled by a third party. While the Company may facilitate and act as a first responder for these services, the third-party service providers perform the primary maintenance and warranty services for the customer. Therefore, the Company is not primarily responsible for performing these services and revenue is recorded on a net basis.
Professional Services Revenue Recognition
SGS’s professional services include fixed fee contracts. Fixed fees are paid monthly, in phases, or upon acceptance of deliverables. For fixed fee contracts, the Company recognizes revenue evenly over the service period using a time-based measure because the Company is providing continuous service. Because the Company’s contracts have an expected duration of one year or less, the Company has elected the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-50-14(a) to not disclose information about its remaining performance obligations. Anticipated losses are recognized as soon as they become known. For the year ended December 31, 2021, SGS did not incur any such losses. These amounts are based on known and estimated factors. Revenues from time and material or firm fixed price long-term and short-term contracts are derived principally with various United States government agencies.
Non-GAAP Financial information
EBITDA
EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before interest, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is used by our management as the matrix in which it manages the business. It is defined as EBITDA plus adjustments for other income or expense items, non-recurring items, and non-cash stock-based compensation.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021, was a gain of $ 3.8 million compared to a gain of $ 1.3 million for the prior year period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of continuing and discontinued operations net income/loss attributable to stockholders of Sysorex, which is our GAAP operating performance measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 (in thousands):
We have presented Adjusted EBITDA above because we believe it conveys useful information to investors regarding our operating results. We believe it provides an additional way for investors to view our operations, when considered with both our GAAP results and the reconciliation to net income (loss). By including this information, we can provide investors with a more complete understanding of our business. Specifically, we present Adjusted EBITDA as supplemental disclosure because of the following:
● we believe Adjusted EBITDA is a useful tool for investors to assess the operating performance of our business without the effect of interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and other non-cash items including stock based compensation, change in the fair value of shares to be issued, impairment of fixed assets and one-time charges including acquisition costs and the costs associated with public offerings; and
● we believe that it is useful to provide to investors a standard operating metric used by management to evaluate our operating performance.
Even though we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful for investors, it does have limitations as an analytical tool. Thus, we strongly urge investors not to consider this metric in isolation or as a substitute for net income (loss) and the other combined carve-out statement of operations data prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business or as a measure of performance in compliance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and providing Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency contracts. We do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements, please see the Recent Accounting Standards section of Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements, which is included in this Form 10-K in Item 1.