Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Sizzle Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated on October 12, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities.
Our sponsor is VO Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “sponsor”). The Registration Statement for the Company’s initial public offering was declared effective on November 3, 2021. On November 8, 2021, the Company consummated its initial public offering of 15,500,000 units at $10.00 per unit (which included a partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option), which is discussed in Note 3 and the sale of an aggregate of 770,000 shares at a price of $10.00 per private placement share in a private placement to the sponsor and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”) that closed simultaneously with the initial public offering. On November 8, 2021, the underwriter exercised 2,000,000 of the full 2,025,000 over-allotment option available to them and forfeited the remainder. Due to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, the initial stockholders forfeited 8,750 founder shares. Transaction costs amounted to $11,381,247 consisting of $2,700,000 of underwriting commissions, $8,150,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $531,247 of other cash offering costs.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 770,000 shares of common stock at a price of $10.00 per private placement share in a private placement to our sponsor and to Cantor, generating gross proceeds to us of $7,700,000. Of the total private placement shares sold, 722,750 shares were purchased by the sponsor and 47,250 shares were purchased by Cantor.
Following the closing of the initial public offering on November 8, 2021, $158,100,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds sold in the initial public offering and the proceeds of the sale of the private placement shares, was deposited in a trust account. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the trust account that may be released to the Company to pay its franchise and income tax obligations (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), the proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement shares will not be released from the trust account until the earliest of: (a) the completion of our initial business combination; (b) the redemption of any public shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our certificate of incorporation: (i) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of the public shares if we do not complete the initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of the initial public offering; or (ii) with respect to any other material provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity; and (c) the redemption of the public shares if we are unable to complete the initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of the initial public offering, subject to applicable law.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement shares, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a an initial business combination.
We will have up to 15 months from the closing of this offering to complete an initial business combination. If we have not completed an initial business combination by such date, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including any interest not previously released to us but net of taxes payable, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,046,646 in cash and a working capital of $1,079,831 (excluding franchise tax payable).
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 have been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $150,000, which was fully drawn down as of December 31, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the Company’s sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from filing the initial public offering. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Going Concern
The Company has until February 8, 2023, 15 months from the closing of the IPO, which happened on November 8, 2021, to consummate a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). It is uncertain that we will be able consummate a Business Combination within the Combination Period. If a Business Combination is not consummated within the Combination Period, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the authoritative guidance FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) Topic 2014-15, “Disclosure of Uncertainties About an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern”, management has determined that mandatory liquidation, and subsequent dissolution, should the Company be unable to complete a business combination, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 8, 2023.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from October 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement shares. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $888,941, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $897,298, offset by interest income on trust account of $ 8,357.
For the period from October 12, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,642, relating to formation and operating costs.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on the Nasdaq Global Market, we agreed to pay the sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying such monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement shares, EarlyBirdCapital, Inc.’s shares (“EBC Shares”) and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated November 8, 2021, requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the underwriters may not exercise their demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five and seven years after the effective date of the Registration Statement and may not exercise their demand rights on more than one occasion.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter had a 45-day option from the date of the initial public offering to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,025,000 additional units at the public offering price less the underwriting commissions to cover over-allotments, if any. On November 8, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised this option and purchased an additional 2,000,000 units and forfeited the remaining 25,000 available.
The underwriters received a cash underwriting discount of 2.0% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $2,700,000 (which is capped at $2,700,000 with the remaining $400,000 deferred to the close of the initial business combination with the rest of the deferred underwriting discount due to the underwriters’ partial over-allotment exercise). The underwriters will be entitled to a cash underwriting discount of 5.0% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $8,150,000 (inclusive of the $400,000 deferral noted above) upon consummation of the initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Offering costs consist of underwriter, accounting, filing and legal expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the initial public offering and were charged to temporary equity and stockholders’ equity (deficit) based on the underlying instruments’ relative fair value upon the completion of the initial public offering. If the initial public offering had proved to be unsuccessful, these deferred costs, as well as additional expenses to be incurred, would have been charged to operations.
Warrant Liability
We evaluated the public warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the public warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the public warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the public warrants will be recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the initial public offering) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). Our financial instruments are classified as either Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3. These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity (deficit). Our shares of common stock sold in the initial public offering feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of shares of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid-in capital, or in the absence of additional capital, in accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common Stock
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share, with one class being the redeemable shares and one class being the non-redeemable shares. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend for the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the redeemable common stock and the non-redeemable common stock by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.	
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.