Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to as “Talkspace,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us” refer to the business of Talkspace, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes contained in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our plans, estimates, and beliefs, which involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” sections and elsewhere in this Annual Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
As a healthcare company enabled by a purpose-built technology platform, Talkspace offers convenient and affordable access to a fully-credentialed network of highly qualified providers. We are a leading virtual behavioral health company and, since Talkspace’s founding in 2012, we have connected millions of patients, who we refer to as our members, with licensed mental health providers across a wide and growing spectrum of care through virtual counseling, psychotherapy and psychiatry. We created a purpose-built platform to address the vast, unmet and growing demand for mental health services of our members, serving our business-to-consumer (“B2C”) channel, comprised of individual consumers who subscribe directly to our platform, and our business-to-business (“B2B”) channel, comprised of large enterprise clients such as Google and Expedia and large health plans and employee assistance programs (“health plan clients”) such as Aetna, Cigna, Premera and Optum (collectively, our “clients”), who offer their employees and insured members access to our platform while their employer is under an active contract with Talkspace, or at in-network reimbursement rates, where applicable.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately 280,000 members were registered on our platform, as compared to approximately 200,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 56,000 active members receiving care through our B2C and B2B channels, including approximately 24,000 B2C active members, and approximately 69 million B2B eligible lives. We consider members “active” (i) in the case of our B2C members, commencing on the date such member initiates contact with a provider on our platform until the term of their monthly, quarterly or bi-annual subscription plan expires, unless terminated early, and (ii) in the case of our B2B members, if such members have engaged on our platform during the preceding 25 days, such as sending a text, video or audio message to, or participating in a video call with, a provider, completing a satisfaction or progress report survey or signing up for our platform. While a growth in active members typically highlights strong engagement with our members, not all active members are associated with revenue in that particular period. We consider B2B lives “eligible” if such persons are eligible to receive treatment on the Talkspace platform, in the case of our enterprise clients, while their employer is under an active contract with Talkspace, or, in the case of health plan clients, at an agreed upon reimbursement rate through insurance under an employee assistance program or other network behavioral health paid benefit program. There may be instances where a person may be covered through multiple solutions, typically through behavioral health plans and employee assistance programs. In these instances, the person is counted each time they are covered in the B2B eligible lives calculation, which may cause this amount to reflect a higher number of members than we actually serve. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our clinicians completed 273,700 B2B sessions related to members covered under our health plan clients, as compared to 114,600 completed B2B sessions for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The behavioral health market has traditionally been underserved for a number of reasons, including as a result of inadequate access, a limited universe of qualified providers, high cost and social stigma. We believe virtual is the ideal modality for mental health treatment because it removes or reduces these burdens associated with traditional face-to-face mental health services by improving convenience through 24/7 access to our platform, providing more accessible entry level price points, and reducing associated stigmas by promoting transparency, increasing ease of access and preserving privacy. Our platform connects consumers in need, including many of whom have never had an opportunity to benefit from high-quality behavioral healthcare, with experienced providers across all 50 U.S. states.
Through our psychotherapy offerings, our licensed therapists and counselors treat mental health conditions in over 21 specializations, such as depression, anxiety, trauma and other human challenges. Through our psychiatry offerings, our board-certified psychiatrists and prescription-eligible nurse practitioners treat a higher acuity patient demographic, including those who may have pharmacological needs. Like the traditional face-to-face models, Talkspace providers are able to treat a wide range of mental health conditions, such as schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, bipolar disorders and depression, including through prescription medication and management from psychiatrists, up and until the point that the provider, in their discretion, feels it
prudent to refer the member to a face-to-face psychiatrist to address potential needs for “controlled substances” under the federal Controlled Substances Act, which generally prohibits the prescribing and dispensing of controlled substances via telehealth without performing an in-person examination.
While optimizing consumers’ access to care, we believe our platform also provides benefits to providers through expanded reach, steady access to member leads, reduced administrative burdens, more efficient time utilization and data-driven insights. These features, together with continuous training and professional growth opportunities we offer, empower providers to deliver what we believe will enable an enhanced care journey, higher member lifetime engagement, meaningful outcomes and greater margins when compared to face-to-face treatment.
Recent Events
On January 12, 2021, HEC, entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of January 12, 2021 (the “Merger Agreement”), with Groop Internet Platform, Inc. (“Old Talkspace”), Tailwind Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of HEC (“First Merger Sub”), and Tailwind Merger Sub II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Second Merger Sub”).
On June 22, 2021, as contemplated by the Merger Agreement, First Merger Sub merged with and into Old Talkspace (the “First Merger”) with Old Talkspace surviving the First Merger, and immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, Old Talkspace merged with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of HEC (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Business Combination”). In connection with the Business Combination, HEC filed the Certificate of Incorporation and changed its name to “Talkspace, Inc.”
See Note 3, “Business Combination” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
COVID-19 Update
While the global crisis resulting from the spread of COVID-19 has not had a negative impact on our business and results of operations so far, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, and we continue to closely monitor how the COVID-19 pandemic is impacting our business. Thus far, we believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has been a contributing factor to the acceleration of growth of our business. However, we cannot determine the extent to which our results of operations and overall financial performance have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. While our financial condition and results of operations were not negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact of the pandemic on our future growth, results of operations, cash flow and financial condition is unknown, and we are unable to accurately predict such future impact. There can be no assurance that the circumstances that have accelerated the growth of our business stemming from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will continue over time whether during or after the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Segments
We operate our business in a single segment and as one reporting unit, which is how our chief operating decision maker (who is our interim chief executive officer) reviews financial performance and allocates resources.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor the following key metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions. We believe the following metrics are useful in evaluating our business:
Active Members: We consider members “active” (i) in the case of our B2C members, commencing on the date such member initiates contact with a provider on our platform until the term of their monthly, quarterly or bi-annual subscription plan expires, unless terminated early, and (ii) in the case of our B2B members, if such members have engaged on our platform during the preceding 25 days, such as sending a text, video or audio message to, or participating in a video call with, a provider, completing a satisfaction or progress report survey or signing up for our platform. While a growth in active members typically highlights strong engagement with our members, not all active members are associated with revenue in that particular period.
B2B Eligible Lives: We consider B2B lives “eligible” if such persons are eligible to receive treatment on the Talkspace platform, in the case of our enterprise clients, while their employer is under an active contract with Talkspace, or, in the case of health plan clients, at an agreed upon reimbursement rate through insurance under an employee assistance program or other network behavioral health paid benefit program. There may be instances where a person may be covered through multiple solutions, typically through behavioral health plans and employee assistance programs. In these instances, the person is counted each time they are covered in the B2B eligible lives calculation, which may cause this amount to reflect a higher number of members than we actually serve.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our financial results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, is useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that this non-GAAP financial measure, when taken together with the corresponding GAAP financial measures, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. We believe that the use of adjusted EBITDA is helpful to our investors as it is a metric used by management in assessing the health of our business and our operating performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measure as a tool for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for this non-GAAP financial measure to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review our GAAP financial measure and the reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a key performance measure that our management uses to assess our operating performance. Because adjusted EBITDA facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use this measure for business planning purposes and in evaluating acquisition opportunities.
We calculate adjusted EBITDA as net loss adjusted to exclude (i) interest and other expenses (income), net, (ii) tax expense, (iii) depreciation and amortization (iv) stock-based compensation expense and (v) certain non-recurring expenses, where applicable.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA from the most comparable GAAP measure, net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2021, financial income, net, primarily consisted of $36.0 million in gains resulting from the revaluation of warrant liabilities, partially offset by $4.2 million in warrant issuance costs in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination.
(2)For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-recurring expenses primarily consisted of severance costs related to the separation of Oren Frank and Roni Frank, co-founders and former executives of the Company, in November 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, nonrecurring expenses consisted of legal expenses related to the acquisition of Lasting in November 2020.
Some of the limitations of adjusted EBITDA include (i) adjusted EBITDA does not properly reflect capital commitments to be paid in the future and (ii) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the underlying assets may need to be replaced and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect these capital expenditures. Our adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as we calculate the measure, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. In evaluating adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses similar to the adjustments described herein. Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these expenses or any unusual or non-recurring items. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to loss before income taxes, net loss, loss per share, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP. When evaluating our performance, you should consider adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net loss and other GAAP results.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenues from the sale of monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual membership subscriptions to our therapy platform as well as supplementary a la carte offerings, payments from members and their respective insurance companies and annually contracted platform access fees paid to us by our enterprise clients for the delivery of therapy services to their members or employees. We recognize B2C member subscription revenues ratably over the subscription period, beginning when therapy services commence. B2C members may cancel at any time and will receive a pro-rata refund for the subscription price.
We recognize contracted revenue from our enterprise clients from the commencement of their contracted term through the annual period based primarily on a per-member-per month model. We recognize revenues from services provided to insured members at a point in time, as virtual therapy session is rendered. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected in exchange for the service. Contracts with our enterprise clients are for one or more years with the ability to provide 60 days advance notice prior to termination at each year mark during the term. On occasion and depending on the client, we allow a 60 or 90 day intra-year termination notice but only after the client has completed the first year of service.
Revenue growth is generated from increasing our membership subscriptions, contracting with enterprise clients and health plans.
We have demonstrated continued revenue growth during the last three years as a direct result of the increased penetration of the direct-to-consumer market, and the Company’s 2018 entry into the commercial insurance and enterprise sales markets. The Company’s revenues grew 49.2% from $76.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $113.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is comprised of therapist payments and hosting costs. Cost of revenues is largely driven by the size of our provider network that is required to service the growth of our customer base, in addition to the growth of our health plan and enterprise clients.
We designed our business model and our provider network to be scalable and to leverage a hybrid model of both employee providers and independently contracted providers to support multiple growth scenarios. The compensation paid to our independently contracted providers is variable, and the amount paid to a provider is generally based on the amount of time committed by such provider to our members. In addition, our network supervisors have broad authority to approve the payment of incentive bonuses to providers with certain licenses during periods of higher demand for providers with such licenses. For our employee providers, they receive a fixed-salary and discretionary bonuses, where applicable.
While we expect increased investments to support accelerated growth and the required investment to scale our provider network, we also expect increased efficiencies and economies of scale. Our cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues is expected to fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these aforementioned factors.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of research and development, clinical operations, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include personnel and related expenses for software development and engineering, information technology infrastructure, security and privacy compliance and product development (inclusive of stock-based compensation for our research and development employees), third-party services and contractors related to research and development, information technology, software-related costs, and cost savings related to the application of research grant proceeds.
We expect research and development expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to grow our platform and product offerings; however, the anticipated corresponding future revenue growth is expected to result in lower research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue.
Clinical Operations Expenses
Clinical operations expenses are associated with the management of our provider network of therapists. Such costs are comprised of costs related to recruiting, onboarding, credentialing, training and ongoing quality assurance activities (inclusive of stock-based compensation for our clinical operations employees), costs of third-party services and contractors related to recruiting and training and software-related costs.
We expect clinical operations expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to grow our provider network and product offerings.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, commissions, travel and stock-based compensation costs for our employees engaged in sales and account management. We expect our sales expenses to increase as we continue to invest in the expansion of our health plan and enterprise business. We expect to hire additional sales personnel and related account management personnel to properly service our increasing client base, to develop additional growth opportunities within existing clients and to develop new market opportunities.
Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising and marketing expenses for consumer acquisition and engagement, as well as personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense for marketing employees, third-party services and contractors. Marketing expenses also include third-party software subscription services, third-party independent research, participation in trade shows, brand messaging and costs of communications materials that are produced for our clients to generate greater awareness and utilization of our platform among our health plan and enterprise clients.
Consumer marketing expenses are primarily driven by investments to grow and retain our consumer base and may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of our advertising and marketing expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense for our executive, finance, accounting, legal and human resources functions, as well as professional fees, occupancy costs, and other general overhead costs. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses in compliance, legal, investor relations, director’s and officer’s insurance, and professional services related to our compliance and reporting obligations as a public company. We also anticipate that as we continue to grow as a company our general and administrative expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis. However, we expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the next several years.
Financial income (expense), net
Financial income (expense), net, includes the impact from changes in the fair value of our warrant liabilities, issuance costs related to our warrant liabilities, interest earned on cash equivalents deposited in our bank accounts and other financial expenses in connection with bank charges.
Taxes on income
Our taxes on income consists primarily of foreign income taxes related to income generated by our subsidiary organized under the laws of Israel. As we expand the scale of our international business activities, any changes in the U.S. and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
We have a full valuation allowance for our U.S. deferred tax assets, including federal and state NOLs. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized through expected future taxable income in the United States.
Results of Operations
The following table presents the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the dollar and percentage change between the respective periods:
* Percentage not meaningful
(1) Prior period results have been adjusted to reflect the exchange of Old Talkspace’s common stock for Talkspace’s common stock at an exchange ratio of approximately 1.134140 in June 2021 as a result of the Business Combination. See Note 3, “Business Combination” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues increased by $37.5 million, or 49.2%, to $113.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $76.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was principally driven by an increase in year-over-year revenue from existing health plan clients, increased B2C member subscriptions and the addition of new enterprise clients, partially offset by higher revenue reserves primarily from our existing health plan clients. Revenue from our health plan clients, prior to the impact of
revenue reserves, increased by $16.5 million, or 166.1%, to $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an increase in the revenue reserves of $4.1 million related to receivables from its health plan clients. This compares to an increase of $0.8 million in revenue reserves recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020. B2C member subscriptions revenue increased by $13.2 million, or 21.4%, to $74.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $61.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Enterprise client contracts increased by 86 clients, or 119.4%, to 158 clients as of December 31, 2021 from 72 clients as of December 31, 2020. The increase in the number of enterprise clients increased revenue by $11.1 million, or 201.4%, to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe that the appeal of our technology platform, the quality of our providers and the cost of our services will continue to represent the primary drivers of revenue growth from B2C members and B2B clients.
Costs of revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $20.5 million, or 78.0%, to $46.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $26.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to costs associated with an increase of providers on our platform. This increase of providers was required to service the increased demand for our therapy services in both our B2C and B2B businesses.
Total employee provider headcount was 287 as of December 31, 2021.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased by $16.9 million, or 34.0%, to $66.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $49.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the 49.2% increase in revenues, partially offset by higher cost of revenues due to an increase of providers on our platform to support our increased demand. Gross margin was 58.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 65.4% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to a revenue shift to our B2B business, higher revenue reserves and growth in our employee provider headcount during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $6.3 million, or 66.1%, to $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase of $6.4 million in employee-related costs, inclusive of non-cash stock compensation expense, partially offset by $1.0 million in cost savings related to the application of research grant proceeds.
Total research and development employee headcount increased to 57 employees as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 38 employees as of December 31, 2020.
Clinical operations expenses
Clinical operations expenses increased by $5.0 million, or 116.2%, to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase of $3.6 million in employee-related costs, inclusive of non-cash stock compensation expense, and a $0.9 million increase in provider recruiting costs.
Total clinical operation employee headcount increased to 31 employees as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 21 employees as of December 31, 2020.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $52.9 million, or 111.0%, to $100.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses primarily consisted of a $38.4 million increase in direct marketing and promotional costs and a $10.6 million increase in employee-related costs inclusive of commissions and non-cash stock compensation expense.
Total sales and marketing employee headcount increased to 84 employees as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 61 employees as of December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $24.6 million, or 240.9% , to $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase of $19.5 million in employee-related costs inclusive of non-cash stock compensation expense of which $10.1 million related primarily to the Closing of the Business Combination, a $3.1 million increase in consulting and professional fees, and a $1.7 million increase in insurance costs.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative costs in compliance, legal, investor relations, insurance, and professional services related to our compliance and reporting obligations as a public company. We also anticipate that as we continue to grow as a company our general and administrative costs will increase on an absolute dollar basis. However, we expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the next several years.
Total general and administrative employee headcount increased to 37 employees as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 18 employees as of December 31, 2020.
Financial income (expense), net
Financial income, net was $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to financial expense, net of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in financial income (expense), net was primarily driven by gains resulting from the revaluation of warrant liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by $4.2 million in warrant issuance costs related to the Closing of the Business Combination.
Taxes on income
Taxes on income were minimal for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
For a detailed discussion of the results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section of the Company’s Form S-1 Registration Statement, filed on July 2, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the completion of the Business Combination, we have historically financed our operations and working capital through periodic issuances of convertible preferred stock. As a result of the Business Combination, we received $249.3 million in proceeds after the payment of transaction costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $198.3 million of cash and cash equivalents, which were held to finance our operations and support a variety of growth initiatives and investments. We had no debt as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020 and expect to generate operating losses for the foreseeable future.
Our primary cash needs are to fund operating activities and invest in technology development. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, contract renewal activity, the timing and extent of investments to support product development efforts, our expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced service offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of virtual behavioral services. Additionally, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies.
We currently anticipate to be able to fund our cash needs for at least the next twelve months using available cash and cash equivalent balances as of December 31, 2021. However, in the future we may still require additional capital to respond to technological advancements, competitive dynamics or technologies, customer demands, business opportunities, challenges, acquisitions or unforeseen circumstances and we may determine to engage in equity or debt financings or enter into credit facilities for other reasons. We may not be able to timely secure additional debt or equity financing on favorable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt or other equity-linked securities, our existing stockholders could experience significant dilution. Any debt financing obtained by us in the future could involve restrictive covenants relating to our capital raising activities and other financial and operational matters, which may make it more difficult for us to obtain additional capital and to pursue business opportunities, including potential acquisitions. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us, when we require it, our ability to continue to grow or support our business and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
The following table presents the summary consolidated cash flow information for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $65.7 million and $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was driven primarily by the negative impact from a higher net loss and unfavorable changes in working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The higher net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by higher investments in direct marketing and promotional costs to support future growth, partially offset by the additional gross profit generated from increased revenue. The unfavorable changes in working capital were driven primarily by higher payments on our payable balances and unfavorable timing on collections of receivables compared to prior year.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was driven primarily by the acquisition of Lasting in November 2020. The activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the purchases of computer equipment to support increased headcount.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $251.4 million and $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was driven primarily by $249.3 million in proceeds, net of the payment of transaction costs, as a result of the closing of the Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any short-term or long-term debt, capital lease obligations, long-term operating lease obligations, or long-term liabilities.
Our commercial contract arrangements generally include certain provisions for indemnifying clients against liabilities if there is a breach of a client’s data or if our service infringes a third party’s intellectual property rights. To date, we have not incurred any material costs as a result of such indemnifications.
We have also agreed to indemnify our officers and directors for costs associated with any fees, expenses, judgments, fines and settlement amounts incurred by any of these persons in any action or proceeding to which any of those persons is, or is threatened to be, made a party by reason of the person’s service as a director or officer, including any action by us, arising out of that person’s services as our director or officer or that person’s services provided to any other company or enterprise at our request. We maintain director and officer liability insurance coverage that would generally enable us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. We may also be subject to indemnification obligations by law with respect to the actions of our employees under certain circumstances and in certain jurisdictions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not invest in any off-balance sheet vehicles that provide liquidity, capital resources, market or credit risk support, or engage in any activities that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our condensed consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, current business factors, and various other assumptions that the Company believes are necessary to consider to form a basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities, the recorded amounts of revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We are subject to uncertainties such as the impact of future events, economic and political factors, and changes in our business environment; therefore, actual results could differ from these estimates. Accordingly, the accounting estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements will change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained, and as our operating environment evolves.
Changes in estimates are made when circumstances warrant. Such changes in estimates are reflected in the reported results of operations; if material, the effects of changes in estimates are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Significant estimates and assumptions reflected in these consolidated financial statements include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition, revenue reserves, business combinations, goodwill and intangible assets, warrant liabilities and stock-based compensation.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We were an early adopter of the requirements of the new revenue recognition standard, known as ASC 606, effective January 1, 2018, which utilizes the modified retrospective method of transition. Revenue is recognized upon satisfaction of our performance obligation to provide virtual behavioral healthcare services, which occur over time, when our customers have access to our platform and services. The Company also contracts with health insurance organizations to provide its therapy services to their eligible insured members, revenue is recognized at a point in time, as virtual therapy session is rendered. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for the services we provide.
The Company elected to use the practical expedient and recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense since the amortization period of the assets that the Company otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.
Deferred Revenue
The deferred revenue balance consists of payments received from customers for which revenues have not yet been earned and recognized according to the criteria described above. The Company recognizes deferred revenues as revenues in the statement of operations and comprehensive loss once performance obligations have been performed and satisfied.
Revenue Reserves
Revenue reserves relate primarily to allowances for balances which collection is uncertain and estimated refunds. Account receivables are recorded at the invoiced amount and amounts for which revenue has been recognized but not invoiced, net of the impact from revenue reserves. Revenue reserves are based on the Company’s assessment of historical collection experience. The Company regularly reviews the adequacy of its reserve based on a combination of factors, including an assessment of the current customer’s aging balance, the nature of the balance and any receivables in dispute. The Company accrues for estimated refunds in the period in which the related revenue is recognized. Revenue reserves are recorded as a reduction against revenue when identified.
Business Combination
On June 22, 2021, the Company completed the Business Combination pursuant to the Merger Agreement dated January 12, 2021. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, HEC who was the legal acquirer, is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Old Talkspace issuing stock for the net assets of HEC, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of HEC are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Old Talkspace was determined to be the accounting acquirer based on the following predominant factors:
oOld Talkspace’s shareholders represent a relative majority of the voting rights in the Company and have the ability to nominate the members of the board of directors for the Company;
oOld Talkspace’s operations prior to the acquisition represent the ongoing operations of the Company; and
oOld Talkspace’s senior management represents a majority of the senior management of the Company.
The consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations prior to the Business Combination are those of Old Talkspace. The shares and corresponding capital amounts and losses per share, prior to the Business Combination, have been retroactively restated based on shares reflecting the exchange ratio established in the Business Combination.
Warrant liabilities
In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, the Company acquired Private Placement Warrants from HEC. Additionally, there were Private Placement Warrants that were issued related to the closing of the Forward Purchase Agreement with the HEC Fund. The Private Placement Warrants are accounted for as liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40 and are presented within warrant liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The warrant liabilities are measured at fair value at inception and on a recurring basis, with changes in fair value presented within financial income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The Private Placement Warrants were valued using the Black-Scholes-Merton Model, which is considered to be a Level 3 fair value measurement. The primary unobservable input utilized in determining the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants is the expected volatility of the Company’s common stock. The expected volatility of the Company’s common stock was estimated to be approximately 67.8% as of December 31, 2021.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC No. 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation.” which requires equity-based awards to be measured at fair value on the grant date and the resulting compensation cost to be recognized over the requisite service period.
ASC No. 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of stock options awards using an option-pricing model. We have selected the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model as the most appropriate fair value method for our stock-options awards. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are the expected stock price volatility and the expected option term. Expected volatility was calculated based upon similar traded companies’ historical share price movements as adequate historical experience is not available to provide a reasonable estimate. Expected term is calculated based on the simplified method as adequate historical experience is not available to provide a reasonable estimate. The simplified method will continue to apply until enough historical experience is available to provide a reasonable estimate of the expected term. The risk-free interest rate is calculated based on the yield from U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds with an equivalent term. We have historically not paid dividends and have no foreseeable plans to pay dividends. We recognize forfeitures of awards as they occur.
Determination of Fair Value of our Common Stock prior to the Business Combination
Due to the absence of an active market for our shares of common stock prior to the Business Combination, the grant-date fair market value of the common shares underlying stock options was historically determined by management with the assistance of third-party valuation specialists and approved by the Company’s board of directors. Because there was no public market for the Company’s common shares, the Board of Directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair market value, which included important developments in the Company’s operations, the prices at which the Company sold shares of its convertible preferred shares, the rights, preferences and privileges of the Company’s convertible preferred shares relative to those of the Company’s common shares, actual operating results, financial performance and the lack of marketability of the Company’s common shares.
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Estimates” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for information regarding recent accounting developments and their impact on our results.