Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report. Amounts are in thousands of dollars, shares of common stock or gallons, as applicable, unless indicated otherwise.
Company Overview
TravelCenters of America Inc. is a Maryland corporation. As of December 31, 2021, we operated or franchised 276 travel centers, three standalone truck service facilities and one standalone restaurant. Our customers include trucking fleets and their drivers, independent truck drivers, highway and local motorists and casual diners. We also collect rents, royalties and other fees from our tenants and franchisees.
We manage our business as one segment. We make specific disclosures concerning fuel and nonfuel products and services because they facilitate our discussion of trends and operational initiatives within our business and industry. We have a single travel center located in a foreign country, Canada, that we do not consider material to our operations.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization, declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, and, in response to the outbreak, the U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary declared a public health emergency in the United States and many states and municipalities declared public health emergencies. Various governmental responses attempting to contain and mitigate the spread of the virus have negatively impacted, and continue to negatively impact, the global economy, including the U.S. economy.
We believe that our travel centers and the truck drivers that we serve are critical to sustaining a resilient supply chain to support essential services and daily commerce across the United States. To date during the COVID-19 pandemic, our business has benefited from an increased demand for e-commerce and from being recognized by various governmental authorities as a provider of services essential to businesses, which allowed us to continue operating our travel centers through the COVID-19 pandemic. We have taken various actions and have incurred additional costs in response to the pandemic to address its operating and financial impact and to protect the health and safety of our customers, employees and other persons who visit our travel centers and restaurants. However, if there is another economic downturn as a result of the continued impact of the pandemic, demand for the transporting of products across the United States by trucks may decline, possibly significantly. If that occurs, our business, results of operations and financial position may be adversely impacted.
The U.S. economic conditions have improved significantly in the United States from the low points experienced during the pandemic. Commercial activities in the United States rebounded and grew in part due to government spending on pandemic relief, infrastructure and other matters. This recent economic growth may have had some impact on our sales as during 2021 our diesel fuel sales volume increased 10.6% and total nonfuel revenues increased 11.4%, as compared to the prior year.
Government and market responses to the COVID-19 pandemic have caused supply chain and labor availability issues, which at times have resulted in reduced availability of goods and inflationary pressures; inflationary pressures have continued into 2022 and remain heightened. The ultimate adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health crisis is highly uncertain. If these challenges continue, or if governments take further actions in response to these challenges, our business, results of operations and financial position may be negatively impacted. We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business and intend to respond to developments accordingly.
For a discussion of and the risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath on us and our business, see elsewhere in this Annual Report, including "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements", Part I, Item 1. "Business" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report.
Executive Summary of Financial Results
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated income before income taxes of $75,454 and a loss before income taxes of $21,082, respectively. The $96,536 increase in our income before income taxes was primarily due to the following factors:
•site level gross margin in excess of site level operating expense increased $88,918, which primarily resulted from the incremental margin due to increases in nonfuel and fuel revenues, partially offset by increased labor costs driven by wage increases, overtime and COVID-19 related costs in truck services and restaurant employees who returned to work for re-openings during 2021, and other increased operating expenses; and
•depreciation and amortization expense decreased $31,282, which primarily resulted from a $13,715 impairment charge recognized in 2020 related to QSL, an $8,072 write off of certain assets related to truck service programs that were canceled during 2020, an $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, a $3,046 goodwill impairment charge recognized in 2020 with respect to our QSL business, a $6,574 property and equipment impairment charge recognized in 2020 with respect to our QSL business and an $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, minimally offset by a $650 impairment charge relating to our QSL business during 2021.
The above factors were partially offset by:
•selling, general and administrative expense increased $10,317, which primarily resulted from the impact of increased incentive compensation expense, increases in consultant fees to assist with identifying and implementing cost reduction and other opportunities, increases in contract services due to staffing shortages resulting from the current labor market and costs related to the transition to cloud-based technology solutions, partially offset by expenses related to the Reorganization Plan and executive officer retirement and separation agreements recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020; and
•interest expense, net increased $16,307, which primarily resulted from the Term Loan Facility (as defined below) that was funded in December 2020.
Effects of Fuel Prices and Supply and Demand Factors
Our fuel revenues and fuel gross margin are subject to fluctuations, sometimes material, as a result of market prices and the availability of, and demand for, diesel fuel and gasoline. These factors are subject to the worldwide petroleum products supply chain, which historically has experienced price and supply volatility as a result of, among other things, severe weather, terrorism, political crises, military actions and variations in demand that are often the result of changes in the macroeconomic environment. Also, concerted efforts by major oil producing countries and cartels to influence oil supply, as well as other actions by governments regarding trade policies, may impact fuel prices. Further, there have been reports of reduced investment in oil exploration and production as a result of concerns about decreased demand for oil in response to market and governmental factors, including increased demand for alternative energy sources in response to global climate change. These and other factors are believed to have contributed to recent increases in the cost of oil and other fossil energy sources.
Although there are several components that comprise and impact our fuel costs of goods sold, including the cost of fuel, freight and mix, the cost of fuel is the primary factor. Over the past several years there have been significant changes in the cost of fuel. During the year ended December 31, 2021, fuel prices trended upward, increasing 62.1% as compared to the beginning of the period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, fuel prices trended downward, ending at a 30.2% lower price than at the start of the year. The decrease in fuel prices for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulted from a 52.7% decrease in March and April 2020 as a result of the sharp decrease in demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic downturn. The average fuel price during the year ended December 31, 2021, was 59.6% above the average fuel price during the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted from the increase in demand as we began to emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic. We generally are able to pass changes in our cost for fuel products to our customers, but typically with timing differences associated with on-hand inventory, such that during periods of rising fuel commodity prices, fuel gross margin per gallon tends to be higher than it otherwise may have been and during periods of falling fuel commodity prices, fuel gross margin per gallon tends to be lower than it otherwise may have been. For example, steadily rising fuel prices typically improve short-term fuel margins due to the sell-through of lower cost inventory at current market prices. Increases in the prices we pay for fuel can increase our working capital requirements.
Due to the volatility of our fuel costs and our methods of pricing fuel to our customers, we believe that fuel revenues are not a reliable metric for analyzing our results of operations from period to period. As a result solely of changes in fuel prices, our fuel revenues may materially increase or decrease, in both absolute amounts and on a percentage basis, without a comparable change in fuel sales volume or in fuel gross margin, as evidenced in 2021. We therefore consider fuel sales volume and fuel gross margin to be better measures of our performance.
We believe that demand for fuel by trucking companies and motorists for a constant level of miles driven will remain relatively unchanged in the near-term but could continue to decline over time because of technological innovations that improve fuel efficiency of motor vehicle engines, other fuel conservation practices and alternative fuels and technologies. Although we believe these factors, combined with competitive pressures, impact the level of fuel sales volume we realize, fuel sales volume increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases primarily resulted from improved market conditions within the freight industry, traffic increases associated with the ongoing pandemic recovery and the success of our marketing initiatives to increase our market share.
Factors Affecting Comparability
COVID-19 Pandemic
See our discussion regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us and our business above.
Growth Strategies
Our Transformation Plan consists of numerous initiatives across our organization for the purpose of expanding our travel center network, improving and enhancing operational profitability and efficiency, and strengthening our financial position all in support of our core mission to return every traveler to the road better than they came.
Since the beginning of 2019, we entered into franchise agreements for 59 travel centers to be operated under our travel center brand names, including 26 new agreements in 2021. Four began operations during 2019, ten began operations during 2020 and five began operations during 2021, and we expect the remaining 40 to open by the second quarter of 2024.
Our capital expenditures plan for 2022 is expected to be in the range of $175.0 million to $200.0 million and includes projects to enhance the guest experience through significant upgrades at our travel centers the expansion of restaurants and food offerings and improvements to our technology systems infrastructure. Approximately 75% of our capital expenditures in 2022 are focused on growth initiatives that we expect to meet or exceed our 15% to 20% cash on cash return hurdle.
Importantly, we are committed to embracing environmentally friendly sources of energy through our eTA division, which seeks to deliver sustainable and alternative energy to the marketplace by working with the public sector, private companies and customers to facilitate this initiative. Recent accomplishments include continued expansion of our biodiesel blending capabilities, increasing the availability of DEF at all diesel pumps nationwide and placement of electric vehicle charging stations. We believe our large, well-located sites may provide us with the opportunity to make both fossil and, eventually, non-fossil fuels available throughout our nationwide network of sites.
Results of Operations
We present our results of operations on a consolidated basis. Currently all of our company operated locations are same site locations with the exception of two standalone truck service facilities and one standalone restaurant. Same site operating results would not provide materially different information from our consolidated results and are not presented as part of this discussion and analysis.
Consolidated Financial Results
The following table presents changes in our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021, As Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Fuel Revenues. Fuel revenues for 2021 increased by $2,290,372, or 74.3%, as compared to 2020. The increase in fuel revenues for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in market prices for fuel and an increase in fuel sales volume. The table below presents the factors causing the changes in total fuel sales volume and revenues between periods. See "Effects of Fuel Prices and Supply and Demand Factors" for more information regarding the impact market prices for fuel has on our financial results.
Nonfuel Revenues. Nonfuel revenues for 2021 increased by $199,314, or 11.4%, as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of increases in our store and retail services, truck service, restaurants and diesel exhaust fluid revenues associated with the improvement in economic conditions in 2021 from the low points experienced during COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were primarily due to the comparison against the negative impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on nonfuel revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020, favorable product mix and additional sales from certain travel center restaurants that re-opened or are operating with expanded hours as compared to the pandemic conditions experienced in the prior year, and operating efficiencies from the progress of our Transformation Plan.
Rent and Royalties from Franchisees Revenues. Rent and royalties from franchisees revenues for 2021 increased by $1,121, or 7.8%, as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of the franchised travel centers that began operations since the beginning of 2020, partially offset by the elimination of royalties from franchised QSL standalone restaurants in 2021 following the sale of our QSL business in April 2021.
Fuel Gross Margin. Fuel gross margin for 2021 increased by $59,440, or 17.8%, as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of improved purchasing contracts, favorable market conditions, primarily in the fourth quarter of 2021, and an increase in fuel sales volume during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Nonfuel Gross Margin. Nonfuel gross margin for 2021 increased by $113,413, or 10.7%, as compared to 2020 due to the increase in nonfuel revenues as a result of the factors noted above. Nonfuel gross margin percentage for 2021 declined slightly to 60.4% from 60.8% for 2020.
Site Level Operating Expense. Site level operating expense for 2021 increased by $85,056, or 9.8%, as compared to 2020, primarily due to increased labor costs driven by wage increases, overtime and COVID-19 related costs in truck services and restaurant employees who returned to work for re-openings during 2021, and other increased operating expenses, partially offset by cash bonuses we paid to certain employees in 2020 who continued to work at our locations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Site level operating expense as a percentage of nonfuel revenues decreased 70 basis points to 49.1% for 2021 from 49.8% for 2020, primarily due to the increase in nonfuel revenues as business conditions improved and cost management.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense for 2021 increased by $10,317, or 7.1%, as compared to 2020, which primarily resulted from the impact of increased incentive compensation expense, increases in consultant fees to assist with identifying and implementing cost reduction and other opportunities, increases in contract services due to staffing shortages resulting from the current labor market and costs related to the transition to cloud-based technology solutions during 2021, partially offset by expenses related to the Reorganization Plan and executive officer retirement and separation agreements recognized in the year ended 2020.
Real Estate Rent Expense. Real estate rent expense for 2021 decreased by $116, as compared to 2020, primarily the result of a $1,262 impairment charge recognized relating to our operating lease assets with respect to our QSL business during 2020, partially offset by an increase in percentage rent due to SVC as a result of the increase in our nonfuel revenues during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense. Depreciation and amortization expense for 2021 decreased by $31,282, or 24.5%, as compared to 2020, which primarily resulted from a $13,715 impairment charge recognized in 2020 related to QSL, an $8,072 write off of certain assets related to truck service programs that were canceled during 2020, an $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, a $3,046 goodwill impairment charge recognized in 2020 with respect to our QSL business, a $6,574 property and equipment impairment charge recognized in 2020 with respect to our QSL business and an $834 write off of intangible assets associated with three franchised QSL standalone restaurants that closed during 2020, minimally offset by a $650 impairment charge relating to our QSL business during 2021.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net for 2021 increased by $16,307 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of the Term Loan Facility (as defined below) that was funded in December 2020.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Taxes. Provision for income taxes for 2021 increased to $17,263 as compared to an income tax benefit of $6,178 for 2020, primarily due to pretax income generated in 2021 as compared to pretax loss in 2020. Please refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report for more information about our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal liquidity requirements are to meet our operating and financing costs, which include contractual lease payments and required principal and interest payments on our debt, and to fund our capital expenditures, acquisitions and working capital requirements. Our principal sources of liquidity to meet these requirements are our:
•cash balance;
•operating cash flow;
•our Credit Facility (as defined below) with a current maximum availability of $200,000 subject to limits based on our qualified collateral;
•potential sales to SVC of improvements we make to the sites we lease from SVC;
•potential issuances of new debt and equity securities; and
•potential financing or selling of unencumbered real estate that we own.
We believe that the primary risks we currently face with respect to our operating cash flow are:
•the potential negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including if the United States experiences a prolonged and significant decline in economic activity that reduces demand for our products and services;
•decreased demand for our fuel products resulting from regulatory and market efforts for improved engine fuel efficiency, fuel conservation and alternative fuels and technologies;
•decreased demand for our products and services that we may experience as a result of competition or otherwise;
•the fixed nature of a significant portion of our expenses, which may restrict our ability to realize a sufficient reduction in our expenses to offset a reduction in our revenues;
•the costs and funding that may be required to execute our growth initiatives;
•the possible inability of acquired or developed properties to generate the stabilized financial results we expected at the time of acquisition or development;
•inflationary pressures;
•increasing labor costs;
•labor availability;
•increased cost of fleet card fees;
•increased costs for nonfuel products that we may not be able to pass through to our customers;
•increases in our cost of capital due to increasing market interest rates;
•adverse impacts from the current supply chain challenges;
•increased costs we may need to incur to operate our business in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including enhancing sanitation and other preventative measures, sick pay and possible implementation of a vaccine mandate and/or testing protocols; and
•the negative impacts on our gross margins and working capital requirements due to the higher level of prices for petroleum products or due to increases in the cost of our fuel or nonfuel products resulting from inflation generally.
Our business requires substantial amounts of working capital, including cash liquidity, and our working capital requirements can be especially large because of the volatility of fuel prices. Selectively acquiring additional properties and businesses and developing new sites requires us to expend substantial capital for any such properties, businesses or developments. In addition, our properties are high traffic sites with many customers and large trucks entering and exiting our properties daily, requiring us to expend capital to maintain, repair and improve our properties. Although we had a cash balance of $536,002 at December 31, 2021, and net cash provided by operating activities of $154,461 in 2021, we cannot be sure that we will maintain sufficient amounts of cash, that we will generate future profits or positive cash flows or that we will be able to obtain additional financing, if and when it becomes necessary or desirable to pursue business opportunities. We believe we have sufficient financial resources to fund operating and financing costs and required capital expenditures for greater than 12 months.
Our Investment and Financing Liquidity and Resources
Revolving Credit Facility
On December 14, 2020, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into an amendment to our Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, or the Credit Facility, with a group of commercial banks that matures on July 19, 2024. Under the Credit Facility, a maximum of $200,000 may be drawn, repaid and redrawn until maturity. The availability of this maximum amount is subject to limits based on qualified collateral. Subject to available collateral and lender participation, the maximum amount of this Credit Facility may be increased to $300,000. The Credit Facility may be used for general business purposes and allows for the issuance of letters of credit. Generally, no principal payments are due until maturity. Under the terms of the Credit Facility, interest is payable on outstanding borrowings at a rate based on, at our option, LIBOR or a base rate, plus a premium (which premium is subject to adjustment based upon facility availability, utilization and other matters). At December 31, 2021, based on our qualified collateral, a total of $104,703 was available to us for loans and letters of credit under the Credit Facility. At December 31, 2021, there were no borrowings under the Credit Facility and $14,128 of letters of credit issued under that facility, which reduced the amount available for borrowing under the Credit Facility, leaving $90,575 available for our use as of that date. As of February 21, 2022, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility and approximately $90,575 available under the Credit Facility for our use.
Term Loan Facility
On December 14, 2020, we entered into a $200,000 Term Loan Facility, or the Term Loan Facility, which is secured by a pledge of all the equity interests of substantially all of our wholly owned subsidiaries, a pledge, subject to the prior interest of the lenders under our Credit Facility, of substantially all of our other assets and the assets of such wholly owned subsidiaries and mortgages on certain of our fee owned real properties. We used the net proceeds of $190,062 from our Term Loan Facility for general business purposes, including the funding of deferred capital expenditures, updates to key information technology infrastructure and growth initiatives consistent with our Transformation Plan. Interest on amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Facility are calculated at LIBOR, with a LIBOR floor of 1 basis points, plus 6 basis points and the Term Loan Facility matures on December 14, 2027. Our Term Loan Facility requires periodic interest payments based on the interest period selected and quarterly principal payments of $500, or 1.0% of the original principal amount annually. In addition, beginning with the year ended December 31, 2021 and for each twelve month period thereafter (each considered an “Excess Cash Flow Period”, as defined), we are required to calculate Excess Cash Flow, as defined, and prepay an amount equal to Excess Cash Flow less other defined adjustments. The prepayment, as calculated, is due 95 days after the end of the respective Excess Cash Flow Period. There was no required prepayment due as of December 31, 2021. Remaining principal amounts outstanding under the Term Loan Facility may be prepaid beginning on December 14, 2022.
Underwritten Public Equity Offering
On July 6, 2020, we received net proceeds of $79,980, after $296 of offering costs and $5,124 of underwriting discounts and commissions, from the sale and issuance of 6,100 shares of common stock in an underwritten public equity offering. We have been using the net proceeds from this offering to fund deferred maintenance and other capital expenditures necessary to enhance property conditions and implement growth initiatives, for working capital and for general corporate purposes.
West Greenwich Loan
On February 7, 2020, we entered into a 10 year term loan for $16,600 with The Washington Trust Company, or the West Greenwich Loan. The West Greenwich Loan is secured by a mortgage encumbering our travel center located in West Greenwich, Rhode Island. The interest rate is fixed at 3.85% for five years based on the five year Federal Home Loan Bank rate plus 0.0198 basis points, and will reset thereafter. The West Greenwich Loan requires us to make principal and interest payments monthly. The proceeds from the West Greenwich Loan were used for general business purposes. We may, at our option with 60 days prior written notice, repay the loan in full prior to the end of the 10 year term plus, if repaid prior to February 7, 2023, a nominal penalty.
Senior Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding the following Senior Notes, as defined below:
We refer to the 2030 Senior Notes, 2029 Senior Notes and 2028 Senior Notes collectively as our Senior Notes, which are our senior unsecured obligations. The Senior Notes are callable by us at par plus accrued interest, if any, and without penalty at any time. The total annual cash payments for interest expense on the current outstanding aggregate principal amount under our Senior Notes is $26,675. The indenture governing our Senior Notes does not limit the amount of indebtedness we may incur. We may issue additional debt from time to time.
IHOP Secured Advance Note
On October 28, 2019, we entered into a multi unit franchise agreement with IHOP Franchisor LLC, or IHOP, in which we agreed to rebrand and convert certain of our full service restaurants to IHOP restaurants over five years, or the IHOP Agreement. Concurrent with entering into the IHOP Agreement, we entered into a Secured Advance Note with IHOP, or the IHOP Note, pursuant to which we can borrow up to $10,000 in connection with the costs to convert our full service restaurants to IHOP restaurants. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no loans outstanding under the IHOP Note.
QSL Business Sale
On April 21, 2021, we completed the sale of our QSL business for $5,000 excluding costs to sell and certain closing adjustments.
Lease Amendments
On March 9, 2021, we and SVC amended one of the SVC Leases to reflect the renewal of a third party ground lease at one of the 179 travel center properties that we lease from SVC. This ground lease, which was previously accounted for as an operating lease, is now accounted for as a finance lease.
For more information about our dispositions, debt financing, leases, equity and investments, please refer to Note 3, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following is a summary of our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities. During 2021 and 2020, we had net cash inflows from operating activities of $154,461 and $244,408, respectively. The change of $89,947 was primarily due to a decrease in cash generated from working capital, primarily as a result of lower receivable collections in 2021 due to the collection of $70,100 in 2020 related to the federal biodiesel tax credit, partially offset by higher earnings in 2021.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. During 2021 and 2020, we had net cash outflows from investing activities of $93,914 and $55,155, respectively. The change of $38,759 primarily resulted from an increase in capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of assets, which primarily included the divestiture of the QSL business and the sale of land in Mesquite, Texas.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. During 2021, we had net cash outflows from financing activities of $7,706 as compared to net cash inflows of $276,641 during 2020, respectively. The change of $284,347 primarily resulted from the $190,062 net proceeds received from the Term Loan Facility, $79,980 net proceeds received from the underwritten public equity offering and $16,600 proceeds received under the West Greenwich Loan during 2020, and repayments of $2,000 on our Term Loan Facility and repayments of $664 on the West Greenwich Loan during the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by a $7,900 repayment of our borrowings under our Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe we have adequate financial resources from our existing cash flows from operations, together with cash on hand and amounts available under our Credit Facility to support our business for at least the next 12 months.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Related Party Transactions
We have relationships and historical and continuing transactions with SVC, RMR and others related to them. For further information about these and other such relationships and related party transactions, see Notes 8, 12 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report and the section captioned "Business - Our Leases with SVC" above in Part I, Item 1. of this Annual Report, which are incorporated herein by reference, our other filings with the SEC and our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. For further information about the risks that may arise as a result of these and other related party transactions and relationships, see elsewhere in this Annual Report, including "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors." We may engage in additional transactions with related persons, including businesses to which RMR or its subsidiaries provide management services.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make reasonable estimates and assumptions that may involve the exercise of significant judgment. For any estimate or assumption used, there may be other reasonable estimates or assumptions that may have been used. However, based on the available facts and circumstances inherent in the estimates and assumptions reflected in our consolidated financial statements, management believes it is unlikely that applying other reasonable estimates and assumptions would have caused materially different amounts to have been reported. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Impairment of Long Lived Assets. We review definite lived assets for indicators of impairment during each reporting period. We recognize impairment charges when (i) the carrying value of a long lived asset or asset group to be held and used in the business is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value and (ii) when the carrying value of a long lived asset or asset group to be disposed of exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset less the estimated cost to sell the asset. Our estimates of fair value are based on our estimates of likely market participant assumptions, including our current expectations for projected fuel sales volume, nonfuel revenues, fuel and nonfuel gross margins, site level operating expense and real estate rent expense. If the business climate deteriorates, our actual results may not be consistent with these assumptions and estimates. The discount rate is used to measure the present value of projected future cash flows and is set at a rate we believe is likely to be used by a market participant using a weighted average cost of capital method that considers market and industry data as well as our specific risk factors. The weighted average cost of capital is our estimate of the overall after tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise. We use a number of assumptions and methods in preparing valuations underlying impairment tests, including estimates of future cash flows and discount rates and in some instances we may obtain third party appraisals. We recognize impairment charges in the period during which the circumstances surrounding an asset or asset group to be held and used have changed such that the carrying value is no longer recoverable, or during which a commitment to a plan to dispose of the asset or asset group is made. We perform our impairment analysis for substantially all of our property and equipment and lease assets at the individual site level because that is the lowest level of asset and liability groupings for which the cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities.
Impairment of Definite Lived Intangible Assets. We assess intangible assets with definite lives for impairment annually as of November 30 or whenever events or changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Definite lived intangible assets primarily include our agreements with franchisees. For 2021, definite lived intangible assets were assessed using a qualitative analysis that was performed by assessing certain trends and factors, including actual sales, collection of royalties from franchisees and any changes in the manner in which the assets were used that could impact the values of the assets.
Impairment of Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets and Goodwill. We assess intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable using either a quantitative or qualitative analysis. Indefinite lived intangible assets consisted of trademarks and their fair value was determined using a relief from royalty method. We subject goodwill and indefinite lived assets to further evaluation and recognize impairment charges when events and circumstances indicate the carrying value of the goodwill or indefinite lived intangible asset exceeds the fair market value of the asset. For 2021, indefinite lived intangible assets were assessed using a qualitative analysis that was performed by assessing certain trends and factors, including actual sales and operating profit margins, discount rates, industry data and other relevant qualitative factors. These trends and factors were compared to, and based on, the assumptions used in the most recent quantitative assessment.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually as of July 31, or more frequently if the circumstances warrant. We have one reporting unit, travel centers. As of July 31, 2021, we evaluated our travel centers reporting unit for impairment using a qualitative analysis which included evaluating financial trends, industry and market conditions and assessing the reasonableness of the assumptions used in the most recent quantitative analysis, including comparing actual results to the projections used in the quantitative analysis.
After evaluating and weighing all relevant events and circumstances, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the travel centers reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations was included in our analyses. The ultimate adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health crisis is highly uncertain. We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business and intend to respond to developments accordingly.
Customer Loyalty Programs. We offer travel center trucking customers and casual restaurant diners the option to participate in customer loyalty programs. Our customer loyalty programs provide customers with the right to earn loyalty awards on qualifying purchases that can be used for discounts on future purchases of goods or services. We apply a relative standalone selling price approach to our outstanding loyalty awards whereby a portion of each sale attributable to the loyalty awards earned is deferred and will be recognized as revenue in the category in which the loyalty awards are redeemed upon the redemption or expiration of the loyalty awards. Significant judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price for loyalty awards. Assumptions used in determining the standalone selling price include the historic redemption rate and the use of a weighted average selling price for fuel to calculate the revenues attributable to the loyalty awards. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, revenues and net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Income Tax Matters. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating actual current tax expense along with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for financial statement and tax reporting purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are recorded in our consolidated balance sheets. We are required to record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets if we are not able to conclude that it is more likely than not these assets will be realized. In measuring our deferred tax assets, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is needed for all or a portion of the deferred tax assets. Judgment is required in considering the relative impact of negative and positive evidence. The weight given to the potential effect of negative and positive evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets related to certain net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards in certain federal, state and foreign jurisdictions. To the extent our estimates of future taxable income or other assumptions prove inaccurate, we may need to recognize additional amounts of valuation allowance, which would increase our book income tax expense and reduce our net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders in future periods.
Accounting for Leases. With respect to accounting for leases, each time we enter a new lease or materially modify an existing lease we evaluate its classification as either a finance lease or an operating lease. The classification of a lease as finance or operating affects whether and how the transaction is reflected in our consolidated balance sheets, as well as our recognition of rental payments as rent or interest expense. For all leases with a term greater than 12 months, we recognize a lease asset and liability in our consolidated balance sheet. Certain of our leases include renewal options and purchase options. Renewal periods are included in calculating our lease assets and liabilities when they are reasonably certain. We calculate our lease assets and liabilities using the discount rate implicit in the SVC Leases and our incremental borrowing rate for all other leases. These evaluations require us to make estimates of, among other things, the remaining useful life and residual value of leased properties, appropriate discount rates that may be realized from the leased properties. Incorrect assumptions or estimates may result in misclassification of our leases or the understatement or overstatement of our lease assets and liabilities. Our lease accounting policies involve significant judgments based upon our experience, including judgments about current valuations, estimated useful lives and salvage or residual values. In the future, we may need to revise our assessments to incorporate information which is not known at the time of our previous assessments, and such revisions could increase or decrease our depreciation expense related to properties that we lease, result in the classification of some of our leases as other than operating leases or decrease the carrying values of some of our assets.
Business Combinations. We account for our acquisitions of businesses as business combinations, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the acquisition date. We record any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the net assets as goodwill. Our accounting for business combinations involves significant judgments about valuations of assets and liabilities in the current market and the assignment of estimated useful lives. We may adjust our accounting for business combinations to reflect information that is unknown at the time of our respective acquisitions for up to one year after each purchase. Acquisition related transaction costs, such as legal fees, due diligence costs and closing costs, are not included as a component of consideration transferred in an acquisition but are expensed as incurred. The operating results of acquired businesses are reflected in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition.
Self Insurance Accruals. We are exposed to losses under insurance programs for which we pay deductibles and for which we are partially self insured up to certain stop loss amounts, including claims under our general liability, workers' compensation, motor vehicle and group health benefits policies and programs. Accruals are established under these insurance programs for both estimated losses on known claims and potential claims incurred but not asserted, based on claims histories and using actuarial methods. The most significant risk of this methodology is its dependence on claims histories, which are not always indicative of future claims. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, expenses and net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Contingencies. We establish or adjust environmental contingency accruals when the responsibility to remediate becomes probable and the amount of associated costs is reasonably determinable and we record legal contingency accruals when our liability becomes probable and when we can reasonably estimate the amount of our contingent loss. We also have a receivable for expected recoveries of certain of our estimated future environmental expenditures. The process of determining both our estimated future costs of environmental remediation and our estimated future recoveries of costs from insurers or others involves a high degree of management judgment based on past experiences and current and expected regulatory and insurance market conditions. The process of estimating our liability for legal matters involves a high degree of management judgment, which is based on facts and circumstances specific to each matter and our prior experiences with similar matters that may not be indicative of future results. To the extent an estimate is inaccurate, our liabilities, expenses and net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders may be understated or overstated.
Environmental and Climate Change Matters
Governmental actions, including legislation, regulations, treaties and commitments, such as those seeking to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and market actions in response to concerns about climate change, may decrease the demand for our major product, diesel fuel, and may require us to make significant capital or other expenditures related to alternative energy distribution or other changing fuel conservation practices. Federal and state governments require manufacturers to limit emissions from trucks and other motor vehicles, such as the U.S. EPA's gasoline and diesel sulfur control requirements that limit the concentration of sulfur in motor fuel. Further, legislative and regulatory initiatives requiring increased truck fuel efficiency have accelerated in the United States and these mandates have and may continue to result in decreased demand for diesel fuel.
For example, in August 2021 the EPA and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration proposed new rules intended to phase in more stringent fuel efficiency standards for passenger cars and light duty trucks. In addition, the California Air Resources Board, and other similar state government agencies routinely consider rulemaking activity the purpose of which is to improve fuel efficiency and limit pollution from vehicles. Moreover, market concerns regarding climate change may result in decreased demand for fossil fuels and increased adoption of higher efficiency fuel technologies and alternative energy sources. Regulations that limit, or market demands to reduce carbon emissions, may cause our costs at our locations to significantly increase, make some of our locations obsolete or completely disadvantaged, or require us to make material investments in our properties. For example, we have installed electric charging capacity at certain of our travel centers and expect to install them at additional travel centers and we are also evaluating hydrogen dispensing as another alternative fuel offering at certain of our travel centers.
Some observers believe severe weather activities in different parts of the country over the last few years are evidence of global climate change. Such severe weather may have an adverse effect on individual properties we own, lease or operate, or the volume of business at our locations. We mitigate these risks by owning, leasing and operating a geographically diversified portfolio of properties, by procuring insurance coverage we believe adequately protects us from material damages and losses and by attempting to monitor and be prepared for such events. However, we cannot be certain that our mitigation efforts will be sufficient or that future weather-related events or other climate changes that may occur will not have an adverse effect on our business.
For further information about these and other environmental and climate change matters, and the related risks that may arise, please refer to the disclosure under the heading "Environmental Contingencies" in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15. of this Annual Report, "Warning Concerning Forward-Looking Statements," "Regulatory Environment - Environmental Regulation" in Part I, Item 1. and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors."