Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this document, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a New York City based clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company committed to identifying and advancing transformative therapies for the treatment of cancer and rare diseases. We were founded on the principle of applying modern scientific, regulatory or manufacturing advancements to established mechanisms in order to create new development opportunities. We prioritize creativity, diverse perspectives, integrity and tenacity to expedite our goal of bringing life-changing therapies to people with limited treatment options.
Our portfolio includes two development programs utilizing TARA-002, an investigational cell therapy based on the broad immunopotentiator, OK-432, which was originally granted marketing approval by the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare as an immunopotentiating cancer therapeutic agent. This cell therapy is currently approved in Japan and Taiwan for LMs, and multiple oncologic indications. We have secured worldwide rights to the asset excluding Japan and Taiwan and have begun to explore its use in oncology and rare disease indications. TARA-002 was developed from the same master cell bank of genetically distinct group A Streptococcus pyogenes as OK-432 (marketed as Picibanil® in Japan and Taiwan by Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., or Chugai Pharmaceutical). We are currently developing TARA-002 in non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, or NMIBC, and in LMs.
Our lead oncology program is TARA-002 in NMIBC, which is cancer found in the tissue that lines the inner surface of the bladder that has not spread into the bladder muscle. Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer in the United States, with NMIBC representing approximately 80% of bladder cancer diagnoses. Approximately 65,000 patients are diagnosed with NMIBC in the United States each year. Very few new therapeutics have been approved for NMIBC since the 1990s and the current standard of care for NMIBC includes intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guérin, or BCG. The mechanism of TARA-002 is similar to BCG. TARA-002 and BCG are intravesically administered and elicit both a Th1 type immune response and locally activated generally similar array of cytokines and immune cells.
In October 2021, we announced that the Office of Tissues and Advanced Therapies Division, or the OTAT Division, of the FDA’s Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, or CBER, cleared our Investigational New Drug, or IND, application for TARA-002 in NMIBC. We have commenced a Phase 1 dose-finding, open-label clinical trial to evaluate TARA-002 in treatment-naïve and treatment-experienced NMIBC patients with high-grade carcinoma in situ and high-grade papillary tumors (Ta). In the initial dose escalation phase of the trial, patients will receive six weekly intravesical doses of TARA-002. The primary objective of the trial is to evaluate the safety, tolerability and preliminary signs of anti-tumor activity of TARA-002, with the goal of establishing a recommended dose for a future Phase 2 clinical trial.
We are also pursuing TARA-002 in LMs, which are rare, non-malignant cysts of the lymphatic vascular system that primarily form in the head and neck region of children before the age of two. In July 2020, the FDA granted Rare Pediatric Disease designation for TARA-002 for the treatment of LMs. OK-432, the originator therapy to TARA-002, has been the standard of care in LMs in Japan for over 20 years. In addition to the clinical experience in Japan, we have secured the rights to a dataset from one of the largest ever conducted Phase 2 trials in LMs, in which OK-432 was administered via a compassionate use program led by the University of Iowa to over 500 pediatric and adult patients. We have an IND for TARA-002 for LMs with the Vaccines and Related Products Division of the FDA, or Vaccines Division, and in October 2021 we submitted the completed confirmatory, current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) comparability data for TARA-002 in relation to OK-432 as part of the IND. We are engaged with the FDA to align on a development plan for TARA-002 in LMs.
The third development program in our portfolio is intravenous, or IV, Choline Chloride, an investigational phospholipid substrate replacement therapy initially in development for patients receiving parenteral nutrition, or PN, who have intestinal failure associated liver disease, or IFALD. IV Choline Chloride has been granted Orphan Drug Designation by the FDA for this indication and has also been granted Fast Track Designation for the treatment of IFALD. Following a positive end of Phase 2 meeting with the FDA, we received feedback on the design of the studies necessary to complete a registration package for IV Choline Chloride for the treatment of IFALD, including a Phase 1 pharmacokinetic, or PK, trial and a Phase 3 clinical trial. Prior to initiating these clinical trials, we are conducting a prevalence study to enhance understanding of the PN patient population and we plan to use this information to determine the next steps for the development program. In September 2021, we reported results of the retrospective part of the prevalence study, which supported the significant unmet medical need in patients dependent on PN who have IFALD. We are currently conducting the prospective part of the study, which is a multi-center, cross-sectional observational study that will assess the prevalence of choline deficiency, as well as cholestasis and steatosis, in patients dependent on PN.
We had been pursuing an additional program, Vonapanitase, a recombinant human elastase. Following a review of the research, preclinical, and clinical data of Vonapanitase, we have determined to cease further development of this product candidate at this time.
We have devoted substantial efforts to the development of these programs and do not have any approved products and have not generated any revenue from product sales. TARA-002 has not yet been approved for use for treatment of NMIBC, LMs or any other indications. We do not expect to generate revenues in the near-term, if ever. To finance our current strategic plans, including the conduct of ongoing and future clinical trials and further research and development costs, we will need to raise additional capital.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $94.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next few years as we continue our development of, and seek marketing approvals for, our product candidates, prepare for and begin the commercialization of any approved products, and add infrastructure and personnel to support our product development efforts and operations as a public company in the United States.
As a clinical-stage company, our expenses and results of operations are likely to fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year. We believe that our period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations should not be relied upon as indicative of our future performance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $130.7 million in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities.
Merger
On January 9, 2020, Protara Therapeutics, Inc. (formerly ArTara Therapeutics, Inc., formerly Proteon Therapeutics, Inc., the “Company”), completed its previously announced merger transaction with ArTara Subsidiary, Inc. (formerly ArTara Therapeutics, Inc., “Private ArTara”) in accordance with the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated as of September 23, 2019, by and among the Company, REM 1 Acquisition, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), and Private ArTara (as amended on November, 19, 2019, the “Merger Agreement”), pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Private ArTara, with Private ArTara surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”).The Merger was structured as a reverse merger and Private ArTara was determined to be the accounting acquirer based on the terms of the Merger and other factors. Following the completion of the Merger, the Company is focused on advancing Private ArTara’s drug development programs.
On January 9, 2020, in connection with, and prior to the completion of, the Merger, the Company effected a 1-for-40 reverse stock split of its common stock (the “Reverse Stock Split”), Private ArTara changed its name from “ArTara Therapeutics, Inc.” to “ArTara Subsidiary, Inc.”, and the Company changed its name from “Proteon Therapeutics, Inc.” to “ArTara Therapeutics, Inc.”. On May 11, 2020, the Company changed its name to Protara Therapeutics, Inc. In addition, immediately following the closing of the Private Placement (defined below), all of the outstanding shares of the Company’s Series A Preferred Stock were converted into shares of the Company’s common stock.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Company issued shares of its common stock to Private ArTara’s stockholders, at an exchange ratio of 0.190756 shares of its common stock, after taking into account the Reverse Stock Split, for each share of Private ArTara common stock outstanding immediately prior to the Merger. The Company assumed all of the outstanding and unexercised stock options of Private ArTara, with such stock options now representing the right to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s common stock equal to 0.190756 multiplied by the number of shares of Private ArTara common stock previously represented by such Private ArTara stock options. The Company also assumed all of the unvested Private ArTara restricted stock awards, which were exchanged for a number of shares of the Company’s common stock equal to 0.190756 multiplied by the number of shares of Private ArTara common stock previously represented by such Private ArTara restricted stock awards and unvested to the same extent as such Private ArTara restricted stock awards and subject to the same restrictions as such Private ArTara restricted stock awards.
The shares of the Company’s common stock issued to the former stockholders of Private ArTara were registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on a Registration Statement on Form S-4 (Reg. No. 333-234549) (the “Registration Statement”).
The shares of the Company’s common stock listed on The Nasdaq Capital Market, previously trading through the close of business on Thursday, January 9, 2020 under the ticker symbol “PRTO,” commenced trading on The Nasdaq Capital Market, on a post-Reverse Stock Split adjusted basis, under the ticker symbol “TARA,” on Friday, January 10, 2020.
COVID-19
The ultimate impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We have experienced delays and may experience additional future delays that impact our business, our research and development activities, the healthcare systems in which we operate and the global economy as a whole. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 public health crisis closely including whether the effects would have a material impact on our operations, liquidity and capital resources.
In response to the initial outbreak of COVID-19 and the prevalence of new variants and additional waves of infections throughout the pandemic, we have from time to time implemented work-from-home policies for our employees and at times have temporarily modified our operations to comply with applicable safety recommendations. Similar health and safety measures have affected or may affect third parties with whom we do business, including the third parties that we have contracted with to conduct studies for TARA-002, our study sites or other clinical partners, laboratories through which we conduct non-clinical studies. our third-party manufacturers and other parties with whom we conduct business and regulatory agencies. The effects of these measures and our related adjustments to our business are likely to negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business and delay our timelines, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the pandemic and associated health and safety measures and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course.
Severe and/or long-term disruptions in our operations as a result of COVID-19, including in response to the prevalence of new variants of the virus, additional waves of infections and the associated health and safety measures, will negatively impact our business, operating results and financial condition. Specifically, we anticipate that the stress of COVID-19 on healthcare systems around the globe will negatively impact our ability to conduct clinical trials in the near-term primarily due to the lack of resources at clinical trial sites and the resulting inability to timely enroll patients in the trials. We also anticipate that the global impact of COVID-19 will negatively impact our ability to conduct non-clinical studies due primarily to laboratory closures and limited availability of personnel. In addition, the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, and it may limit our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. A recession or market correction resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related effects on the economy such as supply chain disruptions and inflation risk could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
Financial Overview
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of TARA-002 and IV Choline Chloride, which include employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense, expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations, or CROs, contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CDMOs, the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials, clinical and non-clinical related costs, costs associated with regulatory operations and facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other supplies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist principally of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense, in executive and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, patent review, consulting and accounting services, facility related costs, as well as expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with our Nasdaq listing and SEC requirements, director and officer liability insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with being a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and investment income consists of interest income on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable debt securities and amortization of investment premiums.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial position and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from those estimates or assumptions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Goodwill
On January 9, 2020, in connection with the Merger, we separately valued the assets and liabilities acquired, and then determined goodwill as the residual of the purchase price less identified net assets. The carrying value of goodwill is $29.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill has an indefinite useful life. Goodwill is assessed annually for impairment as of December 31, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset has declined below its carrying value. In performing its annual goodwill impairment assessment, we have the option under GAAP to qualitatively assess whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value; if the conclusion of the qualitative assessment is that there are no indicators of impairment, then we would not perform a quantitative assessment. Otherwise, a quantitative assessment is performed and the fair value of the reporting unit is determined.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment. We have determined that we operate as one reporting unit and have selected December 31 as the date to perform our annual impairment test. As of December 31, 2021, we elected to forego the qualitative screen and performed a quantitative annual goodwill impairment test for our single reporting unit. Based upon the results of our annual goodwill impairment test, no adjustments to the carrying value of goodwill were necessary during the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we elected to perform a qualitative impairment assessment of goodwill and concluded that no impairment existed as of the test date.
In consideration of the results of our annual goodwill impairment test, as well as the carrying amount of the goodwill held by our single reporting unit, further information and sensitivity analysis for our reporting unit has been included below.
The fair value of our reporting unit was determined using an income approach based on discounted cash flows, or DCF, as we elected to forgo the qualitative screen. Determining fair value using a DCF analysis requires the exercise of significant judgment with respect to several assumptions and estimates, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows and appropriate discount rate to be applied. The expected cash flows used in the DCF analyses are based on our most recent internal long-range forecast and budget and, for years beyond the budget, our estimates, which are based, in part, on industry benchmarks and forecasted growth rates. The discount rates used in the DCF analyses are intended to reflect the risks inherent in the expected future cash flows of the respective programs within our portfolio. Assumptions used in the DCF analyses, including the discount rate, are assessed based on our current results and forecasted future performance, as well as macroeconomic and industry specific factors.
The estimated fair value of the reporting unit was determined by utilizing a discount rate of 17.5%, resulting in an estimate excess of fair value over carrying value greater than 20%. Assuming all other factors remain the consistent, a 150-basis point increase in the discount rate would decrease the excess estimated fair value over carrying value to approximately 20%.
We note that a deterioration in general market conditions, a sustained trend of weaker than anticipated financial performance, a decline in share price for a sustained period of time, adverse clinical trial or regulatory related events, significant increase in market competition, a deterioration in general market conditions due to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, or an increase in the market-based weighted average cost of capital, among other factors, could significantly impact our impairment analysis and may result in future goodwill impairment charges that, if incurred, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial position.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The measurement of net deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefit that, based on available evidence, is not expected to be realized, and a corresponding valuation allowance is established.
Tax benefits are recognized only for tax positions that are more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized upon settlement. A liability for “unrecognized tax benefits” is recorded for any tax benefits claimed in our tax returns that do not meet these recognition and measurement standards. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, no liability for unrecognized tax benefits was required to be recorded. Our policy is to record interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense. No interest or penalties were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Business Combinations
For a business combination, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are recognized at the acquisition date, measured at their fair values as of that date. In a business combination achieved in stages, the identifiable assets and liabilities are recognized at their fair values.
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the deferred tax consequences of differences between the tax bases and the recognized values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination in accordance with ASC Topic 740-10 “Income Taxes”.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our research and development expenses were approximately $21.1 million which represented an increase of approximately $9.1 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $4.1 million for manufacturing activities associated with TARA-002, an increase of $1.0 million of non-clinical, clinical and regulatory expenses associated with TARA-002, an increase of $1.7 million in manufacturing and clinical expenses associated with the prospective IV Choline Chloride study, an increase of $1.9 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses, and an increase of $0.7 million in stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our general and administrative expenses were approximately $26.4 million which represented an increase of approximately $3.9 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $1.9 million in compensation, benefits and other employee-related expenses, an increase of $2.1 million in expenses for development of market development capabilities, and an increase of $0.7 million in expenses associated with the opening of our new office in New York, New York. This was partially offset by a decrease of $0.6 million in legal fees, as we incurred significant one-time expenses in the first quarter of 2020 upon the closing of the reverse merger.
Other Income (Expense), Net. During the year ended December 31, 2021, interest and investment income was approximately $0.2 million which represented a decrease of approximately $0.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities were $130.7 million and $168.6 million, respectively. We have not generated revenues since our inception and have incurred net losses of approximately $47.3 million and $34.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $88.8 million and stockholder’s equity of approximately $161.9 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash flows used in operating activities were approximately $34.5 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of approximately $47.3 million, which includes non-cash stock-based compensation charges of approximately $10.4 million. Since inception, we have met our liquidity requirements principally through the sale of our common stock and preferred stock in private placements and underwritten offerings.
Liquidity
In connection with the Merger, we consummated the Private Placements, raising gross proceeds of approximately $42.5 million.
Concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, certain institutional investors (together, the “Investors”) entered into a subscription agreement (as amended on November 19, 2019, the “Subscription Agreement”) with Protara Therapeutics, Inc. and Private ArTara, pursuant to which (A) Protara Therapeutics, Inc. issued, in a private placement immediately after the Merger (the “Proteon Private Placement”), (i) 3,879.356 of shares of Protara Therapeutics, Inc.’s Series 1 Convertible Non-Voting Preferred Stock (“Series 1 Preferred Stock”) at a purchase price of approximately $7,011.47 per share for gross proceeds of $27.2 million and proceeds, net of issuance costs, of $25.3 million, (ii) 1,896,888 shares of Protara Therapeutics, Inc.’s common stock at a purchase price of approximately $7.01 per share for gross proceeds of $13.3 million and proceeds, net of issuance costs, of $12.4 million and (B) Private ArTara issued, in a private placement immediately prior to the Merger (the “ArTara Private Placement”), 284,875 shares of Private ArTara common stock (post-Exchange Ratio (as defined in the Merger Agreement) basis) at a purchase price of approximately $7.01 per share (post-Exchange Ratio basis) (together with the Proteon Private Placement, the “Private Placements”) for gross proceeds of $2.0 million and proceeds, net of issuance costs, of $1.9 million. The shares issued in the Proteon Private Placement were registered for resale on a registration statement on Form S-3 filed and declared effective by the SEC on February 10, 2020.
On September 24, 2020, pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated September 22, 2020, we issued and sold in an underwritten public offering (the “Common Offering”) an aggregate of 4,600,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $16.87 per share, for gross and net proceeds of approximately $77.6 million and $73.6 million, respectively. The underwriters were granted an option to purchase up to 690,000 additional shares of common stock at the public offering price, less the underwriting discount. On October 6, 2020, the underwriters exercised their overallotment option in full, purchasing an additional 690,000 shares, resulting in the receipt of gross and net proceeds of approximately $11.6 million and $11.1 million, respectively.
On September 24, 2020, pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated September 22, 2020, we issued and sold in an underwritten public offering (the “Preferred Offering”) an aggregate of 4,148 shares of our Series 1 Preferred Stock at an offering price of $16,873.54 per share, for gross and net proceeds of approximately $70.0 million and $66.3 million, respectively.
In December 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the Shelf Registration Statement, which became effective in December 2020. The Shelf Registration Statement permits: (i) the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $300.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants in one or more offerings and in any combination. No securities have been sold to date under the Shelf Registration Statement.
We are in the business of developing biopharmaceuticals and have no current or near term revenues. We have incurred substantial clinical and other costs in our drug development efforts. We will need to raise additional capital in order to fully realize management’s plans.
We believe that our current financial resources, as of the date of the issuance of these consolidated financial statements, are sufficient to satisfy our estimated liquidity needs for at least twelve months from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
As a result of economic conditions, general global economic uncertainty, political change, pandemics, and other factors, we do not know whether additional capital will be available when needed, or that, if available, we will be able to obtain additional capital on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital due to the volatile global financial markets, general economic uncertainty or other factors, we may need to curtail planned development activities. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related effects on the economy such as supply chain disruptions and inflation risk could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $34.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately $23.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of approximately $11.1 million in cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by an increase net loss of approximately $13.3 million, which was partially offset by a $3.3 million increase in non-cash items including stock-based compensation, right-of-use asset, and amortization of premium on bonds. There was a decrease in working capital of $1.1 million, primarily related to changes in prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable, and accrued expenses resulting from the timing of payments to our service providers.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $98.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by investing activities of approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change of $101.0 million resulted primarily from the proceeds from maturity and redemption of marketable debt securities of $27.2 million. This was offset by the purchases of marketable debt securities of $124.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $189.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash used in financing of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was for the repurchase of shares in connection with the settlement of restricted stock units. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of the proceeds, net of offering costs, from the Common Offering of approximately $73.6 million, the Preferred Offering of approximately $66.3 million, the issuance of Series 1 Preferred Stock of approximately $25.3 million, the Proteon Private Placement of approximately $12.4 million, the underwriters overallotment option of approximately $11.1 million, and the ArTara Private Placement of approximately $1.9 million, offset by repayments of short-term debt of approximately $1.7 million
Contractual and Other Obligations
Operating lease obligations
Our operating lease obligations primarily consist of lease payments on our corporate headquarters in New York, New York, as well as lease payments for our development laboratory, a manufacturing facility and an additional manufacturing space, all located in North America which are described in further detail in Note 10 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Future contractual payments on operating lease obligations due within one year of December 31, 2021 are $1.3 million, and future contractual payments on operating lease obligations due greater than one year from December 31, 2021 are $5.9 million.
Other obligations
From time to time, we enter into certain types of contracts that contingently require us to indemnify parties against third-party claims, supply agreements, and agreements with directors and officers. The terms of such obligations vary by contract and in most instances a maximum dollar amount is not explicitly stated therein. Generally, amounts under these contracts cannot be reasonably estimated until a specific claim is asserted, thus no liabilities have been recorded for these obligations on our consolidated balance sheet for the periods presented.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs and clinical sites for the conduct of clinical trials, non-clinical research studies, professional consultants for expert advice and other vendors for clinical supply manufacturing or other services. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts.
Certain of these agreements require us to pay milestones to such third parties upon achievement of certain development, regulatory or commercial milestones as further described in Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory approval and commercial milestones, which may not be achieved.
We also have obligations to make future payments to third parties that become due and payable on the achievement of certain milestones, including future payments to third parties with whom we have entered into research, development and commercialization agreements. We have not included these commitments on our balance sheet because the achievement and timing of these milestones is not fixed and determinable.