Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. In addition to historical data, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and disclosed or referenced in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. The following discussion and analysis also includes a discussion of certain non-GAAP financial measures. For a description and reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures discussed in this section, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
This Annual Report includes certain historical consolidated financial and other data for TaskUs, Inc. (“we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”). The following discussion provides a narrative of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our prospectus dated October 20, 2021 as filed with the SEC on October 22, 2021, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Overview
We provide digital outsourced services, focused on serving high-growth technology companies to represent, protect and grow their brands. As of December 31, 2021, we served over 100 clients across industry segments within the Digital Economy, including e-commerce, FinTech, food delivery and ride sharing, gaming, HiTech, HealthTech, social media and streaming media.
Our global, omni-channel delivery model is focused on providing our clients three key services - Digital Customer Experience (“Digital CX”), Content Security and Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) Operations. 95% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was delivered from non-voice, digital channels or omni-channel services. Non-voice channels allow us to utilize resources efficiently, thereby driving higher profitability.
We have designed our platform to enable us to rapidly scale and benefit from our clients’ growth. We believe our ability to deliver “ridiculously good” outsourcing will enable us to continue to grow our client base.
At TaskUs, culture is at the heart of everything we do. Many of the companies operating in the Digital Economy are well-known for their obsession with creating a world-class employee experience. We believe clients choose TaskUs in part because they view our company culture as aligned with their own, which enables us to act as a natural extension of their brands and gives us an advantage in the recruitment of highly engaged frontline teammates who produce better results.
Business Highlights
We nearly doubled our 2020 revenue growth rate during the year ended December 31, 2021, as we transitioned to operating as a public company in a primarily virtual environment. We added 41 new clients in 2021, achieving a 49% new client win rate, and 69 current clients signed new statements of work with us.
Recent Financial Highlights
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded service revenue of $760.7 million, or a 59.1% increase from $478.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a net loss of $(58.7) million, or a (270.0)% decrease from net income of $34.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease included expenses related to the one-time phantom shares bonuses and non-recurring teammate bonuses associated with the initial public offering ("IPO") of $133.7 million and non-cash stock-based compensation expense which we began recognizing upon our IPO. Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 86.5% to $129.4 million from $69.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 75.8% to $187.9 million from $106.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The operating results in any period are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period.
2021 Developments
Initial Public Offering
On June 11, 2021, our Class A common stock began trading on the Nasdaq. Upon closing the IPO on June 15, 2021, we issued and sold 5,553,154 shares of Class A common stock (the “primary” offering) and certain selling stockholders sold
9,626,846 outstanding shares (the “secondary” offering), including shares sold by the selling stockholders pursuant to the underwriters’ full exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $23 per share. We received net proceeds of $120.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, but before deducting offering expenses. We used the proceeds from the issuance, together with cash on hand, to satisfy payments of approximately $127.5 million in respect of vested phantom shares.
As a result of becoming a public company, we incur additional costs related to audit, legal, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with being a public company.
Amendment and Restatement of Certificate of Incorporation
Prior to the completion of the IPO, we amended and restated our certificate of incorporation to effect a ten-for-one forward stock split of our outstanding common stock and authorized three classes of ownership interests: (i) 250,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share; (ii) 2,500,000,000 shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share; and (iii) 250,000,000 shares of Class B common stock, par value $0.01 per share. After giving effect to the ten-for-one stock split, all then outstanding shares of common stock were reclassified into an equal number of shares of Class B common stock.
Equity Incentive Plans
At the IPO date, we concluded that our IPO represented a qualifying liquidity event that would cause the performance conditions of stock options issued under our 2019 Stock Incentive Plan to be probable of occurring. As such, we started to recognize stock-based compensation expense in relation to the stock options issued under the 2019 Stock Incentive Plan.
In connection with the IPO, we adopted the 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan, which became effective on the date our registration statement was declared effective. Under the 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan, we granted time-based restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-based restricted stock units (“PSUs”), and time-based stock options, in each case relating to shares of our Class A common stock.
For additional information, see Note 9, “Employee Compensation” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report.
Trends and Factors Affecting our Performance
There are a number of key factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Growing with our current clients
As of December 31, 2021, we served over 100 of the world’s leading technology companies. In addition, over 99% of our revenues in 2021 were from recurring revenue contracts. As our clients grow in size and the complexity of their outsourcing needs increases, we believe we have an opportunity to increase the addressable spend available to TaskUs through enhanced penetration of current services as well as cross-selling new services. In 2021, 69 current clients signed new statements of work with us.
New client wins
We are well positioned within multi-billion dollar commercial markets with substantial addressable spend opportunities where we focus on culturally aligned, agile companies that plan to scale rapidly. Our world-class sales team is organized around new-economy industry verticals such as Entertainment + Gaming, FinTech, HealthTech, HiTech, On Demand Travel + Transportation, Retail + e-Commerce and Social Media. We identify emerging industry and funding trends to engage early and work with future market leaders and enterprise-class clients. We added 41 new clients in 2021, and we achieved a 49% new client win rate for every dollar of new client opportunities we pursued.
Expanded service offerings
We closely watch trends in the start-up and venture capital space, working with founders and investors to develop custom service offerings. This approach has earned us the opportunity to support some of the fastest growing companies in history, often before anyone else. In Content Security we responded to the rise of NFTs by rolling out a service focused on securing the marketplaces or games where these digital assets are bought and sold. This leverages our existing capabilities and brings an adjacent offering to the market.
Expanding geographically
Global presence and multilingual capabilities are of increasing importance to our multinational clients and potential clients. New geographies mean new languages and/or capabilities to offer to our clients and increasing opportunities to win new business. We have expanded our presence from 18 sites in eight countries as of December 31, 2020 to 23 sites in ten countries as of December 31, 2021, including two countries where operations are expected to start in 2022. In October 2019, we entered
the India market with our first site in Indore, where we had approximately 6,000 employees as of December 31, 2021. We plan to continue expanding our geographic footprint to drive growth with both existing and new clients, which may result in one-time costs that may impact profitability. Additionally, as we enter new geographies and make new capabilities available, clients may elect to move current work with TaskUs in one geography to another geography to optimize cost or to provide additional business continuity to their operations. These changes in geographic mix may result in fluctuations in revenue and cost of service which are driven by the geography in which the work is being performed. These fluctuations are in line with our business model, which aims to deliver service out of the optimal geography for our clients. This allows us to serve our clients better in the long-term in most cases and deepens our relationship as we tend to grow and operate over multiple geographies contemporaneously with our larger clients over time as they grow. These fluctuations might be especially noticeable in a particular service line or geography on a period over period basis.
Hiring and retention of employees
In order to efficiently and effectively provide services to our clients, we must be able to quickly hire, train and retain employees. We offer our employees competitive wages with annual increases and also invest in their well-being. Our employee benefits and employee engagement costs may vary from period to period based on employee participation. We seek to retain sufficient employees to serve our clients’ increasing business needs and position ourselves for growth. We believe our focus on employee culture leads to lower employee attrition levels. Apart from driving our high client satisfaction and retention metrics, lower employee attrition leads to lower hiring and training costs and higher employee productivity. The voluntary attrition rate for employees who were employed by TaskUs for more than 180 days was 15.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Foreign currency fluctuations
We are subject to foreign currency exposure, primarily related to costs from the international locations in which we have operations. In order to mitigate this exposure, we enter into foreign currency exchange rate forward contracts for the larger geographies in which we operate to reduce the volatility of forecasted cash flows denominated in foreign currencies.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has evolved from its emergence in early 2020, and so has its global impact. Many countries have reacted by instituting or re-instituting quarantines and restrictions on travel, closing financial markets and/or restricting trading, and limiting operations of non-essential businesses. Such actions created disruption in global supply chains, increased rates of unemployment and adversely impacted many industries. The outbreak could have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions, and the full extent of the impact and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on future developments, including, among other factors, the duration and spread of the outbreak, including new strains and variants of the virus, and the success and impact of vaccination programs and mandates, along with related travel advisories, quarantines and restrictions, the recovery time of the disrupted supply chains and industries, the impact of labor market interruptions and wage increases, the impact of government interventions, and uncertainty with respect to longer term global macro-economic effects. We continue to closely monitor the outbreak and the impact on our operations and liquidity. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates may change materially in the future.
Operational Enablement
In early March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented a virtual operating model, enabling over 90% of our frontline employees to work virtually soon after the commencement of lockdowns to protect the health and safety of our employees, and ensure continued service for our clients.
As part of our swift transition to a virtual operating model during the outbreak, we continued to pay employees who were unable to work due to logistical and technical hurdles or due to illness in order to maintain the health and financial well-being of our employees. We also made certain payments to employees as incentive to quickly adapt to the virtual model, which allowed us to maintain employee productivity. In total, we incurred costs of $0.5 million related to leave payments for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $2.0 million related to incentive and leave payments for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Similarly, as part of the transition to working virtually, we made additional investments in our employees in the form of internet and Wi-Fi connectivity to their homes as well as hotel and shuttle costs for employees who were displaced by the pandemic. We incurred approximately $4.8 million of operational enablement related investments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In September 2021, we announced the continuation of our company-wide work from home policy through the first quarter of 2022. However, where there have been specific client requirements to return to our facilities and, where it has been safe to do so, we have begun transitioning some of our employees back to the office. We continued to incur approximately $5.6 million of operational enablement costs during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 90% of our frontline employees have continued to work virtually.
Revenue and Sales Generation
While we initially saw a reduction in spend from some clients, our strong market position within our industry verticals as well as our operational agility enabled us to act as a key partner. As a result, we ultimately delivered strong sales performance across new and existing clients, with revenue of $760.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was an increase of 59.1% compared to our revenue of $478.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash and Cost Management
On March 27, 2020, in the United States, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits net operating loss (“NOL”) carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021 and the deferral of employer taxes. We chose to avail ourselves of these CARES Act provisions for NOL carryovers and carrybacks and the deferral of employer taxes. We have carried back net operating losses resulting in an expected benefit of approximately $5.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we deferred $5.3 million of employer taxes.
In March 2020, we also drew $39.9 million in our revolving line of credit as a liquidity precaution due to the uncertainty to our business and our clients’ businesses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we were able to meet our liquidity needs with cash generated from operations and the funds that were drawn from the revolving credit line were not needed. We believe these actions have appropriately prepared us to respond to continued uncertainty, and we do not have significant liquidity or operational concerns. As of December 31, 2021, we had $63.6 million of cash and $50.1 million of borrowing availability under the revolving line of credit. We continue to closely monitor the outbreak and the impact on our operations and liquidity.
In addition, we conducted a comprehensive review of our cost structure in order to build efficiencies across functions and implemented robust working capital controls to maintain cash conversion and compliance with covenants. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 we incurred certain costs as a result of our cash and cost management decisions. We terminated leases for two of our U.S. sites during the second half of 2020, for which we incurred $1.8 million of termination costs. Certain cost optimizing measures to consolidate and transition some support functions in lower-cost geographies resulted in $2.6 million of severance costs for the year. We believe our active cash and cost management decisions will have long-term benefits to the goal of enabling our future growth and profitability.
As a result of the unpredictable and evolving impact of the pandemic and measures being taken around the world to combat its spread, the timing and trajectory of the recovery remain unclear at this time, and the adverse impact of the pandemic on our operations could be material. See Part I, Item IA “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Industry-The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the resulting global economic uncertainty and measures taken in response to the pandemic, has adversely impacted our business, financial condition and results of operations.”
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Service Revenue
We derive revenues from the following three service offerings:
•Digital Customer Experience: Principally consists of omni-channel customer care services primarily delivered through digital (non-voice) channels. Other solutions include customer care services for new product or market launches, trust & safety solutions and customer acquisition solutions.
•Content Security: Principally consists of review and disposition of user and advertiser generated content for purposes which include removal or labeling of policy violating, offensive or misleading content. We are developing and enforcing Content Security policies in several areas including intellectual property, job and commerce postings, objectionable material, political advertising, as well as services related to the rise of NFTs, digital marketplaces and gaming platforms.
•AI Operations: Principally consists of data labeling, annotation and transcription services performed for the purpose of training and tuning AI algorithms through the process of machine learning.
As these services are delivered, we bill our clients on either time-and-materials, cost-plus, unit-priced, fixed-price, or outcome oriented basis. Service revenue from time-and-materials or cost-plus contracts is recognized as the services are performed. Service revenue from unit-priced contracts is recognized monthly as transactions are processed based on objective measures of output. Service revenue from fixed-price contracts is recognized monthly as service revenue is earned and obligations are fulfilled. Service revenue from outcome oriented contracts is recognized when it is reasonably certain that the desired outcome has been achieved.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Services
Cost of services consists primarily of costs related to delivery of services, and consists primarily of personnel costs like salaries and wages, employee welfare, employee engagement, recruiting, professional development and stock-based compensation expense. Additionally, cost of services includes expenses related to sites and technology costs that can be directly attributed to the delivery of services.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Selling expenses consist of personnel costs, travel expenses, and other expenses for our client services, sales and marketing teams. Additionally, it includes costs of marketing and promotional events, corporate communications, and other brand-building activities.
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs and related expenses for technology, human resources, legal, finance, global shared services, and executives including, professional fees; insurance premiums, cloud-based capabilities and other corporate expenses.
Depreciation
Depreciation is computed on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of our property and equipment assets, generally three to five years or, for leasehold improvements, over the term of the lease, whichever is shorter.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets relates to our client relationship and trade name intangibles, which are amortized over their useful lives using the straight-line method, which reflects the pattern of benefit, and assumes no residual value.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense (income) primarily consists of gains and losses resulting from changes in the fair value of the foreign currency exchange rate forward contracts that we are party to. Our forward contracts are not designated as hedging instruments. Other income also includes gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of U.S.-denominated accounts to foreign currency and interest income.
Financing Expenses
Financing expenses primarily consist of interest expenses related to our term loan and revolving credit facility in addition to commitment fees related to the undrawn delayed draw loan and revolver borrowings.
Provision for (Benefit From) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of income information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Service revenue
Service revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $760.7 million and $478.0 million, respectively. Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $282.7 million or 59.1% when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Service revenues by service offering
The following table presents the breakdown of our service revenue by service offering for each period:
The year over year growth in Digital Customer Experience, AI Operations and Content Security contributed 38.9%, 11.5% and 8.7%, respectively, of the total increase of 59.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The 62.0% growth in Digital Customer Experience was primarily driven by an increase in volume of services to our existing customers and new customer wins. The 32.4% growth in Content Security was primarily driven by an increase in volume of services to our existing customers. The 110.0% growth in AI Operations was driven by an increase in volume of services to our existing customers and new customer wins.
Service revenues by delivery geography
The majority of our service revenues are derived from contracts with clients who are either located in the United States, or with clients who are located outside of the United States but whereby the contract specifies payment in United States Dollars. However, we deliver our services from multiple locations around the world.
The following table presents the breakdown of our service revenue by geographical location, based on where the services are provided:
Revenue generated from services provided from our delivery sites in the Philippines grew from expansion in all three of our service offerings, Digital Customer Experience, Content Security and AI Operations, which contributed 29.7%, 12.8% and 7.8% of the total increase of 50.3% in the Philippines, respectively.
Revenue generated from services provided from our delivery sites in the United States grew from expansion in two of our service offerings, Digital Customer Experience and AI Operations, which contributed 36.7% and 12.7% of the total increase of 43.8% in the United States, respectively, partially offset by a 5.6% decrease contributed by Content Security due to the shift in revenues to the Philippines and Rest of World.
Revenues generated from services provided from our delivery sites in the Rest of World grew primarily from expansion in all three of our service offerings in India and Mexico.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Services
Cost of services for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $431.7 million and $270.5 million, respectively. Cost of services for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $161.2 million, or 59.6%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher personnel costs of $143.7 million related to an increase in headcount to meet the demand in services from our customers. The remaining increase included site expansions to support revenue growth, operational enablement costs incurred in response to the COVID pandemic and costs associated with our gradual return to office.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $335.3 million and $113.5 million, respectively. Selling, general, and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $221.8 million, or 195.4%, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher personnel costs of $207.6 million due primarily to expenses related to the one-time phantom shares bonuses and non-recurring teammate bonuses associated with the IPO of $133.7 million, as well as stock-based compensation expense for equity-classified awards of $44.9 million, and increased costs across functions in support of our growth in revenue and public company requirements. The remaining increase included professional fees of $10.5 million due primarily to third parties who were engaged to assist with public offerings and public company requirements, investment in digital initiatives and higher insurance expense, partially offset by lease termination charges and severance incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect our stock-based compensation expense for equity-classified awards to increase in future periods as we recognize expense for the full periods, as well as any future grants.
Depreciation
Depreciation for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $29.0 million and $20.2 million, respectively. The increase in depreciation is a result of capital expenditures for additional technology and computers in support of our company-wide work-from-home policy, as well as leasehold improvements associated with site expansions to support revenue growth.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $18.8 million. Amortization can be attributed to the recognition of client relationship and trade name intangible assets recognized in connection with the October
2018 transaction in which we were formed by affiliates of Blackstone as a vehicle for the acquisition of TaskUs Holdings, Inc. that are being amortized on a straight-line basis.
Loss on disposal of assets
We recognized losses from disposal of assets during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $0.1 million and $1.1 million, respectively. The loss recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 related primarily to the closing of our Santa Monica Headquarters and San Antonio office locations.
Contingent consideration
We recognized expense related to the increase in the value of a contingent consideration liability of $3.6 million for cash payments due to the sellers in the Blackstone Acquisition as a result of tax benefits that became receivable by the Company during the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 13, “Related Party” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
Other expense (income)
Other expense (income) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.2 million and $(1.6) million, respectively. Changes in other expense (income) are primarily driven by our exposure to foreign currency exchange risk resulting from our operations in foreign geographies, primarily the Philippines, offset by economic hedges using foreign currency exchange rate forward contracts.
Financing expense
Financing expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $6.5 million and $7.5 million, respectively. The decrease in financing expense is primarily driven by the decrease in the rate of LIBOR used to calculate the interest rate of the term loan. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness-2019 Credit Agreement” for additional discussion on term loan.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $(2.3) million and $9.9 million, respectively. Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 3.7% and 22.3%, respectively. There are certain items included within the provision for (benefit from) income taxes calculation which are directly related to the IPO and not expected to recur in future periods, including certain phantom shares bonuses and equity awards made to officers which are not deductible under Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code. Additionally, there are costs related to the issuance of stock-based compensation included within the provision for (benefit from) income taxes calculation. If those costs directly related to the IPO and stock-based compensation expense are removed, the provision for income taxes would have been $23.0 million and the effective tax rate would have been 20.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue by Top Clients
The table below sets forth the percentage of our total service revenues derived from our largest clients for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Our clients are part of the rapidly growing Digital Economy and they rely on our suite of digital solutions to drive their continued success. For our existing clients, we benefit from our ability to grow as they grow and to cross sell new solutions, further deepening our entrenchment.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated 27% and 32%, respectively, of our service revenue from Meta, formerly known as Facebook, our largest client, and we generated 11% and 12%, respectively, of our service revenue from our second largest client, DoorDash.
We continue to identify and target high growth industry verticals and clients. Our strategy is to acquire new clients and further grow with our existing ones in order to achieve meaningful client and revenue diversification over time.
Foreign Currency
As a global company, we face exposure to movements in foreign currency exchange rates. Fluctuations in foreign currencies impact the amount of total assets, liabilities, revenue, operating expenses and cash flows that we report for our foreign subsidiaries upon the translation of these amounts into U.S. Dollars. See