Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations focuses on discussion of year-over-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussion of 2019 results and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The United States economy in general and our business specifically have been negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have seen adverse impacts as it relates to the decline in the number of patients that healthcare facilities and clinics are able to treat due to enhanced safety protocols. While we saw some level of recovery in the second quarter of 2021, the second half of 2021 was negatively impacted by the prolonged recovery from COVID-19 and increased variant cases during the period, which extended and expanded restricted access to clinics and hospitals and disrupted the recovery in patient visits versus the pre-COVID environment. There are no reliable estimates of how long the pandemic will last, whether any recovery will be sustained or will reverse course, the severity of any resurgence of COVID-19 or variant strains of the virus, the effectiveness of vaccines and attitudes towards receiving them, or what ultimate effects the pandemic will have. For that reason, we are unable to reasonably estimate the long-term impact of the pandemic on our business at this time.
Since the onset of COVID-19, we have remained proactive to ensure we continue to adapt to the needs of our employees, clinicians and patients. For a detailed listing of the changes to our business practices since the onset of the pandemic, refer to previous reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Continued modifications to our business include, but are not limited to:
● Incorporating remote and flexible work arrangements for employees whenever possible, including real-time, online training of our new sales representatives. In addition, we are monitoring pandemic conditions to assess whether our in-office and remote work strategy remains both productive and competitive.
● Eliminating employee travel restrictions in alignment with the opening of healthcare facilities and clinics while also continuing to maintain social distancing contact restrictions to reduce exposure.
● Utilizing a mix of employee trainers and independent healthcare practitioners to educate patients on the proper use of our solutions virtually or in-person.
● Continuing to host large virtual medical education programs, while also beginning to schedule smaller in-person meetings and restoring attendance at key professional congresses.
● Supporting clinicians and patients by using rigorous infection control practices when in-person visits are required.
● Following government guidelines related to vaccinations of our staff in light of customer vaccination requirements and our focus on safe interactions with patients and customers.
We cannot assure you that these changes to our processes and practices will be successful in mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business. We continue to evaluate and, if appropriate, will adopt other measures in the future related to the ongoing safety of our employees, clinicians and patients.
Overview
We are a medical technology company that develops and provides innovative medical devices for the treatment of underserved chronic diseases. Our mission is to help people suffering from chronic diseases live better and care for themselves at home. We focus our efforts on advancing the standard of care in treating underserved chronic diseases in the home setting to improve patient outcomes and quality of life and help control rising healthcare expenditures. Our areas of therapeutic focus are (1) vascular disease, with a goal of advancing the standard of care in treating lymphedema and chronic venous insufficiency, (2) oncology, where lymphedema is a common consequence among cancer survivors and (3) providing airway clearance therapy for those suffering from chronic respiratory conditions. We possess a unique, scalable platform to deliver at-home healthcare solutions throughout the United States. This evolving home care delivery model is recognized by policymakers and insurance payers as a key for controlling rising healthcare costs. Our solutions deliver cost-effective, clinically proven, long-term treatment for people with these chronic diseases.
Our current products are the Flexitouch system, Entre system and AffloVest. A predecessor to our Flexitouch system received 510(k) clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) in July 2002, and we introduced the system to address the many limitations of self-administered home-based manual lymphatic drainage therapy. We began selling our more advanced Flexitouch system after receiving 510(k) clearance from the FDA in October 2006. In September 2016, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for the Flexitouch system in treating lymphedema of the head and neck. In June 2017, we announced that we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for the Flexitouch Plus, the third-generation version of our Flexitouch system. In December 2020, we received 510(k) clearance for two new indications for our Flexitouch Plus system: phlebolymphedema and lipedema. We derive the vast majority of our revenue from our Flexitouch system. Sales and rentals of our Flexitouch system represented 85% and 88% of our revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We introduced our Entre system in the United States in February 2013. The Entre system is sold or rented to patients who need a simple pump or who do not yet qualify for insurance reimbursement for an advanced compression device such as our Flexitouch system. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, sales and rentals of our Entre system represented 13% and 12% of our revenue, respectively.
We previously sold and rented another proprietary product, the Actitouch system. During fiscal year 2018, we recorded a $2.5 million non-cash impairment charge to fully impair the inventory and intangible assets related to our Actitouch system due to the lack of market demand for the product. We formally discontinued this product line in the first quarter of 2020. See Note 9 - “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements in this report for more information regarding this impairment charge and discontinuation.
On September 8, 2021, we acquired the assets of the AffloVest respiratory therapy product line from International Biophysics Corporation (“IBC”), a privately-held company which developed and manufactures AffloVest. AffloVest is a portable, wearable vest that provides airway clearance to treat patients with chronic respiratory conditions such as bronchiectasis or conditions resulting from neuromuscular disorders. For the year ended December 31, 2021, sales of AffloVest represented 2% our revenue.
In October 2018, we licensed the intellectual property rights related to the Airwear Gradient Compression Wrap, or the Airwear wrap, in the U.S. and Canada, for use in all medical applications, including but not limited to swelling/edema and ulcers (including lymphedema and chronic venous insufficiency conditions), but excluding the use of the intellectual property in the field of prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis. The Airwear wrap is indicated for the management of venous insufficiency, venous hypertension, venous ulcerations and lymphedema. We began selling the Airwear wrap in a limited market in the fourth quarter of 2019. We subsequently made the strategic decision to discontinue the Airwear wrap in the second quarter of 2020 and, effective July 31, 2020, Sun Scientific, Inc. terminated the license agreement with us related to the Airwear wrap. See Note 9 - “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” to the consolidated financial statements in this report for more information regarding the related impairment charge.
To support the growth of our business, we invest heavily in our commercial infrastructure, consisting of our direct sales force, training resources, reimbursement capabilities and clinical expertise. We market our Flexitouch and Entre products in the United States using a direct-to-patient and -provider model. Our field commercial team consists of our direct sales force and a team of Field Support Specialists. The AffloVest device is sold through respiratory durable medical equipment providers throughout the United States. Our collective field commercial team, including our respiratory sales force, has grown to over 346 employees as of December 31, 2021, compared to 285 employees as of December 31, 2020.
As it relates to the impact of COVID-19 on our commercial processes, in the first half of 2021, we continued to see restrictions loosen, in line with the applicable governmental regulations. Conversely, in the second half of 2021, we were adversely impacted by the resurgence due to variants, resulting in renewed patient cancellations, absenteeism of staff and access limitations implemented by clinics and health systems. As a result, we continue to engage in virtual interactions if possible. We expect these virtual interactions with clinicians and patients to continue into the future until the pandemic subsides, and perhaps as a best practice in the future.
Additionally, with respect to sales force staffing, our results in the second half of 2021 were negatively impacted by the challenging labor market, which, in combination with some reluctance around our vaccination policy among both existing representatives and potential new hires, impacted recruiting and retention.
We invest substantial resources in our reimbursement function to improve operational efficiencies and enhance individual payer expertise, while continuing our strategic focus of payer development. Our payer relations function focuses on payer policy development, education, contract negotiations, and data analysis. Our reimbursement operations function is responsible for verifying patient insurance benefits, individual patient case development, prior authorization submissions, case follow-up, and appeals when necessary. Since the onset of COVID-19, our reimbursement function has been actively working with Medicare and a broad base of private payers to understand the ever-changing reimbursement criteria being introduced. We have seen increased flexibility in coverage criteria with select payers in which they now allow the use of virtual patient interactions in place of the previously required in-person interactions. However, as these circumstances are ever-changing, the extent to which these changes will remain in place and the impact on our business in the future are not determinable at this time.
We also have a clinical team, consisting of a scientific advisory board, in-house therapists and nurses, and a Chief Medical Officer, that serves as a resource to clinicians and patients and guides the development of clinical evidence in support of our products. Most clinical studies require observation and interaction with clinicians and patients to monitor results and progress. Given the impact of COVID-19, patient recruitment for our clinical studies involving our products and clinical outcomes had previously been suspended in 2020. In 2021, all of our clinical trials have resumed research activities, including study visits and new patient enrollments, albeit more slowly than the targeted enrollment rates.
We rely on third party contract manufacturers for the sourcing of parts, the assembly of our controllers and the manufacturing of the garments used with our Flexitouch and Entre systems. We conduct final assembly of the garments used with our Flexitouch system, perform quality assurance and ship our Flexitouch and Entre products from our facility in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The AffloVest device is currently manufactured by a third party, IBC, pursuant to a Transition Services Agreement. We plan for IBC to continue to manufacture the product on our behalf through the first half of 2022.
To date, our supply chain has not been materially impacted by COVID-19. We continue to receive our product on time and believe that we have enough safety stock to meet our short and mid-term demand. However, we cannot assure you that our supply chain will not be materially impacted in the future.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenue of $208.1 million and had a net loss of $11.8 million, compared to revenue of $187.1 million and a net loss of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and revenue of $189.5 million and net income of $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Our primary sources of capital since our initial public offering in 2016 have been from operating income and bank financing.
We operate in one segment for financial reporting purposes.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue from sales and rentals of our Flexitouch and Entre systems, to patients in the United States. Revenue growth has been driven by increased clinician, patient and payer awareness of lymphedema and the clinical efficacy of our Flexitouch system, and the launch of our Entre system in 2013. We have expanded our direct sales force, which helps us drive and support our revenue growth and intend to continue this expansion. However, any reversal in these recent trends could have a negative impact on our future revenue.
We sell or rent our Flexitouch and Entre systems either directly to patients or to the Veterans Administration on behalf of patients, who are referred to us by physicians, therapists or nurses. We bill payers, such as private insurers, Medicare, or Medicaid, on behalf of our patients and bill patients directly for their cost-sharing amounts, including any portion of an unsatisfied deductible and any copayments or co-insurance. We bill the Veterans Administration directly for the purchase or lease of our product on behalf of the patient. Approximately 13% of our revenue in each of 2021 and 2020 came from the Veterans Administration. Approximately 17% of our revenue in 2021 and 16% of our revenue in 2020 came from Medicare patients. Changes to the level of Medicare coverage for our products could reduce the number of Medicare patients who have access to our products. Our products currently are not subject to the competitive bidding process for supplying covered items to Medicare recipients.
We derive revenue from sales of our AffloVest product to accredited DME providers. These respiratory DME providers provide a full range of solutions for these patients with complex diseases, and represent a large, developed channel. Respiratory DME partners serve the role of receiving prescriptions, verifying coverage criteria, shipping, billing and training the patient. We intend to expand and support our respiratory DME partners, in an effort to help demonstrate HFCWO as a staple among the host of treatments they bring to chronic respiratory patients, thereby allowing us to continue to grow revenue from this product offering.
Our revenue has fluctuated, and we expect our revenue to continue to fluctuate, from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors, including seasonality. See Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Seasonality” for a further discussion of factors contributing to our seasonality. Further, our revenue is impacted by fluctuations in the mix of products being sold and rented during each period and changes in the mix of our payers and contract pricing.
Furthermore, we expect our revenue to continue to increase in the future as a result of increased awareness of our solutions, expansion of our direct sales force, our DME partners, enhanced marketing and customer support efforts, continued focus on developing clinical and economic outcomes data, efforts related to expanded third-party reimbursement and longer term, potential introduction of our solutions outside the United States. We also anticipate pricing pressure from private insurers, which will result in continued downward pressure on our revenue growth rate.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of component costs, direct labor, overhead costs, product warranties, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory, delivery costs for items sold or rented, and amortization related to the intangible assets related to our products. A significant portion of our cost of revenue consists of manufacturing overhead costs. These overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment and operations supervision and management. Cost of revenue also includes depreciation expense for product tooling and equipment as well as shipping costs. We expect overhead costs as a percentage of revenue to decrease as a result of expected increases in production volume and yields. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars primarily if, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
We provide a warranty for our products against defects in material and workmanship for a period of one to five years. We record a liability for future warranty claims at the time of sale for the warranty period offered to a customer in cost of revenue. If the assumptions used in calculating the provision were to materially change, such as incurring higher than anticipated warranty claims, an additional provision may be required.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including product and payer mix, production volumes, manufacturing costs and cost-reduction strategies. We continue to work to reduce product manufacturing costs through enhanced product design efforts as well as supply chain initiatives in an effort to offset anticipated price erosion. Our gross margin will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, commissions and benefits for employees. They also include expenses for patient training, social media and advertising, informational kits, public relations and other promotional and marketing activities, field sales travel and entertainment expenses, trade shows and conferences, stock-based compensation, as well as customer service. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our commercial infrastructure to drive and support our planned revenue growth. To the extent our revenue grows, we expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over time.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, third-party product development costs, laboratory supplies, consulting fees and related costs, clinical research expenses, expenses related to clinical and regulatory affairs, patent amortization costs, stock-based compensation and patent legal fees, including defense costs, and testing costs for new product launches. Clinical research expenses include clinical trial management and monitoring, payment to clinical investigators, consulting fees, data management, stock-based compensation, travel expenses and the cost of manufacturing products for clinical trials. We have made substantial investments in R&D since our inception. Our R&D efforts have focused primarily on activities designed to enhance our technologies and to support development and commercialization of new and existing products. We expect R&D expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop, enhance and commercialize new products and expand clinical trial efforts. We expect R&D expenses as a percentage of our revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of initiating new product development efforts, as well as our clinical trial activities.
Reimbursement, General and Administrative Expenses
Reimbursement, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation, including salaries, bonuses and benefits for employees in our patient services and advocacy, billing and collections, case management, payer relations and governmental affairs and reimbursement operations departments, as well as finance, human resources and administration, information technology, business development and general management functions, and facilities costs. Reimbursement expenses also include consulting, travel to payer case manager seminars, professional development and training, and certification expenses. General and administrative expenses also include professional services such as legal, consulting and accounting services, stock-based compensation, travel expenses, insurance and acquisition costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income related to investment income earned on our invested capital portfolio and interest expense related to our debt obligations.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Our income tax expense (benefit) consists primarily of permanent differences related to share-based compensation activity, as well as deferred income taxes resulting from temporary differences between the reporting of amounts for financial statement purposes and income tax purposes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could be material to our financial position and results of operations. Critical accounting estimates are those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting estimates, which involve significant subjectivity and judgment, and changes to such estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition or operating results. Therefore, we consider an understanding of the variability and judgment required in making these estimates and assumptions to be critical in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from the sales and rentals of our proprietary line of Flexitouch and Entre systems, and from our sales of our recently acquired AffloVest product. We recognize revenue when control of the product has been transferred to our customer, in the amount of the expected consideration to be received for the product. Expected consideration is estimated as follows:
● Flexitouch and Entre systems. Expected consideration to be received is estimated based on a detailed review of historical pricing adjustments and collections. Specifically, payment history of the applicable payer, as well as historical patient collections serve as a primary source of information in estimating expected consideration.
● AffloVest products. Management’s assessment of the expected consideration to be received is based on agreed upon contractual pricing, assessment of the likelihood of available volume-based rebates being achieved and payment history of the applicable DME partner.
We update our assessment of collectability on a quarterly basis, with any adjustments for Flexitouch and Entre systems being reflected as sales and rental revenue and AffloVest products being reflected as bad debt expense within reimbursement, general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of adjustment.
If in the future we determine that another method is more reasonable, or if another method for calculating these input assumptions is prescribed by authoritative guidance, the expected consideration associated with the sales and rentals of our products could change significantly. Changes in contractual pricing, payment trends and rebate structures would impact, either positively or negatively, our sales and rental revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
The fair value of stock options is estimated at the date of grant, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, except for the valuation of certain “CEO” related stock options subject to a market condition which uses the Monte Carlo Simulation model. We recognize the fair value of each award as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the equity grant.
The Monte Carlo Simulation and Black-Scholes valuation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock,
the risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend yield. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the significant application of management's judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. We determined weighted-average valuation assumptions as follows:
● Expected term. We use the "simplified method" to determine the expected term of the stock option.
● Expected volatility. Expected volatility for grants issued in and prior to the first fiscal quarter of 2021 was estimated using the average historical volatility of public companies of similar size and industry over a similar period as the expected term assumption used for our options. Beginning in the second fiscal quarter of 2021, we had sufficient historical data to transition to utilizing our average historical volatility over a similar period as the expected term assumption used for our options as the expected volatility.
● Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of U.S. Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected term of the options for each option group.
● Expected dividend yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
If in the future we determine that another method is more reasonable, or if another method for calculating these input assumptions is prescribed by authoritative guidance, the fair value calculated for our stock options could change significantly. Higher volatility and longer expected lives would result in an increase to stock-based compensation expense determined at the date of grant. Stock-based compensation expense affects our cost of revenue, sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses, and reimbursement, general and administrative expenses.
We estimate our forfeiture rate based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures and will continue to evaluate the appropriateness of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior and other factors. Quarterly changes in the estimated forfeiture rate can have a significant effect on reported stock-based compensation expense, as the cumulative effect of adjusting the rate for all expense amortization is recognized in the period the forfeiture estimate is changed. If a revised forfeiture rate is higher than the previously estimated forfeiture rate, an adjustment is made that will result in a decrease to the stock-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements. If a revised forfeiture rate is lower than the previously estimated forfeiture rate, an adjustment is made that will result in an increase to the stock-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements. The effect of forfeiture adjustments was insignificant for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We will continue to use significant judgment in evaluating the expected term, volatility and forfeiture rate related to our stock-based compensation.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table presents our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Revenue increased $20.9 million, or 11%, to $208.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $187.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was attributable to an increase of approximately $12.3 million, or 8%, in sales and rentals of our Flexitouch system, an increase of approximately $3.5 million, or 15%, in sales and rentals of our Entre system and $5.1 million in sales of the recently-acquired AffloVest product in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Beginning in March 2020 and continuing through 2020, revenue was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which limited our ability to access our clinician customers and their patients. Specifically, we saw healthcare facilities and clinics restricting access to their clinicians, reducing patient consultations, or closing temporarily due to COVID-19. Revenue for the first half of 2021 benefited from the initial stages of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, with a portion of healthcare facilities and clinics relaxing restrictions and increasing patient throughput, as well as an expanded prescriber base. Fiscal 2021 revenue also benefited from effective virtual education events and an increase in Medicare patients served. However, revenue in the second half of 2021 was negatively impacted by the prolonged recovery from COVID-19 and the resurgence due to variants, which extended and expanded restricted access to clinics and hospitals and disrupted the recovery in patient visits versus the pre-COVID environment. In addition, the challenging labor
market coupled with our vaccine policy impacted our ability to recruit and retain quality candidates for our direct sales force.
The following table summarizes our revenue by product for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, both in dollars and percentage of total revenue:
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased $5.5 million, or 10%, to $59.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $54.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in the number of Flexitouch and Entre systems sold and rented, the additional contribution of AffloVest, and an increase in inbound freight costs.
Gross margin was 71% for both of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $7.1 million, or 9%, to $86.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $79.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a:
● $7.4 million increase in personnel-related compensation expense as a result of the increased headcount in the collective field commercial team;
● $2.9 million increase in travel and entertainment expense due to eased restrictions on travel; and
● $0.7 million increase in demonstration equipment expense.
These increases were partially offset by a:
● $2.4 million decrease in expenses due to reduced sales meetings, tradeshows and professional services; and
● $1.5 million decrease in external patient training expense as a result of transitioning to employee trainers.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses increased $0.4 million, or 8%, to $5.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to an increase in professional services.
Reimbursement, General and Administrative Expenses
Reimbursement, general and administrative expenses increased $5.5 million, or 11%, to $56.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $51.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a:
● $5.0 million increase in occupancy costs, depreciation expense, and legal and professional fees;
● $3.3 million increase in personnel-related compensation expense as a result of increased headcount in our reimbursement operations, payer relations and corporate functions; and
● $0.8 million increase in transaction-related costs related to the acquisition of AffloVest.
These increases were partially offset by a:
● $3.6 million impairment charge related to the write-off of our Airwear wrap-related long-lived assets recorded in the second quarter of 2020.
Intangible Asset Amortization and Earn-out
Intangible asset amortization and earn-out expenses increased $0.5 million to $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in intangible asset amortization and earn-out expense was primarily attributable to the increase in amortization related to the assets acquired in the AffloVest acquisition, partially offset by a reduction in the estimated fair value of our earn-out liability.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net was an expense of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other income was primarily due to $1.2 million received in 2020 under the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund to compensate us for lost revenues from the COVID-19 public health emergency (PHE) which was recognized in the period based on our interpretation of guidance issued by the Department of Health and Human Services through January 2021.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
We recorded an income tax expense of $9.5 million and an income tax benefit of $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The current year tax expense was driven by the recording of a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets based on an assessment of existing positive and negative evidence which indicated these deferred tax assets would not be realizable.
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of the existing deferred tax assets. Based on this evaluation, as of December 31, 2021, a valuation allowance of $12.0 million was recorded to recognize only the residual portion of the existing deferred tax asset that are more likely than not to be realized and which comprises the assets that will not be offset by the reversal of deferred tax liabilities. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable which will be offset by reversing deferred tax liabilities, however, could be adjusted in the future if estimates of taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or increased or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as projections for growth.
Seasonality
Our business is affected by seasonality. In the first quarter of each year, when most patients have started a new insurance year and have not yet met their annual out-of-pocket payment obligations, we
experience substantially reduced demand for our products. We typically experience higher revenue in the third and fourth quarters of the year when more patients have met their annual insurance deductibles, thereby reducing their out-of-pocket costs for our products, and because patients desire to exhaust their flexible spending accounts at year end. This seasonality applies only to purchases and rentals of our products by patients covered by commercial insurance and is not relevant to Medicare, Medicaid or the Veterans Administration, as those payers either do not have plans that have declining deductibles over the course of the plan year and/or do not have plans that include patient deductibles for purchases or rentals of our products. Further, seasonality trends have been, and may continue to be, significantly different than historical trends as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related impacts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $28.2 million and net accounts receivable of $62.3 million compared to cash and cash equivalents of $47.9 million and net accounts receivable of $53.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Our primary sources of capital since our initial public offering in 2016 have been from operating income and bank financing.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $2.6 million, resulting from a net loss of $11.8 million and non-cash net income adjustments of $23.9 million, which were offset by an increase in net operating assets of $8.5 million. The non-cash net income adjustments primarily consisted of $10.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, $10.2 million of deferred income tax expense and $3.7 million of depreciation and amortization expense. Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of the acquisition in the current year, reflected stronger cash flow as compared to the prior year due primarily to improved collections in 2021, which were offset, in part, by continued investment in inventory designed to meet future projected demand, as well as payment of income tax obligations.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $2.8 million, resulting from net loss of $0.6 million and non-cash net income adjustments of $16.2 million, which were offset by an increase in net operating assets of $12.8 million. The non-cash net income adjustments primarily consisted of $10.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, a $4.0 million non-cash adjustment for impairment losses and $2.8 million of depreciation and amortization expense. Changes in operating assets and liabilities in 2020, reflected stronger cash flow as compared to the prior year, due primarily to improved collections in 2020, offset in part by continued investment in inventory designed to return the Company to standard stocking levels.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $82.2 million, primarily consisting of acquisition-related payments of $79.8 million associated with the acquisition of the AffloVest business and $2.1 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to office equipment, production tooling and tenant improvements and $0.3 million related to the acquisition of patents and other intangible assets.
Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $20.2 million, consisting primarily of $22.5 million in net proceeds from maturities of securities available-for-sale, offset by $2.1 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily related to IT infrastructure, production tooling and office equipment and $0.2 million related to the acquisition of patents and other intangible assets.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $59.9 million, primarily consisting of borrowings of $54.8 million net of debt issuance costs incurred and $6.3 million in proceeds from exercises of common stock options and the issuance of common stock under the ESPP, partially offset by $1.2 million in taxes paid for the net share settlement of performance and restricted stock units.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $2.1 million, consisting of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the ESPP of $2.9 million and proceeds from exercises of common stock options of $1.1 million, partially offset by $1.9 million in taxes paid for the net share settlement of performance and restricted stock units.
Credit Agreement
On August 3, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, which was amended by a First Amendment dated February 12, 2019, a Waiver and Second Amendment dated March 25, 2019, and a Third Amendment dated August 2, 2019 (collectively, the “2018 Credit Agreement”). On April 30, 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Restated Credit Agreement”) with the lenders from time to time party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent. The Restated Credit Agreement amended and restated in its entirety the 2018 Credit Agreement.
On September 8, 2021, we entered into a First Amendment Agreement (the “First Amendment”), which amends the Restated Credit Agreement (as amended by the First Amendment and the Second Amendment (as defined below), the “Credit Agreement”) with the lenders from time to time party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent. The First Amendment, among other things, adds a $30.0 million incremental term loan to the $25.0 million revolving credit facility provided by the Restated Credit Agreement. The term loan and the revolving credit facility mature on September 8, 2024. The Credit Agreement provides that, subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, we may increase the amount of the revolving loans available under the Credit Agreement and/or add one or more term loan facilities in an amount not to exceed $25.0 million in the aggregate, such that the total aggregate principal amount of loans available under the Credit Agreement (including under the revolving credit facility) does not exceed $80.0 million.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by a security interest in substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets and are also guaranteed by our subsidiaries. The Credit Agreement contains a number of restrictions and covenants, including that we maintain compliance with a maximum leverage ratio, minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and a minimum consolidated EBITDA covenant. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Agreement.
On September 8, 2021, in connection with the closing of the acquisition of the AffloVest business, we borrowed the $30.0 million term loan and utilized that borrowing, together with a draw of $25.0 million under the revolving credit facility and cash on hand, to fund the purchase price. The principal of the term loan is required to be repaid in quarterly installments of $750,000 commencing January 7, 2022, through July 8, 2024, with the remaining outstanding balance due on September 8, 2024.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings of $55.0 million under the Credit Agreement, comprised of $30.0 million under the term loan and $25.0 million under the revolving credit facility.
On February 22, 2022, we entered into a Second Amendment Agreement (the “Second Amendment”), which further amends the Credit Agreement. The Second Amendment modifies the maximum leverage ratio, the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and the minimum consolidated EBITDA covenants under the Credit Agreement, and adds a minimum liquidity covenant. The Second Amendment also increases the applicable margin for LIBOR rate loans under the Credit Agreement during the period commencing on the date of the Second Amendment and ending on the last day of the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2023.
Pursuant to the Second Amendment, on February 22, 2022, we made a mandatory principal prepayment of the term loan under the Credit Agreement of $3.0 million. Following such payment, as of February 22, 2022, we had outstanding borrowings of $51.3 million under the Credit Agreement, comprised of $26.3 million under the term loan and $25.0 million under the revolving credit facility.
For additional information regarding the Credit Agreement, including interest rates, fees and maturities, see Note 12 - “Credit Agreement” of the consolidated financial statements contained in this report.
Future Cash Requirements
Our material estimated future cash requirements under our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2021, in total and disaggregated into current (payable in 2022) and long-term (payable after 2022) obligations, are summarized as follows:
(1) We issued purchase orders in 2021 totaling $15.1 million for goods that we expect to receive and pay for in 2022.
(2) We currently lease approximately 150,000 square feet of office space for our corporate headquarters in Minneapolis, Minnesota, under a lease that expires in February 2031 and approximately 63,000 square feet of office, assembly and warehouse space at another facility in Minneapolis, Minnesota, under a lease that expires in March 2027. We entered into a fleet vehicle program for certain members of our field sales organization in 2016. At December 31, 2021, we had 39 vehicles under this program with current lease commitments. Furthermore, we lease office equipment from time-to-time based on our needs and these commitments are classified as operating leases.
(3) Reflects principal payment obligations under our term loan. Refer to Note 12 ‘‘Credit Agreement’’ to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for additional information regarding the maturities of debt principal.
(4) Reflects repayment of the principal of outstanding borrowings under our revolving line of credit based on the scheduled maturity date.
(5) Interest payment amounts on long-term debt are calculated using outstanding balances and interest rates in effect on December 31, 2021.
(6) In connection with the acquisition of AffloVest, we are liable for earn-out payments, aggregating up to $20.0 million in cash if certain future financial results of the AffloVest business are met. The fair value of this obligation at December 31, 2021 was $6.2 million, which is reflected on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Adequacy of Resources
Our future cash requirements may vary significantly from those now planned and will depend on many factors, including:
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business;
● sales and marketing resources needed to further penetrate our market;
● expansion of our operations domestically and/or internationally;
● response of competitors to our solutions and applications;
● costs associated with clinical research activities;
● increases in interest rates;
● labor shortages and wage inflation;
● costs to develop and implement new products; and
● use of capital for acquisitions or licenses, if any.
Historically, we have experienced increases in our expenditures consistent with the growth in our revenue, operations and personnel, and we anticipate that our expenditures will continue to increase as we expand our business.
Although the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors such as inflation and rising interest rates are difficult to predict, we believe our cash, cash equivalents and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, debt repayment and related interest, and other cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Inflation and changing prices did not have a material effect on our business during the year ended December 31, 2021, and we do not expect that inflation or changing prices will materially affect our business for at least the next twelve months.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
On March 27, 2020 the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act is a tax-and-spending package intended to provide economic relief to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act includes several tax provisions that, among other things, allow businesses to carry back net operating losses (“NOLs”) arising in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to the prior five tax years. In the third quarter of 2020, we collected $2.9 million related to the carry back of our NOLs arising from these prior tax years.
In addition, the CARES Act provided $100 billion in relief funds to hospitals and other healthcare providers on the front lines of the COVID-19 pandemic. An initial $30 billion of the funds were released for immediate infusion and were distributed to all facilities and providers that received Medicare fee-for-service (“FFS”) reimbursements in 2019. On April 10, 2020, we received $1.2 million of the initial allotment to all facilities and providers which was determined to be our proportionate share. Within 45 days of each reporting period end, we complied with the reporting requirements confirming funds were utilized in a manner described within the terms and conditions outlined by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. As of December 31, 2020, we recognized all of the funds received in the initial allotment as other income.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under the applicable regulations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of our consolidated financial statements contained in this report for a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that are applicable to our business.