Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and future financial performance, includes forward-looking statements that are based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results and the timing of selected events to differ materially from those described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section within Part I of this Annual Report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of novel targeted therapeutics for cancer and utilizing our cost efficient, contract research organization (CRO) independent product development platform to partner with ex-U.S. companies to develop and commercialize innovative products in the United States.
In December 2019, we entered into a collaboration and clinical trial agreement (the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement) with 3D Medicines Co., Ltd. (3D Medicines) and Jiangsu Alphamab Biopharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (Alphamab) for the development of envafolimab, also known as KN035, an investigational PD-L1 single-domain antibody (sdAb) administered by rapid subcutaneous injection for the treatment of sarcoma in North America. The ENVASARC Phase 2 pivotal trial (the ENVASARC trial) began dosing in December 2020 at 300mg of envafolimab every three weeks in cohort A, and 300mg of envafolimab every three weeks in combination with Yervoy® at 1mg/kg every three weeks for four doses in cohort B, in the sarcoma subtypes of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) and myxofibrosarcoma (MFS). In December 2021, the IDMC reviewed interim safety and efficacy data from 18 patients enrolled into each cohort who completed a minimum of 12 weeks of efficacy evaluations (two on-treatment scans). The objective response rate (ORR) by blinded independent central review (BICR) in each cohort satisfied the prespecified futility rule of having at least one response in each cohort. Envafolimab was well tolerated, with only a single Grade 3 related adverse event
reported in 36 patients. Based on the tolerability profile and the significantly higher ORR observed in lower weight patients, the independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) recommended the trial continue, using a higher dose of envafolimab of 600mg every three weeks. Given the activity demonstrated by higher doses of envafolimab in completed trials, including in the pivotal trial in MSI-H/dMMR cancer that was the basis for approval of envafolimab in China, we agreed with the IDMC guidance and proposed a doubling of the envafolimab dose to 600mg every three weeks to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in an amendment which was cleared without comment. The ENVASARC trial will now assess up to 80 new patients in a cohort of single agent envafolimab at 600mg every three weeks and up to 80 new patients in a cohort of envafolimab at 600mg every three weeks with Yervoy at 1mg/kg every three weeks for four doses. Nine of 80 responses by BICR in either cohort are needed to satisfy the primary objective of the trial which is to statistically exceed the known 4% ORR of Votrient® (pazopanib), the only FDA-approved treatment for patients with refractory UPS or MFS. Achieving the primary endpoint of ORR could be the basis for accelerated approval of envafolimab by the FDA as a single agent and/or in combination with Yervoy. The trial will provide at least 86% power to demonstrate the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval is greater than 5% in each cohort, which would be greater than the 4% ORR of Votrient reported in soft tissue sarcoma in its package insert. Votrient is the only approved treatment for refractory soft tissue sarcoma, which includes UPS and MFS.
An initial interim efficacy analysis at the higher 600mg dose is planned following the 12-week efficacy scan in the 36th enrolled patient, to allow for determination of the preliminary ORR, which we expect in the second half of 2022. There must be at least one response among the initial 18 patients enrolled at 600mg into each cohort to continue enrollment in that cohort per the futility rules of the trial. A second interim efficacy analysis at the 600mg dose is planned following the 12-week efficacy scan in the 92nd enrolled patient, to allow for determination of the preliminary ORR, which we expect in 2023. There must be at least three responses among the initial 46 patients enrolled at 600mg into each cohort to continue enrollment in that cohort per the futility rules of the trial.
Assuming sufficient patient responses in line with meeting the ENVASARC trial endpoint, we intend to apply for fast track designation with the FDA for envafolimab for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma subtypes in the United States in 2022, and for breakthrough designation following the initial efficacy interim analysis. We expect final response assessment data including duration of response in all patients from the ENVASARC trial in 2024, and, assuming positive data, to submit a biologics license application to the FDA seeking accelerated approval in 2024. At any time that we reach nine responses in each cohort and meet the endpoint, we expect to discuss the submission process with the FDA.
In June 2021, we received orphan drug designation (ODD) for envafolimab for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma. The ODD application included data demonstrating that two of five patients with alveolar soft parts sarcoma (ASPS) treated with envafolimab in Phase 1 trials conducted by 3D Medicines and Alphamab demonstrated partial responses (PR), each with a duration of response greater than six months. In June and August 2021, the Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) recommended that the ENVASARC trial proceed as planned following the review of safety data from the more than 20 patients enrolled in the trial at that time.
In November 2021, we announced that our partners 3D Medicines and Alphamab had received marketing authorization for envafolimab from the Chinese National Medical Products Association (NMPA) in the indication of microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) cancer.
Our other clinical stage oncology product candidates include YH001, which is a monospecific investigational CTLA-4 antibody, that we licensed from Eucure (Beijing) Biopharma Co., Ltd. (Eucure) and Biocytogen Pharmaceuticals (Beijing) Co., Ltd. (Biocytogen) in October 2021, TRC102, which is a small molecule that has been studied in Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials for the treatment of mesothelioma, lung cancer, glioblastoma and solid tumors, and TJ004309, which is a CD73 antibody in Phase 1 clinical development for the treatment of solid tumors, that we licensed from I-Mab Biopharma (I-Mab) in November 2018.
YH001 is an investigational humanized CTLA-4 IgG1 monoclonal antibody that is being developed in two Phase 1 trials by Eucure for the treatment of various cancer indications. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) is a protein expressed on T-cells and expressed at high levels specifically on regulatory T-cells (Tregs) and contributes to the suppressor function of Tregs by acting as a checkpoint to inhibit effector T-cell immune responses to cancer cells. The CTLA-4 inhibitor Yervoy (ipilimumab) marketed by BMS has been approved as a single agent in melanoma and approved in combination with other therapies in multiple indications including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and MSI-H/dMMR cancer. As of August 9, 2021, YH001 had been dosed in more than 34 patients in China and Australia. No CTLA-4 therapy is approved by the FDA for the treatment of soft tissue sarcoma. We intend to initiate a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of YH001 in combination with envafolimab and with doxorubicin chemotherapy, an approved treatment for soft tissue sarcoma, in the second half of 2022. Additionally, we plan to initiate trials of YH001 as a single agent or in combination with immunotherapies in other tumor types.
TRC102 is a small molecule in clinical development to reverse resistance to specific chemotherapeutics by inhibiting DNA base excision repair (BER). In initial clinical trials of more than 100 patients, TRC102 has shown good tolerability and we believe, promising anti-tumor activity in combination with alkylating and antimetabolite chemotherapy for the treatment of cancer patients. TRC102 has been studied in Phase 1 or Phase 2 trials in mesothelioma patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutic Alimta® (pemetrexed), in glioblastoma, ovarian cancer, lung and colorectal cancer patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutic Temodar® (temozolomide) and in lung cancer patients in combination with the approved chemotherapeutics Alimta and cisplatin as well as external beam radiation (i.e., chemoradiation). All current TRC102 trials are sponsored and funded by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). We retain global rights to develop and commercialize TRC102 in all indications. In October 2020, we
received ODD from the FDA for TRC102 for the treatment of patients with malignant glioma, including glioblastoma. O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) deficiency is observed in about one-third of glioblastoma patients, and a prior study of Temodar and TRC102 reported at the Society for Neuro-Oncology in 2018 demonstrated that two MGMT deficient glioblastoma patients had prolonged survival when treated with Temodar and TRC102 after progressing previously on Temodar and radiation therapy. A December 2020 publication in Cancer Cell also demonstrated Temodar and TRC102 were active in MGMT deficient patients with colorectal cancer. Based on these data, we believe a trial in first line glioblastoma patients of Temodar, radiation therapy and TRC102 is warranted and are discussing further development with investigators at this time. In addition, based on data presented at the ASCO 2020 virtual meeting that the combination of chemoradiation and TRC102 produced objective responses in all 15 evaluable patients with advanced localized lung cancer treated in a Phase 1 trial, in January 2022, the NCI initiated a randomized trial of chemoradiation with or without TRC102, followed by consolidative durvalumab treatment. The primary objective is to improve the 56% progression free survival (PFS) rate with current standard of care to 75% with current standard of care plus TRC102. The trial is expected to begin enrollment in June 2022 and complete in 2024.
TJ004309, also known as TJD5 or uliledlimab, is a novel humanized antibody against CD73 expressed on stromal cells and tumors that converts extracellular adenosine monophosphate (AMP) to the immunosuppressive metabolite adenosine. We are developing TJ004309 in collaboration with I-Mab under a strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreement that we entered into in November 2018 (the TJ004309 Agreement). In July 2019, we began enrollment in a Phase 1 clinical trial to assess safety and preliminary efficacy of TJ004309 as a single agent and when combined with the PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor Tecentriq® in patients with advanced solid tumors, and in June 2021 we presented data from the ongoing Phase 1 trial at the ASCO 2021 virtual meeting. In a poster presentation titled “The safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and clinical efficacy of uliledlimab (TJ004309), a differentiated CD73 antibody, in combination with atezolizumab in patients with advanced cancer,” uliledlimab was found to be well-tolerated up to 20mg/kg every three weeks and 15mg/kg once weekly as a monotherapy and in combination therapy with atezolizumab 1200mg every three weeks and no dose limiting toxicity (DLT) was observed and the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was not reached. There was one complete response in a PD-(L)1 naïve patient, two PRs with one PR in a PD-(L)1 naïve patient and one PR in a PD-(L)1 refractory patient, and three cases of stable disease (SD) following treatment with uliledlimab and atezolizumab. We expect to complete the TJ004309 Phase 1 in the first half of 2022.
We entered into a separate strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreement (the Bispecific Agreement) which allows for the development of up to five of I-Mab’s proprietary bispecific antibody (the BsAb) product candidates to be nominated by I-Mab within a five-year period for development and commercialization in North America, with the option to opt-in and acquire product rights outside of Greater China and Korea prior to completing the first pivotal clinical trial for any bispecific product candidate.
In March 2020, I-Mab issued a press release announcing a strategic partnership with Kalbe Genexine Biologics (KG Bio), whereby KG Bio received what the press release described as a right of first negotiation outside North America for TJ004309 for up to $340 million in potential payments to I-Mab. In March 2020, we also learned that I-Mab had entered into two license and collaboration agreements with ABL Bio in July 2018 (ABL Bio License 1 and ABL Bio License 2). Under ABL Bio License 1, I-Mab granted to ABL Bio exclusive, worldwide (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing rights to develop and commercialize a BsAb using certain monoclonal antibody sequences. Under ABL License 2, I-Mab and ABL agreed to collaborate to develop three PD-L1-based bispecific antibodies by using ABL Bio’s proprietary BsAb technology and commercialize them in their respective territories, which, collectively, include China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea, and other territories throughout the rest of the world if both parties agree to do so in such other territories during the performance of the agreement. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute regarding possible breaches of the TJ004309 Agreement and the Bispecific Agreement, which resulted in a binding arbitration proceeding under the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce before an arbitration tribunal seated in New York City (the Tribunal). The Tribunal held a hearing on the merits in February 2022. As of the date of this Annual Report, the TJ004309 Agreement and Bispecific Agreement disputes remain under consideration by the Tribunal, and we expect their decision in 2022. We believe we may be entitled to receive payments due to I-Mab’s strategic partnership with KG Bio under the TJ004309 Agreement, although I-Mab has disputed any payment is due. In 2021, I-Mab sent us notices purporting to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement, which would result in I-Mab owing us a prespecified termination fee of $9.0 million. However, I-Mab does not have an option to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement without cause until the ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial of TJ004309 is “Complete,” as that term is defined in the TJ004309 Agreement, and we responded by disputing the basis for I-Mab’s termination. In March 2021, I-Mab filed a lawsuit in the Delaware Court of Chancery seeking an order of specific performance requiring us to comply with I-Mab’s effort to terminate the agreement. We disagreed with I-Mab’s position and in May 2021, the Delaware Court of Chancery stayed the lawsuit filed by I-Mab and subsequently this matter was remanded and included in the proceeding before the Tribunal. The claims under the arbitration under the TJ00439 and Bispecific Agreements are substantial and complex and the result is inherently uncertain. The dispute with I-Mab has caused and could continue to cause us to incur significant costs.
The following table summarizes key information regarding ongoing and planned development of our clinical stage product candidates:
We utilize a CRO-independent product development platform that emphasizes capital efficiency. Our experienced clinical operations, data management, quality assurance, product development and regulatory affairs groups manage significant aspects of our clinical trials with internal resources. We use these internal resources to reduce the costs associated with utilizing CROs to conduct clinical trials. In our experience, this model has resulted in capital efficiencies and improved communication with clinical trial sites, which can expedite patient enrollment and improve the quality of patient data as compared to a CRO-managed model. We have leveraged this platform in all of our sponsored clinical trials. We have also leveraged our product development platform to diversify our product pipeline without payment of upfront license fees through license agreements with Eucure and Biocytogen, 3D Medicines and Alphamab, I-Mab, and Janssen. We continue to evaluate ex-U.S. companies that would benefit from a rapid and capital-efficient U.S. drug development solution that includes U.S. and European Union (EU) clinical development expertise. We believe we will continue to be recognized as a preferred U.S. clinical development partner through a cost- and risk-sharing partnership structure, which may include U.S. commercialization.
Our goal is to be a leader in the development of targeted therapies for patients with cancer and other diseases of high unmet medical need.
Since our inception in 2004, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development efforts relating to our product candidates, including conducting clinical trials, in-licensing related intellectual property, providing general and administrative support for these operations, and protecting our intellectual property. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and instead, have funded our operations from the sales of equity securities, payments received in connection with our collaboration agreements, and commercial bank debt under our credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB). At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $24.1 million.
We do not own or operate, nor do we expect to own or operate, facilities for product manufacturing, storage, distribution or testing. We contract with third parties or our collaboration partners for the manufacture of our product candidates and we intend to continue to do so in the future.
We have incurred losses from operations in each year since our inception. Our net losses were $28.7 million and $16.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $207.8 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. We expect our expenses to remain relatively constant in 2022 as we:
•
continue to enroll the ENVASARC trial and initiate a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of YH001 in combination with envafolimab in certain sarcoma subtypes;
•
continue our research and development efforts;
•
in-license additional product candidates for development and commercialization;
•
seek regulatory approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials; and
•
incur legal expenses in connection with the arbitration on the TJ004309 Agreement and Bispecific Agreement.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, and distribution. Accordingly, we will need to raise substantial additional capital. The amount and timing of our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the pace and results of our preclinical and clinical development efforts, developments under our collaboration agreements, including whether and when we receive milestone and other potential payments, the outcome of our dispute with I-Mab, and the timing and nature of the regulatory approval process for product candidates. We anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources. Debt financing, if available, may involve
covenants further restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Further, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, as well as actual and anticipated changes in interest rates or economic inflation, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and ability to develop product candidates.
Collaboration and License Agreements
Collaboration Agreement with 3D Medicines and Alphamab
In December 2019, we, 3D Medicines, and Alphamab entered into the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement for the development of envafolimab, an investigational PD-L1 sdAb, or nanobody, administered by rapid subcutaneous injection, for the treatment of sarcoma in North America.
Pursuant to the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we were granted an exclusive license to develop and commercialize envafolimab for the treatment of sarcoma in North America. We are responsible for conducting and will bear the costs of any Phase 1, Phase 2, and Phase 3 or post-approval clinical trial in North America for envafolimab in the indications of refractory and first line treatment of sarcoma. 3D Medicines and Alphamab are responsible for conducting and will bear the costs of investigational new drug (IND)-enabling studies (other than those specific to the sarcoma indication) and the preparation of the chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC) activities sections of an IND application for envafolimab. 3D Medicines and Alphamab have agreed to manufacture and supply, or to arrange for a third-party manufacturer to manufacture and supply, envafolimab to us at pre-negotiated prices that vary based on clinical or commercial use. 3D Medicines and Alphamab retained the right to develop envafolimab in all territories outside of North America as well as within North America for all indications other than sarcoma.
We will be responsible for commercializing envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, including booking of sales revenue, unless (a) envafolimab is first approved in North America for an indication other than sarcoma and launched in North America, or (b) envafolimab is first approved in North America for sarcoma and subsequently approved in North America for an additional non-orphan indication and sold commercially by 3D Medicines and/or Alphamab, or licensee, in which case 3D Medicines and Alphamab will be responsible for commercializing envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, including booking of sales revenue. If 3D Medicines and Alphamab become responsible for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we have the option to co-market envafolimab for sarcoma in North America. In the event that envafolimab is first approved in North America for sarcoma and within three years of the commercial launch of envafolimab in North America for sarcoma 3D Medicines and Alphamab replace us as the party responsible for commercialization, and we elect and 3D Medicines and Alphamab agree for us to not co-market envafolimab for sarcoma in North America, then 3D Medicines and Alphamab will be required to compensate us for our costs associated with preparing for and conducting commercial activities.
If we have the responsibility for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we will owe 3D Medicines and Alphamab tiered double digit royalties on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America ranging from the teens to mid-double digits. If 3D Medicines and Alphamab have responsibility for commercialization under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, we will be entitled to (a) tiered double digit royalties on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America ranging from the teens to mid-double digits if we have elected to not co-market envafolimab in sarcoma or (b) a 50% royalty on net sales of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America if we have chosen to co-market envafolimab in sarcoma. Payment obligations under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement continue on a country-by-country basis until the last to expire licensed patent covering envafolimab expires.
3D Medicines and Alphamab retain the right to reacquire the rights to envafolimab for sarcoma in North America in connection with an arm’s length sale to a third party of the rights to develop and commercialize envafolimab in North America for all indications, provided that the sale may not occur prior to completion of a pivotal trial of envafolimab in sarcoma without our written consent and the parties must negotiate in good faith and agree to fair compensation be paid to us for the value of and opportunity represented by the reacquired rights.
Each party agreed that during the term of the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement, it would not develop or license from any third party a monospecific inhibitor to PD-L1 or PD-1 in sarcoma.
The term of the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement continues until the later of the date the parties cease further development and commercialization of envafolimab for sarcoma in North America or the expiration of all payment obligations. The Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement may be terminated earlier by a party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or for safety reasons related to envafolimab. In the event we elect, or a joint steering committee (JSC) determines, to cease further development or commercialization of envafolimab, or if we fail to use commercially reasonable efforts to
develop (including progress in clinical trials) and commercialize envafolimab and do not cure such failure within a specified time period, then our rights and obligations under the Envafolimab Collaboration Agreement will revert to 3D Medicines and Alphamab.
Collaboration Agreement with Eucure and Biocytogen
In October 2021, we, Eucure and Biocytogen entered into a collaborative development and commercialization agreement (the YH001 Collaboration Agreement) for the development of YH001, a monospecific investigational CTLA-4 antibody. Pursuant to the YH001 Collaboration Agreement, we were granted an exclusive (including with respect to Eucure and its affiliates), nontransferable, license to develop and commercialize YH001 in North America for the treatment, through administration of YH001 by intravenous or subcutaneous means, of multiple human indications, including sarcoma, microsatellite stable colorectal cancer, RCC, and K-ras positive non-small cell lung cancer (collectively, the Initial Indications) or one or more of bladder cancer, endometrial cancer, and melanoma as substitute indications, which may be substituted for Initial Indications at our discretion (each upon such substitution, a Substitute Indication). We are responsible for, and will bear the costs of, preparing and filing all regulatory submissions and conducting any Phase 1, Phase 2, Phase 3, or post-approval clinical trials in North America for YH001 in the Initial Indications and potentially the Substitute Indications, while Eucure is responsible for conducting, and will bear the costs of, the preparation of CMC activities for YH001. Eucure has agreed to manufacture and supply, or to arrange for a third-party manufacturer to manufacture and supply, YH001 to us for clinical trials pursuant to the terms of a clinical supply and quality agreement that will be separately negotiated and agreed in good faith between the parties.
Eucure may pursue clinical trials for YH001 in North America outside of the Initial Indications or Substitute Indications, and also within the Initial Indications or Substitute Indications as part of a combination therapy of YH001 and an additional Eucure product. During a specified period, we have the option, subject to Eucure’s prior written approval, to expand the license to include the development and commercialization of YH001 for the treatment, through administration by intravenous or subcutaneous means, of all human and veterinary therapeutic indications in North America for a payment to Eucure in the low single digit millions (the Company Option).
Pursuant to the YH001 Collaboration Agreement, we granted Eucure an irrevocable, perpetual, royalty-free, exclusive license, with the right to grant sublicenses to develop, register, sell, offer to sell, have sold, market and distribute YH001 in all territories outside of North America as well as within North America for all indications other than the Initial Indications and the Substitute Indications.
We will be responsible for commercializing YH001 in North America, including booking of sales revenue in the Initial and Substitute Indications. We will owe Eucure escalating double digit royalties on net sales of YH001 in North America ranging from the mid-twenties to mid-double digits; provided that until the end of the first full calendar year following the first commercial sale of YH001, royalties will range from the lower double digits to the mid-double digits. If sales of YH001 exceed a pre-determined sales threshold in the first full year of sales following first commercial sale, we will owe a milestone to Eucure in the high single digit millions. Payment obligations under the YH001 Collaboration Agreement continue on a country-by-country basis until the latest of (i) expiration of the last to expire licensed patent covering YH001, (ii) expiration of marketing or regulatory exclusivity covering YH001 and (iii) 10 years from the first commercial sale of YH001 in such country in North America. Eucure has agreed to manufacture and supply, or to arrange for a third-party manufacturer to manufacture and supply, YH001 to us at cost plus a low double-digit markup for commercial sales pursuant to the terms of a commercial supply and quality agreement that will be separately negotiated and agreed in good faith between the parties within 180 days prior to the anticipated first commercial sale in North America.
Pursuant to the YH001 Collaboration Agreement, each party agreed that during the term of the YH001 Collaboration Agreement, it would not develop, manufacture, commercialize or license from any third party a monospecific inhibitor to CTLA-4.
The term of the YH001 Collaboration Agreement continues until the earlier of (i) the date that the parties cease further development and commercialization of YH001 in North America or (ii) on a country-by-county basis, the expiration of the royalty obligations in such country. The YH001 Collaboration Agreement may be terminated earlier by a party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or for safety reasons related to YH001. In the event of a termination of the YH001 Collaboration Agreement, other than by us as a result of Eucure’s material uncured breach or bankruptcy, (i) our license shall terminate and (ii) we would be obligated to grant Eucure an irrevocable, perpetual, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the right to grant sublicenses under its rights in all development data and intellectual property to develop, register, sell, offer to sell, have sold, market and distribute YH001 in North America. In the event of a termination of the YH001 Collaboration Agreement by us as a result of Eucure’s material uncured breach or bankruptcy, the license shall continue in the Initial Indications in North America, provided that (i) such license shall remain exclusive during the royalty term and non-exclusive thereafter; (ii) we shall have the right to have YH001 manufactured for its development and commercialization requirements in the Initial Indications in North America; and (iii) the license shall terminate in the event of an uncured material breach by us of any provision (including payment obligations) that survives termination of the YH001 Collaboration Agreement. In the event the YH001 Collaboration Agreement terminates for safety reasons related to YH001, by mutual agreement of the parties or by Eucure in the event of an uncured material breach or bankruptcy by us, then our rights and obligations under the YH001 Collaboration Agreement will revert to Eucure. In the event Eucure does not approve the Company Option, we may terminate the YH001 Collaboration Agreement for convenience with a 30-day notice to Eucure, provided that such termination is given within 12 months of the effective date of the YH001 Collaboration
Agreement (the Company Option Termination). In the event of a Company Option Termination, Eucure would be obligated to reimburse us for all costs and expenses that we incurred in performing the development activities.
Collaboration Agreements with I-Mab Biopharma
In November 2018, we entered into two separate strategic collaboration and clinical trial agreements with I-Mab for the development of multiple immuno-oncology programs, including I-Mab’s proprietary CD73 antibody TJ004309 as well as up to five proprietary bispecific antibodies currently under development by I-Mab.
In the TJ004309 Agreement, we are collaborating with I-Mab on developing TJ004309, and will bear the costs of filing an IND application and for Phase 1 clinical trials, share costs equally for Phase 2 clinical trials, and we will bear 40% and I-Mab 60% of the costs for pivotal clinical trials. I-Mab will also be responsible for the cost of certain non-clinical activities and the supply of TJ004309 and any reference drugs used in the development activities. We also agreed with I-Mab for a specified period of time to not develop or license to or from a third party any monoclonal antibody targeting CD73 or any other biologic for certain indications that a JSC, as set up under the TJ004309 Agreement, selects for TJ004309 development.
In the event that I-Mab licenses rights to TJ004309 to a third party, we would be entitled to receive escalating portions of royalty and non-royalty consideration received by I-Mab with respect to territories outside of Greater China. In the event that I-Mab commercializes TJ004309, we would be entitled to receive a royalty on net sales by I-Mab in North America ranging from the mid-single digits to low double digits, and in the EU and Japan in the mid-single digits. The portions of certain third party royalty and non-royalty consideration and the royalty from net sales by I-Mab to which we would be entitled escalate based on the phase of development and relevant clinical trial obligations we complete under the TJ004309 Agreement, ranging from a high-single digit to a mid-teen percentage of non-royalty consideration as well as a double digit percentage of royalty consideration. In March 2020, I-Mab issued a press release announcing a strategic partnership with KG Bio, whereby KG Bio received what the press release described as a right of first negotiation outside North America for TJ004309 for up to $340 million in potential payments to I-Mab. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute regarding possible breach of the TJ004309 Agreement, which resulted in a binding arbitration proceeding under the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce before the Tribunal. The Tribunal held a hearing on the merits in February 2022. As of the date of this Annual Report, the TJ004309 Agreement dispute remains under consideration by the Tribunal, and we expect their decision in 2022. We believe we may be entitled to receive payments due to I-Mab’s strategic partnership with KG Bio under the TJ004309 Agreement, although I-Mab has disputed any payment is due.
The TJ004309 Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or for safety reasons related to TJ004309. I-Mab may also terminate the TJ004309 Agreement if we cause certain delays in completing a Phase 1 clinical trial. In addition, I-Mab may terminate the TJ004309 Agreement for any reason within 90 days following the completion of the first Phase 1 clinical trial, in which case we would be entitled to a minimum termination fee of $9.0 million, or following the completion of the first Phase 2 clinical trial, in which case we would be entitled to a pre-specified termination fee of $15.0 million and either a percentage of non-royalty consideration I-Mab may receive as part of a license to a third party or an additional payment if TJ004309 is approved for marketing outside Greater China before a third party license is executed, in addition to a double digit percentage of royalty consideration. In 2021, I-Mab sent us notices purporting to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement, which would result in I-Mab owing us a prespecified termination fee of $9.0 million. However, I-Mab does not have an option to terminate the TJ004309 Agreement without cause until the ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial of TJ004309 is “Complete,” as that term is defined in the TJ004309 Agreement, and we responded by disputing the basis for I-Mab’s termination. In March 2021, I-Mab filed a lawsuit in the Delaware Court of Chancery seeking an order of specific performance requiring us to comply with I-Mab’s effort to terminate the agreement. We disagreed with I-Mab’s position and in May 2021, the Delaware Court of Chancery stayed the lawsuit filed by I-Mab and subsequently this matter was remanded and included in the proceeding before the Tribunal.
The claims under the arbitration under the TJ00439 Agreement are substantial and complex and the result is inherently uncertain. The dispute with I-Mab has caused and could continue to cause us to incur significant costs.
Pursuant to the Bispecific Agreement, we and I-Mab may mutually select through a JSC up to five of I-Mab’s BsAb product candidates within a five-year period for development and commercialization in North America.
For each product candidate selected by the JSC for development under the Bispecific Agreement, I-Mab will be responsible and bear the costs for IND-enabling studies and establishing manufacturing for the product candidate, we will be responsible for and bear the costs of filing an IND and conducting Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials, and we will be responsible for and will share equally with I-Mab in the costs of conducting Phase 3 or pivotal clinical trials, in each case within North America. Subject to I-Mab’s right to co-promote an approved product candidate, we will be responsible for commercializing any approved product candidates in North America, and we will share profits and losses equally with I-Mab in North America. We would also be entitled to receive tiered low single digit royalties on net sales of product candidates in the EU and Japan.
At any time prior to completing the first pivotal clinical trial for a product candidate or if I-Mab ceases to support development costs or pay its portion of Phase 3 clinical trial costs for a product candidate or the JSC decides to cease development over our
objections after initiating Phase 3 clinical trials, we will have an option to obtain an exclusive license to such product candidate in all territories except Greater China and Korea and any other territories in which I-Mab previously licensed rights to a third party subject to our right of first refusal for any licenses I-Mab may grant to third-parties.
If we exercise our licensing option, we would assume sole responsibility for developing and commercializing the product candidate in the licensed territory, and in lieu of profit or loss sharing with I-Mab with respect to such product candidate, we would owe I-Mab pre-specified upfront and milestone payments and royalties on net sales, with the payments and royalties escalating depending on the phase of development the product candidate reached at the time we obtained the exclusive license as follows: (i) if before IND-enabling studies and the preparation of the CMC activities of the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $10.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $90.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the mid-single digits on annual net sales; (ii) if after IND submission but before completion of a Phase 1a clinical trial of the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $25.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $125.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the high single digits on annual net sales; (iii) if after completion of a Phase 1a clinical trial but before completion of a Phase 2 proof of concept clinical trial for the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $50.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $250.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the low double digits on annual net sales; and (iv) if after completion of a Phase 2 proof of concept clinical trial and before completion of a pivotal trial for the collaborative product, we would owe I-Mab a one-time upfront payment of $80.0 million, development and regulatory based milestone payments totaling up to $420.0 million that begin upon completion of a pivotal trial, sales milestones totaling up to $250.0 million, and royalties in the high-teens on annual net sales.
Each party agreed that for a specified period of time, it would not develop or license to or from any third party any bispecific monoclonal antibody targeting the same two biological targets as those of any selected product candidates under the Bispecific Agreement.
If development of any selected product candidates is terminated by a decision of the JSC, all rights to the product candidate will revert to I-Mab, subject to our rights to obtain an exclusive license in certain circumstances. If development is terminated after submission of an IND and prior to initiating Phase 3 clinical studies or after initiating Phase 3 clinical studies and with our concurrence, we would be entitled to tiered low single digit royalties on net sales of the product candidate in North America, the EU and Japan.
The Bispecific Agreement may be terminated by either party in the event of an uncured material breach by the other party or bankruptcy of the other party, or with respect to any selected product candidate, for safety reasons related to that product candidate.
In March 2020, we learned that I-Mab had entered into two license and collaboration agreements with ABL Bio in July 2018. Under ABL Bio License 1, I-Mab granted to ABL Bio exclusive, worldwide (excluding Greater China), royalty-bearing rights to develop and commercialize a BsAb using certain monoclonal antibody sequences. Under ABL License 2, I-Mab and ABL agreed to collaborate to develop three PD-L1-based bispecific antibodies by using ABL Bio’s proprietary BsAb technology and commercialize them in their respective territories, which, collectively, include China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and South Korea, and other territories throughout the rest of the world if both parties agree to do so in such other territories during the performance of the agreement. On April 8, 2020, we issued a notice of dispute regarding possible breach of the Bispecific Agreement, which resulted in a binding arbitration proceeding under the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce before the Tribunal. The Tribunal held a hearing on the merits in February 2022. As of the date of this Annual Report, the Bispecific Agreement dispute remains under consideration by the Tribunal, and we expect their decision in 2022. The claims under the arbitration under the Bispecific Agreement are substantial and complex and the result is inherently uncertain. The dispute with I-Mab has caused and could continue to cause us to incur significant costs.
License Agreement with Case Western
Under our license agreement with Case Western, we may be required to pay up to an aggregate of approximately $9.8 million in milestone payments, of which $0.7 million relates to the initiation of certain development activities ($0.2 million of which has been paid) and approximately $9.1 million relates to the submission of certain regulatory filings and receipt of certain regulatory approvals. If products utilizing certain intellectual property licensed from Case Western, or the TRC102 Technology, are successfully commercialized, we will be required to pay Case Western a single-digit royalty on net sales, subject to adjustments in certain circumstances. Beginning on the earlier of a specified number of years from the effective date of the agreement and the anniversary of the effective date following the occurrence of a specified event, we will be required to make a minimum annual royalty payment of $75,000, which will be credited against our royalty obligations. In the event we sublicense any of our rights under the agreement relating to the TRC102 Technology, we will be obligated to pay Case Western a portion of certain fees we may receive under the sublicense. Our royalty obligations will continue on a country-by-country basis through the later of the expiration of the last valid claim under the TRC102 Technology or 14 years after the first commercial sale of a product utilizing the TRC102 Technology in a given country.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
Our revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 was derived from our 2021 license and supply agreement with Enviro Therapeutics Inc. (Enviro) and Kairos Pharma, Ltd. (Kairos) under which we granted to Enviro access to inactive IND filings for TRC105 in the United States, ownership of existing supplies of TRC105 drug product, and assignment of our patent rights to CD105 technologies, which includes the TRC105 antibody. The terms of this arrangement contain multiple promised goods and provided for the receipt of multiple types of payments, including a non-refundable upfront payment, milestone payments, and royalties on net product sales. In accordance with our revenue recognition policy, we identified one performance obligation and recognized revenue for the fixed or determinable consideration at a point in time, which occurred in the second quarter of 2021.
We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing of any additional collaboration agreements and recognition of associated upfront and milestone payments, and the extent to which any of our products are approved and successfully commercialized by us or our partners. If we or our partners fail to develop product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenues, our results of operations and our financial position could be adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with the preclinical and clinical development of product candidates. These costs consist primarily of:
•
salaries and employee-related expenses, including stock-based compensation and benefits for personnel in research and development functions;
•
costs incurred under clinical trial agreements with investigative sites;
•
costs to acquire preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
•
costs associated with conducting our preclinical, development and regulatory activities, including fees paid to third party professional consultants, service providers and our scientific advisory board;
•
payments related to licensed products and technologies; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, including allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities.
Research and development costs, including third party costs reimbursed in connection with our collaboration agreements, are expensed as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate for the periods indicated:
Unallocated expenses consist primarily of our internal personnel and facility related costs.
We expect our current level of research and development expenses to increase in 2022 due to the continued enrollment of the ENVASARC trial and initiation of a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of YH001 in combination with envafolimab in certain sarcoma subtypes.
We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, many clinical trial sites have temporarily suspended dosing of previously-enrolled patients and/or enrollment of new patients, and patients in clinical trials may choose to not enroll, not participate in follow-up clinical visits or drop out of trials as a precaution against, or as a result of, contracting COVID-19. These events have impacted our clinical trials and those of our collaborators and we cannot predict with certainty the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately delay our clinical trials or those of our collaborators or increase our expenses in completing clinical trials. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
The costs of clinical trials to us and the timing of such costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•
the extent to which costs for comparator drugs are borne by third parties;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the number of doses that patients receive;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•
the duration and scope of impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the phase of development of the product candidate;
•
the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate; and
•
the extent to which costs are borne by third parties such as the NCI.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, corporate development and administrative support functions, including stock-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other significant general and administrative expenses include legal services, including those associated with obtaining and maintaining patents, insurance, occupancy costs, accounting services, and the cost of various consultants.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses for 2022 will decrease with the conclusion of the arbitration on the TJ004309 Agreement and Bispecific Agreement.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) primarily consists of interest related to our loan agreement with SVB offset in part by interest income from our short-term investments and cash equivalents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies related to revenue recognition, expense accruals, and stock-based compensation are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 was derived from our 2021 license and supply agreement with Enviro and Kairos. The terms of this arrangement included payments to us for the following: a non-refundable, up-front license fee; equity ownership in Enviro; financing milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of the licensed product. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, we perform the following five steps in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of these agreements: (i) identification of the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including any constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services transferred to the customer. Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, at contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract to determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these types of arrangements, we develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates, and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, commercialization, and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the achievement of the milestones is considered probable and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Performance milestone payments represent a form of variable consideration. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone payment is included in the transaction price. Achievement of milestones that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable until the approvals are achieved. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achieving such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing Supply Services: Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our out-licensing arrangements.
We receive payments from our collaborators based on billing schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments and fees may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under the collaboration arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the customer and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the customer will be one year or less.
Clinical Trial Expense Accruals
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical sites, and consultants in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts.
Our objective is to reflect the appropriate trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by recording those expenses in the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates taking into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of consummation of trials. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical accruals are dependent upon accurate reporting by third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to differ materially from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. For the three years ended December 31, 2021, there were no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials.
Other Company Information
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Tax Credit Carryforwards
At December 31, 2021, we had federal and California net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards, of approximately $179.4 million and $144.4 million, respectively. The federal and California NOL carryforwards will begin expiring in 2030, unless previously utilized. The federal NOL generated after 2017 of $96.2 million will carryforward indefinitely. At December 31, 2021, we had federal and California research and development and Orphan Drug credit carryforwards of approximately $11.9 million and $2.7 million, respectively. The federal research and development and Orphan Drug credit carryforwards will begin expiring in 2031, unless previously utilized. The California research and development credit carryforwards do not expire.
Pursuant to Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and Amended (Code), our annual use of our NOL and research and development credit carryforwards may be limited in the event that a cumulative change in ownership of more than 50% occurs within a three-year period. We completed a Section 382/383 analysis regarding the limitation of our NOL and research and development credit carryforwards as of December 31, 2018 and did not identify a cumulative change in ownership of more than 50% within the proceeding three-year period. Future ownership changes, including changes during the year ended December 31, 2021, may limit our ability to utilize our remaining NOL and research and development tax credit carryforwards. As of December 31, 2021, we had a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
This section discusses our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 please refer to the section titled Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
License revenue. License revenue was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and related to revenue recognized under the Enviro license agreement with no corresponding revenue in the comparable period in 2020.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses were $11.1 million and $8.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $2.9 million was primarily due to the continued enrollment of the ENVASARC trial.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $17.5 million and $8.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $9.5 million was primarily due to legal expenses incurred in connection with the lawsuit filed by I-Mab in the Delaware Court of Chancery and arbitration of disputes related to the TJ004309 Agreement and Bispecific Agreement.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net was $0.3 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of cash liquidity include our cash and cash equivalents. In July 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $13.4 million (July 2021 Financing). We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund the current requirements of working capital and other financial commitments, including our long-term debt and operating lease obligations, into 2023. Based on our current business plan, we believe that there is substantial doubt as to whether our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our obligations as they become due within one year from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
We may also fund our future liquidity needs by selling shares of our common stock under existing common stock purchase agreements, including our common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital and our Capital on DemandTM sales agreement with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC (JonesTrading). In addition to our existing common stock purchase agreements, we periodically consider various other financing alternatives and may, from time to time, seek to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions.
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $207.8 million, and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our current level of research and development expenses to increase in 2022 due to the continued enrollment of the ENVASARC trial and the initiation of a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of YH001 in combination with envafolimab in certain sarcoma subtypes. Given we do not anticipate any revenues from product sales in the foreseeable future, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may seek to obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third party funding, and licensing or collaboration arrangements.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital
In October 2019, as amended in April 2020, we entered into the 2019 Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations of the 2019 Purchase Agreement, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $15.0 million of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during the 30 month term of the 2019 Purchase Agreement and at prices based on the market price of our common stock at the time of each sale. In consideration for entering into the 2019 Purchase Agreement and concurrently with the execution of the 2019 Purchase Agreement, we issued to Aspire Capital 142,658 shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had sold an aggregate of approximately 4.8 million shares of common stock under the 2019 Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital for net proceeds of $9.6 million.
ATM Facility
In December 2020, we entered into a Capital on DemandTM Sales Agreement (the Sales Agreement) with JonesTrading pursuant to which we could sell from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $50.0 million of shares of our common stock through JonesTrading, as sales agent or principal, all of which remains available for sale as of December 31, 2021. Sales of our common stock made pursuant to the Sales Agreement, if any, will be made on the Nasdaq Capital Market under our effective registration statement on Form S-3, by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions at market prices. Additionally, under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we may also sell shares of our common stock through JonesTrading, on the Nasdaq Capital Market or otherwise, at negotiated prices or at prices related to the prevailing market price. JonesTrading will use its commercially reasonable efforts to sell our common stock from time to time, based upon our instructions (including any price, time or size limits or other customary parameters or conditions we may impose). We are required to pay JonesTrading 2.5% of gross proceeds from the common stock sold through the Sales Agreement.
Credit Facility with SVB
In May 2018, we entered into a third amendment to our Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement with SVB (the 2018 Amended SVB Loan) under which we borrowed $7.0 million, all of which was used to refinance previously outstanding
amounts under the loan and security agreement. In connection with the 2018 Amended SVB Loan, we issued warrants to purchase up to 5,363 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $26.10 per share. The warrants are fully exercisable and expire on May 3, 2025.
The 2018 Amended SVB Loan provides for interest to be paid at a rate of 9.0% per annum, with interest-only payments due monthly through June 30, 2019. Thereafter, in addition to interest accrued during such period, the monthly payments include an amount equal to the outstanding principal at June 30, 2019 divided by 30 months. At maturity (or earlier prepayment), we are also required to make a final payment equal to 4.0% of the original principal amount of the amounts borrowed. In April 2020, we entered into an agreement with SVB (Deferral Agreement) which granted us an interest-only payment period for six months, with a corresponding six-month extension to the maturity date which is now June 2022. All other material terms and conditions of the 2018 Amended SVB Loan remained unchanged.
The 2018 Amended SVB Loan is collateralized by substantially all of our assets, other than our intellectual property, and contains customary conditions of borrowing, events of default and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to dispose of assets, merge with or acquire other entities, incur indebtedness and make distributions to holders of our capital stock. Should an event of default occur, including the occurrence of a material adverse change, we could be required to immediately repay all obligations under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants and conditions of the 2018 Amended SVB Loan.
As of December 31, 2021, the total outstanding balance owed under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan amounted to $1.4 million and future minimum principal and interest payments under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan, including the final payment, were $1.7 million for each of the next 12 and 24 months.
Operating Lease Obligations
Our operating lease obligations relate to our corporate headquarters in San Diego, California. In August 2021, we amended our lease, which now expires in April 2027. As of December 31, 2021, future minimum lease payments under this lease were $0.3 million and $0.6 million for each of the next 12 and 24 months, respectively.
Other Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical trial sites and clinical supply manufacturing organizations and with vendors for preclinical safety and research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash flow activity for each of the periods set forth below:
Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $22.6 million and $17.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was primarily due to our net loss for the respective year, adjusted for noncash items and offset by changes in our working capital.
Investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was due to maturities of short-term investments. Net cash used in investing activities was $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to the purchase of short-term investment securities.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily resulted from $13.4 million in net proceeds raised in connection with an underwritten public offering in July 2021, offset by $2.8 million in net repayments on borrowings under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan. Net cash provided by financing activities was $36.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily resulted from net proceeds received from the sale of common stock and pre-funded warrants during 2020, offset by $1.4 million in net repayments on borrowings under the 2018 Amended SVB Loan.
Funding Requirements
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $24.1 million. In July 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $13.4 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to fund our obligations into 2023. We will need additional funding to complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or those of our partners. In addition, we may evaluate in-licensing and acquisition opportunities to gain access to new product candidates that fit with our strategy. Any such transaction will likely increase our future funding requirements. These uncertainties raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year following the date that the accompanying consolidated financial statements were issued.
Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to initiate, and the progress and results of, our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•
the ability and willingness of our collaboration partners and licensees to continue clinical development of product candidates;
•
our ability to enter into and maintain our collaborations, including our collaborations with Eucure, Biocytogen, 3D Medicines, Alphamab, and I-Mab;
•
our ability to achieve, and our obligations to make, milestone payments under our collaboration and license agreements;
•
the outcome of our disputes with I-Mab with respect to the TJ004309 and Bispecific Agreements and the timing of any termination of the TJ004309 Agreement;
•
the costs and timing of procuring supplies of product candidates for clinical trials and regulatory submissions;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of preclinical development, and clinical trials of our product candidates;
•
the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic delays our clinical development activities or those of our collaborators;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of product candidates;
•
the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we or any of our partners, including Eucure and Biocytogen, 3D Medicines and Alphamab, and I-Mab, may receive marketing approval;
•
the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•
the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any product candidates for which we receive marketing approval and do not partner for commercialization; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license other products and technologies.
Until we can generate substantial product revenues, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, and licensing arrangements. There can be no assurance that additional funds will be available when needed from any source or, if available, will be available on terms that are acceptable to us. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, as well as actual or anticipated changes in interest rates and economic inflation, the global credit and financial markets have experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. Even if we raise additional capital, we may also be required to modify, delay or abandon some of our plans or programs which could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results and financial condition and our ability to achieve our intended business objectives. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.