ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the Financial Statements, related Notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
This discussion is intended to further the reader’s understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and related notes included elsewhere herein. This discussion also contains forward-looking statements. The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of the risks and uncertainties set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the Company’s other SEC filings. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. The Company is not party to any transactions that would be considered “off balance sheet” pursuant to disclosure requirements under Item 303(c) of Regulation S-K.
Overview
The Company is a non-operating holding company. Historically, the Company located and invested in gaming and vending businesses. Focus was on the entertainment, travel and leisure industries. Current management acquired control of the Company through purchase of preferred shares on October 13, 2017 and is in the process of identifying operating businesses that are potential candidates for acquisition.
Critical Accounting Policies
The relevant accounting policies are listed below.
Basis of Accounting
The basis is United States generally accepted accounting principles.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with a maturity of three months or less at the date of purchase to be cash and cash equivalents.
Use of Estimates
In preparing financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reported period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Advertising
Advertising costs are expensed when incurred. The Company incurred $0 of sales and marketing expenses, including advertising, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
Net income (loss) is equal to comprehensive income (loss).
Income Taxes
H.R. 1 (the “Tax Reform Law”), effective for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018, except for certain provisions, resulting in significant changes to existing United States tax law, including various provisions that are expected to impact the Company. The Tax Reform Law reduced the federal corporate tax rate from 34% to 21% effective January 1, 2018 for the Company.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had net operating losses (“NOL”) for income tax purposes. The Company has NOL carry-forwards for Federal income tax purposes of $2.44 million and $2.34 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. No tax benefit was reported with respect to these NOL carry-forwards in the accompanying financial statements because the Company believes the realization of the Company’s deferred tax of approximately $0.51 million as of December 31, 2021, was not considered more likely than not and accordingly, the potential tax benefits of the net loss carry-forwards are fully offset by a full valuation allowance.
Components of deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
Income Tax Provision in the Statements of Operations
A reconciliation of the consolidated federal statutory income tax rate and the effective income tax rate as a percentage of income before income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Year end
The Company’s fiscal year-end is December 31.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-01 to clarify the interaction of the accounting for equity securities under ASC 321 and investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting in ASC 323 and the accounting for certain forward contracts and purchased options accounted for under ASC 815. With respect to the interactions between ASC 321 and ASC 323, the amendments clarify that an entity should consider observable transactions that require it to either apply or discontinue the equity method of accounting when applying the measurement alternative in ASC 321, immediately before applying or upon discontinuing the equity method of accounting. With respect to forward contracts or purchased options to purchase securities, the amendments clarify that when applying the guidance in ASC 815-10-15-141(a), an entity should not consider whether upon the settlement of the forward contract or exercise of the purchased option, individually or with existing investments, the underlying securities would be accounted for under the equity method in ASC 323 or the fair value option in accordance with ASC 825. The ASU is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in any interim period. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-08, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), Codification Improvements - Share-Based Consideration Payable to a Customer. The amendments in this Update require that an entity measure and classify share-based payment awards granted to a customer by applying the guidance in Topic 718. The amount recorded as a reduction of the transaction price is required to be measured on the basis of the grant-date fair value of the share-based payment award in accordance with Topic 718. The grant date is the date at which a grantor (supplier) and a grantee (customer) reach a mutual understanding of the key terms and conditions of a share-based payment award. For entities that have not yet adopted the amendments in Update 2018-07, the amendments in this Update are effective for (1) public business entities in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years, and (2) other than public business entities in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company is evaluating the impact of this on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which simplifies the accounting for income taxes, eliminates certain exceptions within ASC 740, Income Taxes, and clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to promote consistent application among reporting entities. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. Upon adoption, the Company must apply certain aspects of this standard retrospectively for all periods presented while other aspects are applied on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. The Company is evaluating the impact of this on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the SEC issued Release No. 33-10532 that amends and clarifies certain financial reporting requirements. The principal change to our financial reporting will be the application of the disclosure requirement of changes in stockholders’ equity in Rule 3-04 of Regulation S-X to interim periods. Since the adoption of this rule, the Company has included the Statements of Stockholders’ Deficit with each interim reporting.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which issued new guidance related to leases that outlines a comprehensive lease accounting model and supersedes the current lease guidance. The new guidance requires lessees to recognize lease liabilities and corresponding right-of-use assets for all leases with lease terms of more than 12 months. It also changes the definition of a lease and expands the disclosure requirements of lease arrangements. The new guidance must be adopted using the modified retrospective approach and was effective from the fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2018. Adoption of this ASU does not have material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management believes that other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, including its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Securities and Exchange Commission do not have a material impact on the Company’s present or near future financial statements.
Results of Operations
Capitalization
The following table sets forth, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the capitalization of TechCom, Inc. on an actual basis. This table should be read in conjunction with the more detailed financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere herein.
Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no revenue.
Costs of revenue during these same periods were $0.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, professional and administrative expenses were $90,708 and $116,694, respectively. These costs were primarily the costs for the daily operations and legal services.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, professional expenses were $83,380 and $107,199. The professional fee expenses in 2021 and 2020 were mainly due to SEC filing preparations.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses were $7,328 and $9,495. Costs incurred were primarily SEC filings and stock records service fees.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company currently has no operations and has a stockholders deficit of $16,544 with an accumulated deficit of $2,436,110. The Company intends to find a merger target in the form of an operating entity. The Company cannot be certain that it will be successful in this strategy.
These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Summary of any product research and development that we will perform for the term of our plan of operation
The Company is a shell company with no operations and does not have specific products. Our research and development will depend on a future merger with an operational company or companies.
Expected purchase or sale of plant and significant equipment
We do not anticipate the purchase or sale of any plant or significant equipment; as such, items are not required by us at this time.
Significant changes in the number of employees
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any paid employees. We are dependent upon our officers and directors for our future business development. As our operations expand, we anticipate that we need to hire additional employees, consultants and professionals; however, the exact number is not certain at this time.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31 2021, we had cash of $0.
A critical component of our operating plan impacting our continued existence is our ability to obtain additional capital through additional equity and/or debt financing.
We have limited financial resources available, which has had an adverse impact on our liquidity, activities and operations. These limitations have adversely affected our ability to obtain certain projects and pursue additional business. Without realization of additional capital, it would be unlikely for us to continue as a going concern. In order for us to remain a going concern, we will need to obtain additional capital. Additional working capital may be sought through additional debt or equity private placements, additional notes payable to banks or related parties (officers, directors or stockholders), from other funding sources at market rates of interest, or a combination of these. The ability to raise necessary financing will depend on many factors, including the nature and prospects of any business to be acquired and the economic and market conditions prevailing at the time financing is sought. No assurances can be given that any necessary financing can be obtained on terms favorable to us, or at all.
As a result of our current cash status, no officer or director received cash compensation through the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Future funding could result in potentially dilutive issuances of equity securities, the incurrence of debt, contingent liabilities and/or amortization expenses related to goodwill and other intangible assets, which could materially adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. Any future acquisitions of other businesses, technologies, services or products might require us to obtain additional equity or debt financing, which might not be available on terms favorable to us, or at all, and such financing, if available, might be dilutive.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition: We recognize revenue from product sales once all of the following criteria for revenue recognition have been met: pervasive evidence that an agreement exists; the services have been rendered; the fee is fixed and determinable and not subject to refund or adjustment; and collection of the amount due is reasonable assured.