ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our future results of operations could differ materially from our historical results or those anticipated in our forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. With respect to this section, the cautionary language applicable to such forward-looking statements described under “Forward-Looking Statements” found before Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
About Tidewater
Our vessels and associated vessel services provide support for all phases of offshore oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production as well as windfarm development and maintenance. These services include towing of, and anchor handling for, mobile offshore drilling units; transporting supplies and personnel necessary to sustain drilling, workover and production activities; offshore construction and seismic and subsea support; geotechnical survey support for windfarm construction; and a variety of specialized services such as pipe and cable laying. In addition, we have one of the broadest geographic operating footprints in the offshore vessel industry. Our global operating footprint allows us to react quickly to changing local market conditions and to be responsive to the changing requirements of the many customers with which we believe we have strong relationships. We are also one of the most experienced international operators in the offshore energy industry with a history spanning over 60 years.
At December 31, 2021, we owned 153 vessels with an average age of 11.1 years (excluding 3 joint venture vessels, but including 9 stacked active vessels and 18 vessels designated for sale) available to serve the global energy industry. The average age of our 135 active vessels at December 31, 2021 is 10.6 years.
Objective
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is designed to provide information about our financial condition and results of operations from management’s perspective. It includes relevant components of our financial condition and current and long-term liquidity. Primary revenue drivers include numbers of active vessels, active vessel utilization and average day rates. Our most significant operating cost drivers are generally personnel costs and repairs and maintenance. We discuss our liquidity in terms of cash flow that we generate from our operations. Our primary obligations are vessel operating costs including routine planned maintenance, general and administrative costs and long-term debt service. Our primary sources of capital have been our cash on hand, internally generated funds including operating cash flow, vessel sales and long-term debt financing. We also can issue stock either in the open market or as currency in acquisitions. This ability is impacted by existing market conditions. Our results are affected by the activity of our customers in the offshore oil and gas industry and the supply and demand dynamics associated with our vessels. Our objective is to discuss how all these factors have affected our historical results and, where applicable, how we expect these factors to impact our future results and future liquidity.
Principal Factors That Drive Our Results
Our revenues, net earnings and cash flows from operations are largely dependent upon the activity level of our offshore marine vessel fleet. As is the case with the numerous other vessel operators in our industry, our business activity is largely dependent on the level of exploration, field development and production activity of our customers. Our customers’ business activity, in turn, is dependent on current and expected crude oil and natural gas prices, which fluctuate depending on expected future levels of supply and demand for crude oil and natural gas, and on estimates of the cost to find, develop and produce crude oil and natural gas reserves.
Our revenues in all segments are driven primarily by our fleet size, vessel utilization and day rates. Because a sizeable portion of our operating and depreciation costs do not change proportionally with changes in revenue, our operating profit is largely dependent on revenue levels.
Operating costs consist primarily of crew costs, repair and maintenance costs, insurance costs, fuel, lube oil and supplies costs and other vessel operating costs. Fleet size, fleet composition, geographic areas of operation, supply and demand for marine personnel, and local labor requirements are the major factors which affect overall crew costs in all segments. In addition, our newer, more technologically sophisticated vessels generally require a greater number of specially trained, more highly compensated fleet personnel than our older, smaller and less sophisticated vessels. Crew costs may increase if competition for skilled personnel intensifies, although a weaker offshore energy market could mitigate any potential inflation of crew costs.
Costs related to the recertification of vessels are deferred and amortized over 30 months on a straight-line basis. Maintenance costs incurred at the time of the recertification drydocking that are not related to the recertification of the vessel are expensed as incurred. Costs related to vessel improvements that either extend the vessel’s useful life or increase the vessel’s functionality are capitalized and depreciated.
Insurance costs are dependent on a variety of factors, including our safety record and pricing in the insurance markets, and can fluctuate over time. Our vessels are generally insured for up to their estimated fair market value in order to cover damage or loss resulting from marine casualties, adverse weather conditions, mechanical failure, collisions, and property losses to the vessel. We also purchase coverage for potential liabilities stemming from third-party losses with limits that we believe are reasonable for our operations, but do not generally purchase business interruption insurance or similar coverage. Insurance limits are reviewed annually, and third-party coverage is purchased based on the expected scope of ongoing operations and the cost of third-party coverage.
Fuel and lube costs can also fluctuate in any given period depending on the number and distance of vessel mobilizations, the number of active vessels off charter, drydockings, and changes in fuel prices. We also incur vessel operating costs that are aggregated as “other” vessel operating costs. These costs consist of brokers’ commissions, including commissions paid to unconsolidated joint venture companies, training costs, satellite communication fees, agent fees, port fees and other miscellaneous costs. Brokers’ commissions are incurred primarily in our non-U.S. operating areas where brokers oftentimes assist us in obtaining work. Brokers generally are paid a percentage of day rates billed upon collection of the amounts invoiced and, accordingly, commissions paid to brokers generally fluctuate in accordance with vessel revenue.
Deepwater activity is a significant segment of the global offshore crude oil and natural gas markets, and a significant component of our business. Development typically involves significant capital investment and multi-year development plans. Such projects are generally underwritten by the participating exploration, field development and production companies using relatively conservative crude oil and natural gas pricing assumptions. Although these projects are generally less susceptible to short-term fluctuations in the price of crude oil and natural gas, deepwater exploration and development projects can be more costly relative to other onshore and offshore exploration and development. As a result, generally depressed crude oil prices have caused, and may continue to cause, many of our customers and potential customers to reevaluate their future capital expenditures in regard to deepwater projects.
Angolan Joint Venture (Sonatide)
We previously disclosed the significant financial and operational challenges that we confront with respect to operations in Angola, as well as steps that we have taken to address or mitigate those risks. The amounts due from Sonatide are denominated in U.S. dollars; however, the underlying third-party customer payments to Sonatide were satisfied, in part, in Angolan kwanzas. We and Sonangol, our partner in Sonatide, have had discussions regarding how the net losses from the devaluation of certain Angolan kwanza denominated accounts should be shared. In late 2019, we were informed that, as part of a broad privatization program, Sonangol intended to seek to divest itself from Sonatide. In January 2022, we acquired the 51% interest of Sonatide previously held by our partner, which has resulted in Sonatide becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary. Please refer to Note (15) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding this acquisition.
In the second quarter of 2020, Sonatide declared a $35.0 million dividend. On June 22, 2020, Sonangol received $17.8 million and we received $17.2 million. Our share of the dividend is reflected as dividend income from unconsolidated company in the consolidated statement of operations. In addition, as a result of this dividend payment, the cash balances of the joint venture were significantly reduced and we determined that, as a result, a significant portion of our net due from Sonatide balance was compromised. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a $0.4 and $40.9 million affiliate credit loss impairment expense, respectively.
Refer to Notes (4) and (15) of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on Sonatide.
Nigerian Joint Venture (DTDW)
We own 40% of DTDW in Nigeria. Our partner, who owns 60%, is a Nigerian national. DTDW owns one offshore support vessel. We also operate company owned vessels in Nigeria for which the joint venture receives a commission. As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, we had no company owned vessels operating in Nigeria and the DTDW owned vessel was not employed.
Cash flow projections indicate that DTDW does not have sufficient funds to meet its obligations to us or its vendors. Therefore, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded affiliate credit loss impairment expense totaling $12.1 million and additional impairment expense of $2.0 million for the guarantee of our expected share of DTDW's long-term debt. Our operations in Nigeria have been severely impacted and we have effectively ceased activity. We have created a fully reserved position in our consolidated balance sheet to account for our expected liabilities related to certain obligations of the joint venture.
As of December 31, 2020, DTDW had long-term debt of $4.7 million which was secured by the vessel owned by DTDW and guarantees from the DTDW partners (in proportion to their ownership interests). On April 22, 2021, we paid approximately $2.0 million, which represented our portion of the joint venture debt guarantee which was expensed in 2020 and our partner assumed the remaining joint venture debt which represented his portion of the guarantee.
Refer to Note (4) of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on the Nigerian joint venture.
Industry Conditions and Outlook
Our business is directly impacted by the level of activity in worldwide offshore oil and natural gas exploration, development and production, which in turn is influenced by trends in oil and natural gas prices. In addition, oil and natural gas prices are affected by a host of geopolitical and economic forces, including the fundamental principles of supply and demand. In particular, the oil price is significantly influenced by actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or OPEC. In addition, offshore oil and gas exploration and development activities have traditionally required higher oil or natural gas prices to justify the much higher expenditure levels of offshore activities compared to onshore activities. Prices are subject to significant uncertainty and, as a result, are extremely volatile. In late 2014, oil prices declined significantly from levels of over $100.00 per barrel and continued to decline throughout 2015 and into 2016, to a point trading at less than $30.00 per barrel, causing an industry-wide downturn. Prices began to stabilize in the $50.00 to $60.00 per barrel range in 2019 and early 2020 suggesting a return to exploration and production activities for our customers. However, in the first quarter of 2020 the industry was severely impacted by a global pandemic (COVID-19) and the resulting loss of demand and decrease in oil prices. Oil prices declined severely in the second quarter, in this case trading at below $20.00 per barrel. Oil prices have recovered in 2021 to levels greater than experienced since 2018, currently trading over $80.00 per barrel. Natural gas prices are also at historic highs.
Despite the price recovery, there are lingering effects of the 2014 downturn and the subsequent COVID-19 pandemic downturn in the activity levels of our customers. In addition, there has been recent pressure from certain shareholders and other stakeholders, including governmental entities, on our customers related to environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors. A possible impact of this pressure on our business could be a gradual move away from exploration and development of fossil fuels. Many of our large international customers have recently issued statements supporting changes in their future business plans to move toward a lower environmental impact which has, coupled with the lingering COVID-19 impact, effectively delayed the recovery in our business that would be expected with current commodity price levels. Further, as our customers have responded to pressure to return capital to shareholders in the wake of the 2014 downturn and subsequent industry challenges, they have increasingly shifted their capital allocation strategy from primarily new oil and gas production and reserve additions to a mix of returns to shareholders along with new oil and gas project development. The realistic expectation of a worldwide move towards more sustainable fuels for supplying energy includes the continued use of fossil fuels for some time to come. Despite the pressure to return capital to shareholders and the ongoing social pressure to move away from fossil fuels, our customers have recently made gradual moves to expand exploration and development activities. We are one of the world’s largest operators of offshore support vessels and we have operations in most of the world’s offshore oil and gas basins. We continue to believe that there will be sufficient opportunities for us to operate our vessels in this sector for many years to come. We have, however, also begun to seek and develop opportunities in the sustainability arena, including the support of offshore wind energy generation and the improvement of our fleet performance regarding emissions and environmental impact. There is current evidence of higher oil and gas demand which has resulted in increased commodity pricing and increased customer activity offshore. We are optimistic that our industry may experience a recovery over the coming years.
As COVID-19 spread throughout the world, its impact on many of our locations, including our vessels, has affected our operations. We implemented various protocols for both onshore and offshore personnel in efforts to limit this impact. The effect on our business has included lockdowns of shipyards performing drydocks which delays vessels returning to service and the cancellation and/or temporary delay of certain revenue vessel contracts allowed either under the contract provisions or by mutual agreement with our customers. These cancellations and/or temporary delays reduced our year 2020 revenues by 18% and year 2021 revenues by less than 3%. In addition, in the years ended December 31, 2020 and the December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $18.0 million and $7.0 million, respectively, in higher operating costs, primarily related to additional crew costs, mobilization and vessel stacking costs as a result of these unplanned contract cancellations. There may be additional cancellations or delays.
In the first and second quarters of 2020, we considered the COVID-19 lockdowns and the resultant impact on the oil and gas industry to be to be indicators that the value of our active offshore vessel fleet may be impaired. As a result, in the first two quarters of 2020, we performed Step 1 evaluations of our active offshore fleet under FASB Accounting Standards Codification 360, which governs the methodology for identifying and recording impairment of long-lived assets to determine if any of our asset groups have net book value in excess of undiscounted future net cash flows. Our evaluations did not indicate impairment of any of our asset groups. Beginning with the third quarter of 2020, conditions related to the pandemic and oil price environment stabilized and in the fourth quarter industry conditions marginally improved. Similarly, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we have not seen indications in the industry that would indicate impairment of any of our asset groups. As a result, we did not identify additional events or conditions that would require us to perform a Step 1 evaluation as of December 31, 2021. We will continue to monitor the expected future cash flows and the fair market value of our asset groups for impairment.
ESG and Climate Change
Climate change is expected to increase the frequency and intensity of certain adverse weather patterns, which may impact our business. Due to concern over the risk of climate change, several countries have adopted, or are considering the adoption of, regulatory frameworks to reduce the emission of carbon dioxide, methane and other gases (greenhouse gas emissions). In addition, the increased regulation of environmental emissions is expected to create greater incentives for the use of alternative energy sources. Consideration of climate change-related issues and the responses to those issues through international agreements and national, regional, or state regulatory frameworks are integrated into our strategy, planning, forecasting and risk management processes, where applicable.
Our primary business is to support the fossil fuel industry. In addition, we burn fossil fuels in operating our vessels. The fossil fuel industry is considered one of the primary contributors to the elements of global climate change. The primary source of energy in the world is fossil fuels. We believe that continued use of fossil fuels will be important as the world transitions to alternative energy sources. We are prepared to participate in the transition but also to continue to support the fossil fuel industry. We have begun to take measures to address the future of our company and our impact on climate change. Such measures include modifications to many of our vessels to reduce our carbon footprint (approximately $10.8 million of emissions focused costs including fuel monitoring systems and batteries for supplemental power are included in our net properties and equipment amount as of December 31, 2021); developing associations with alternative energy providers such as windfarms; and creation of a written sustainability report. We are in the early stages on most of these measures and continue to develop our strategies and solutions. Whatever measures we undertake will certainly be modified over time, as countries adopt new regulations and there is progress in the development of alternative energy sources.
For detailed discussion of climate change and related governmental regulation, including associated risks and possible impact on our business, financial conditions and results of operations, please see "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
We manage and measure our business performance primarily based on four distinct geographic operating segments: Americas, Middle East/Asia Pacific, Europe/Mediterranean and West Africa.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” in Part II, Items 7 and 7A of the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
The following tables present vessel revenue and operating costs by segment, total vessel revenue and operating costs, and the related segment and total vessel revenue and operating costs as a percentage of segment and total vessel revenues for our owned and operated vessel fleet:
The following tables present vessel operations general and administrative expenses by segment and in total; and the related segment vessel operations general and administrative expenses as a percentage of segment and total vessel revenues.
The following tables present depreciation and amortization expense by segment and in total; and the related segment and total depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of segment and total vessel revenues.
The following tables compare operating income and other components of earnings before income taxes, and its related percentage of total revenues.
(A)
Included in corporate expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are $0.1 million and $1.5 million, respectively, of severance and termination benefits.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $371.0 million and $397.0 million, respectively. The decrease in revenue is primarily due to 11 less active vessels in the year ended December 31, 2021 than in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from our Americas segment. This segment was significantly affected by the decrease in demand caused by the pandemic. Offsetting the decrease in capacity was the increase in active utilization from 77.0% in 2020 to 80.1% in 2021. In addition, the decrease in revenue was impacted by average day rates which were 2.2% lower in 2021 than in 2020. The average day rates are driven by market conditions affected by the pandemic. The revenue effect from the pandemic began in the second quarter of 2020 and continued into the third and fourth quarters as our customers canceled contracts. The impact continued through most of the year 2021, only beginning to improve later in the year. The improvements have not yet reached the level of activity that we had in the first quarter of 2020. Overall, Americas had the most negative impact, with Europe/Mediterranean and West Africa withstanding a harsh early impact but also experiencing the quickest recovery. Middle East/Asia Pacific had the least impact from the pandemic with revenue increasing in 2021 compared to 2020. The individual segment discussions below reflect these impacts.
Vessel operating costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $261.8 million and $268.8 million, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in vessel activity, as we have 11 less active vessels in our fleet in the year ended December 31, 2021. Overall, our vessel personnel costs and insurance costs were lower in 2021 than 2020 due to cost management efforts associated with the COVID-19 downturn and several credits issued by our insurance carriers in 2021 related to vessel valuations and prior year estimates, but were partially offset by increased repair and maintenance costs due to the reactivation of stacked vessels in the latter part of 2021.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $114.5 million and $116.7 million, respectively. Depreciation and amortization expenses were lower in 2021 largely because of lower amortization of deferred drydocking costs resulting from the discontinuation of amortization on vessels classified as held for sale and vessels sold from the active fleet.
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $68.5 million and $73.4 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses decreased overall in 2021 because of continued cost cutting measures being implemented during the pandemic and a reduction in one-time severance charges incurred in 2020 compared to 2021.
The net gain (loss) on asset dispositions for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $2.9 million of net losses, primarily from the sale of 19 vessels and other assets. One of the vessel sales was to a third-party operator, Jackson Offshore, which has a person in senior management, Matthew Rigdon, its Chief Operating Officer, who is the son of Larry Rigdon, the chairman of our Board of Directors. This vessel was sold for proceeds of $11.4 million, all of which was collected in the second quarter of 2021, and we recognized a gain of $4.3 million on the sale. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized net gains of $7.6 million related to the sale of 56 vessels and other assets.
During 2021, we recorded $15.6 million of impairment primarily related to assets held for sale. During 2020, as discussed previously, we recorded $74.1 million of impairment primarily related to classifying our vessels to assets held for sale and $53.0 million of credit related losses associated with our two joint ventures in Nigeria and Angola.
Interest expense and other debt costs decreased by $8.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This is the result of paying down $98.1 million of our long-term debt primarily in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and $39.3 million during the first nine months of 2021. In addition, our interest income and other increased by $0.4 million primarily because of a legal settlement with a customer.
During 2021 we recorded an $11.1 million loss on early extinguishment of debt consisting of make whole premiums and other related costs resulting from the extinguishment of our Senior Secured Notes and Troms offshore debt.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized foreign exchange losses of $0.4 million and for the year ended December 31, 2020 we recognized losses of $5.2 million. These foreign exchange losses were primarily the result of the revaluation of various foreign currencies where we conduct our business including the Norwegian Kroner, Brazilian-Reais, Angola Kwanza, British Pound and Euro which are denominated balances to our U.S. dollar reporting currency.
In addition, our income tax expense was $5.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with an income tax benefit of $1.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily because the year ended December 31, 2020 benefitted from a NOL carryback for a tax refund under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.
Americas Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Americas segment decreased 19.4%, or $24.5 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease of six active vessels primarily due to the pandemic. Overall, America's segment active utilization decreased from 85.7% during 2020 to 81.3% during 2021, however average day rates during these same periods increased 4.6%, which was generally due to a greater portion of the segment’s vessels being hired at current prevailing day rates which were higher than those in 2020.
Operating loss for the Americas segment for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $11.3 million compared to an operating profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaling $4.9 million. The decrease was primarily due to the decrease in revenues. The revenue decrease was partially offset by a $5.4 million decrease in operating costs largely due to lower vessel personnel costs resulting from the lower active vessel count. Depreciation and amortization, and general and administrative costs, were $1.2 million and $1.7 million lower, than prior year respectively, because of vessel sales and cost cutting measures.
Middle East/Asia Pacific Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Middle East/Asia Pacific segment increased $5.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The Middle East/Asia Pacific average day rates were 4.4% higher for 2021 than for 2020. Middle East/Asia Pacific segment active utilization increased from 76.4% to 88.0%. Our Middle East/Asia Pacific segment was only marginally affected by COVID-19.
Operating loss for the Middle East/Asia Pacific segment was $1.2 million in 2021 compared to an operating loss of $5.9 million in 2020. The revenue increase was partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization resulting from increased amortization of deferred drydock costs. General and administrative expenses were lower by $0.9 million due to ongoing cost reduction initiatives.
Europe/Mediterranean Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the Europe/Mediterranean segment decreased $2.7 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower average day rates which decreased from $12,700 to $12,201 per day. Europe/Mediterranean segment active utilization decreased slightly from 89.8% to 88.1%. These decreases in average day rates are due to the mix of vessels under longer term higher day rate contracts declining while shorter term and spot contracts were taken in their place. This segment experienced a significant downturn due to the pandemic in 2020 which continued in 2021.
Operating loss for the Europe/Mediterranean segment increased from $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This loss increase resulted from the lower revenue, coupled with $6.3 million in increased vessel operating costs largely attributable to higher personnel costs and repair and maintenance charges partially offset by $1.1 million in lower depreciation and amortization expense.
West Africa Segment Operations. Vessel revenues in the West Africa segment decreased $2.8 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Average day rates decreased by 9.5%, while active utilization increased from 62.8% to 66.3%. This segment had the most negative impact from the pandemic because of significant contract cancellations.
The operating loss for the West Africa segment was $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $27.5 million operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulting from decreased revenue offset by $7.7 million in lower operating costs due mainly to the decreased activity in Nigeria, and $4.0 million in lower general and administrative costs attributable to our ongoing cost reduction efforts and decreased activity in Nigeria.
Vessel Utilization and Average Rates by Segment
We consider a vessel to be stacked if the vessel crew is furloughed or substantially reduced and limited maintenance is being performed on the vessel. We reduce operating costs by stacking vessels when management does not foresee opportunities to profitably or strategically operate the vessels in the near future. Vessels are stacked when market conditions warrant and they are no longer considered stacked when they are returned to active service, sold or otherwise disposed. When economically practical marketing opportunities arise, the stacked vessels can be returned to active service by performing any necessary maintenance on the vessel and either rehiring or returning fleet personnel to operate the vessel. Although not currently fulfilling charters, stacked vessels are considered to be in service and are included in the calculation of our utilization statistics.
We had 27 and 35 stacked vessels including 18 and 23 vessels, respectively, classified as assets held for sale in our fleet as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. During 2021, we designated an additional seven vessels for disposition and sold nine vessels that had been designated as held for sale and re-activated three vessels from the assets held for sale back into the active fleet. In addition, we sold 10 vessels from our active fleet in 2021.
Vessel Dispositions
We seek opportunities to sell and/or recycle our older vessels when market conditions warrant and opportunities arise. Most of our vessels are sold to buyers who do not compete with us in the offshore energy industry. The number of vessels disposed by segment are as follows:
Vessel Commitments
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we contracted to build two new ocean-going tugs for the Africa market. These vessels are expected to be complete in 2023 and cost approximately $6.3 million each. We made a $2.3 million down payment to start construction on these two tugs. We did not build any vessels in the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, we acquired 11 crew boats for $5.3 million which were added to our active fleet in Africa.
General and Administrative Expenses
Consolidated general and administrative expenses and the related percentage of each component to total revenues are as follows:
Segment and corporate general and administrative expenses and the related percentage of total general and administrative expenses were as follows:
(A)
Restructuring charges for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include $0.3 million and $1.5 million, respectively, of severance and termination benefits.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 have decreased as compared to the comparable prior year primarily as a result of our continuing efforts to reduce overhead costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Other Matters
As of December 31, 2021, we had $154.3 million in cash and cash equivalents (including restricted cash), including amounts held by foreign subsidiaries, the majority of which is available to us without adverse tax consequences. Included in foreign subsidiary cash are balances held in U.S. dollars and foreign currencies that await repatriation due to various currency conversion and repatriation constraints, partner and tax related matters, prior to the cash being made available for remittance to our domestic accounts. We currently intend that earnings by foreign subsidiaries will be indefinitely reinvested in foreign jurisdictions in order to fund strategic initiatives (such as investment, expansion and acquisitions), fund working capital requirements and repay debt (both third-party and intercompany) of our foreign subsidiaries in the normal course of business. Moreover, we do not currently intend to repatriate earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to the U.S. because cash generated from our domestic businesses and the repayment of intercompany liabilities from foreign subsidiaries are currently deemed to be sufficient to fund the cash needs of our U.S. operations.
During 2021, we generated $15.0 million of cash from operating activities plus we also generated $25.1 million in cash proceeds from the sale of vessels, net of additions to property and equipment. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we repaid all our previously outstanding long-term debt, including costs to extinguish the debt, with the proceeds of a new $175.0 million bond offering (described below) that is due in 2026 and cash on hand. As a result, we ended the year 2021 in almost the same cash on hand position as we had at the beginning of the year. However, in the process, we extended the maturities of the major portion of our previous debt by five years. For the next year, we anticipate generating positive operating cash flows which include our drydock costs required to maintain our fleet. In addition, we anticipate generating proceeds from the sale of 18 vessels held for sale valued at approximately $14.5 million and we expect to expend in the range of $5.0 to $10.0 million on capital improvements, primarily to maintain our fleet and our information systems. Based on the current levels of activity in our industry and the anticipated levels of activity from our customers in response to increasing demand levels and pricing for oil and gas, we anticipate healthy cash flow over the next several years sufficient to meet our obligations, including debt service and capital expenditures. We have no major obligations for capital expenditures, except for the two previously mentioned ocean-going tugs, or scheduled repayments of debt until the new bonds mature in 2026.
Our objective in financing our business is to maintain and preserve adequate financial resources and sufficient levels of liquidity. We also have a $25.0 million revolving credit facility which matures in 2026. No amounts have been drawn on this facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had $175.0 million of long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet of which none is due until 2026. The 2026 Notes contain two financial covenants: (i) a minimum free liquidity test of the obligors (as defined) equal to the greater of $20.0 million or 10% of net interest bearing debt, and (ii) a minimum equity ratio of 30%, in each case for us and our consolidated subsidiaries. We are currently in compliance and anticipate being able to maintain ongoing compliance with these two financial covenants. Cash and cash equivalents, our revolving credit facility and future net cash provided by operating activities provide us, in our opinion, with sufficient liquidity to meet our liquidity requirements. In addition, we have available a “shelf” registration under which we may offer and sell up to $300.0 million of any combination of common stock, debt securities, depository shares, preferred stock or warrants from time to time in one or more classes or series or amounts, at prices and on terms that we will determine at the time of the offering. We also have an “at-the-market” offering registered with the SEC under which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $30.0 million from time to time through the Agents acting as a sales agent or directly to the Agents acting as a principal. We expect to use the net proceeds from the sale of the securities covered by these offerings for general corporate purposes, which may include repayment or refinancing of indebtedness, working capital, capital expenditures, investments, acquisitions and other business opportunities.
Refer to Note (3) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on our indebtedness.
Share Repurchases
No shares were repurchased during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Please refer to Note (10) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Dividends
There were no dividends declared during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Please refer to Note (10) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by or used in operating activities for any period will fluctuate according to the level of business activity for the applicable period.
Net cash provided by operating activities is as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, of $15.0 million reflects a net loss of $129.7 million, non-cash impairments of $16.0 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization of $114.5 million, a net loss on asset dispositions of $2.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $5.6 million, and loss on debt extinguishment of $11.1 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $20.0 million in cash while amounts due to/from affiliates used $0.1 million in cash. We paid $27.3 million for regulatory drydocks in 2021.
Net cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $4.0 million reflects a net loss of $196.7 million, non-cash impairments of $129.1 million, non-cash depreciation and amortization of $116.7 million, a net gain on asset dispositions of $7.6 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $5.1 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $26.5 million in cash while amounts due to/from affiliates provided $11.9 million in cash. We paid $33.3 million for regulatory drydocks in 2020.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities is as follows:
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $25.1 million, reflecting proceeds from the sale of assets of $34.0 million related to the disposal of 19 vessels. Additions to property and equipment were comprised of $9.0 million, primarily for the down payment on two tugboats, upgrades to our existing fleet and continued enhancements to our current enterprise software system.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $23.4 million, reflecting proceeds from the sale of assets of $38.3 million related to the disposal of 56 vessels, 25 of which were recycled. Additions to property and equipment were comprised of $14.9 million, primarily for the purchase of eleven crew vessels, upgrades to our existing fleet and continued enhancements to our current enterprise software system.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities is as follows:
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, used $41.0 million of cash, as a result of the repayment of $198.9 million and make-whole premiums of $7.8 million reflecting the retirement of our senior secured notes and the Troms offshore debt. Financing activities also included $5.7 million of debt issuance and modification costs related to our new 2026 notes and costs to modify our Troms offshore debt.
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, used $99.8 million of cash, as a result of the repayment of $76.2 million of our senior secured notes in open market purchases and a voluntary tender offer. Financing activities also included $21.9 million of scheduled semiannual payments and additional prepayments on the Troms offshore debt.
Legal Proceedings
Various legal proceedings and claims are outstanding which arose in the ordinary course of business. In the opinion of management, the amount of ultimate liability, if any, with respect to these actions, will not have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Information related to various commitments and contingencies, including legal proceedings, is disclosed in Note (11) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures and disclosures of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate the reasonableness of these estimates and assumptions continually based on a combination of historical experience and other assumptions and information that comes to our attention that may vary the outlook for the future. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects are subject to uncertainty, and accordingly, these estimates may change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained and as the business environment in which we operate changes. As a result, actual results may differ from estimates under different assumptions.
The "Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies", as described in Note (1) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, should be read in conjunction with this "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations". We have defined a critical accounting estimate as one that is important to the portrayal of our financial condition or results of operations and requires us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates about matters that are uncertain. We believe the following critical accounting policies that affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are described below. There are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation and judgment, but they are not deemed critical as defined above.
Receivables and Allowance for Credit Losses
In the normal course of business, we extend credit to our customers on a short-term basis. Our principal customers are major oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production companies. We routinely review and evaluate our accounts receivable balances for collectability. The determination of the collectability of amounts due from our customers requires us to use estimates and make judgments regarding future events and trends, including monitoring our customers’ payment history and current credit worthiness to determine that collectability is reasonably assured, as well as consideration of the overall business climate in which our customers operate. Expected credit losses are recorded on the initial recognition of our primary financial assets, which are trade accounts receivable and contract assets. We also have net receivable balances related to joint ventures in which we own less than 50%. We review and evaluate these receivables for collectability in a similar manner as we evaluate trade receivables. We believe that our allowance for credit losses is adequate to cover potential bad debt losses under current conditions; however, uncertainties regarding changes in the financial condition of our customers, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional provisions for credit losses that may be required.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review the vessels in our active fleet for impairment whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. In such evaluation, the estimated future undiscounted cash flows generated by an asset group are compared with the carrying amount of the asset group to determine if a write-down may be required. With respect to vessels that are expected to remain in active service, we group together for impairment testing purposes vessels with similar operating and marketing characteristics. Stacked vessels expected to return to active service are evaluated for impairment as part of their assigned active asset group and not individually.
We estimate cash flows based upon historical data adjusted for our best estimate of expected future market performance, which, in turn, is based on industry trends. The primary estimates and assumptions used in reviewing active vessel groups for impairment and estimating undiscounted cash flows include utilization rates, average day rates and average daily operating expenses. These estimates are made based on recent actual trends in utilization, day rates and operating costs and reflect management’s best estimate of expected market conditions during the period of future cash flows. These assumptions and estimates have changed considerably as market conditions have changed, and they are reasonably likely to continue to change as market conditions change in the future. Although we believe our assumptions and estimates are reasonable, deviations from the assumptions and estimates could produce materially different results. Management estimates may vary considerably from actual outcomes due to future adverse market conditions or poor operating results that could result in the inability to recover the current carrying value of an asset group, thereby possibly requiring an impairment charge in the future. As our fleet continues to age, management closely monitors the estimates and assumptions used in the impairment analysis in order to properly identify evolving trends and changes in market conditions that could impact the results of the impairment evaluation.
If an asset group fails the undiscounted cash flow test, we estimate the fair value of each asset group and compare such estimated fair value to the carrying value of each asset group in order to determine if impairment exists.
Management estimates the fair value of each vessel in an asset group considered Level 3, as defined by ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, by considering items such as the vessel’s age, length of time stacked, likelihood of a return to active service and actual recent sales of similar vessels, among others. Third party appraisals, broker values or internal valuations based on recent sale activity are utilized for vessels expected to be sold as an operating vessel. We leverage information for vessels in a similar class, similar age, or similar specification to be used as a basis of fair value for vessels expected to be sold. Internal valuations are also prepared for vessels expected to be sold for recycling utilizing an estimated recycle value per lightweight ton based on the vessel location, the weight of the vessel and recent recycle activity. We record an impairment charge when the carrying value of an asset group exceeds its estimated fair value. In previous years, we sought opportunities to dispose of our older vessels when market conditions warranted and opportunities would arise. As a result, vessel dispositions would vary from year to year, and gains (losses) on sales of assets would also fluctuate significantly from period to period. Most of our vessels were sold to buyers with whom we do not compete in the offshore energy industry. We continue to employ that strategy, but to a lesser extent. When circumstances warrant we review our fleet and make decisions to remove assets that are not considered to be part of our long-term plans. In these circumstances, we will reclassify the identified vessels as held for sale and, if necessary, we will revalue these vessels to net realizable value. We consider the valuation approach for our assets held for sale to be a Level 3 fair value measurement due to the level of estimation involved in valuing assets to be recycled or sold. We estimate the net realizable value using various methodologies including third party appraisals, sales comparisons, sales agreements and scrap yard tonnage prices. Estimates generally fall in ranges rather than exact numbers due to the nature of sales of offshore vessels and industry conditions. Our value ranges depend on our expectation of the ultimate disposition of the vessel. We will in all circumstances attempt to achieve maximum value for our vessels, but also recognize that certain vessels are more likely to be recycled, especially given the time and effort required to achieve a sale and the costs incurred to maintain a vessel while a searching for a buyer. We establish ranges that in many cases have scrap value as the low end of the range and an expected open market sale value at the top of the range. When there is no expectation within the range that is considered more likely than any other, we apply equal probability weighting to the low and high ends of the valuation range.
Income Taxes
The asset-liability method is used for determining our income tax provisions, under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. In addition, we determine our effective tax rate by estimating our permanent differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes.
As a global company, we are subject to the jurisdiction of taxing authorities in the United States and by the respective tax agencies in the countries in which we operate internationally, as well as to tax agreements and treaties among these governments. Our operations in these different jurisdictions are taxed on various bases: actual income before taxes, deemed profits (which are generally determined using a percentage of revenue rather than profits) and withholding taxes based on revenue. Determination of taxable income in any tax jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of deductions, permissible revenue recognition methods under the tax law and the sources and character of income and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year. We are periodically audited by various taxing authorities in the United States and by the respective tax agencies in the countries in which we operate internationally. The tax audits generally include questions regarding the calculation of taxable income. Audit adjustments affecting permanent differences could have an impact on our effective tax rate.
The carrying value of our net deferred tax assets is based on our present belief that we will be unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions to utilize such deferred tax assets, based on estimates and assumptions. If these estimates and related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to adjust valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets resulting in additional income tax expense or benefit in our consolidated statement of operations. Management evaluates the realizability of the deferred tax assets and assesses the need for changes to valuation allowances on a quarterly basis. While we have considered future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the present need for a valuation allowance, in the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made. Should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made.
Deferred taxes are not provided on undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries and business ventures because we consider those earnings to be permanently invested abroad.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) we determine whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions would be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that was more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. The recognition and measurement of tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions in any tax jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations as well as the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes during any given year.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements, refer to Note (1) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.