ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis presents management’s view of our business, financial condition and overall performance and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past development activities, current financial condition and outlook for the future organized as follows:
•Our Business
•Overview of Significant Events
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Capital Development Activities
•Results of Operations
•Commitments and Contingencies
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Recent Accounting Standards
Our Business
Tellurian Inc. (“Tellurian,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company”), a Delaware corporation, is a Houston-based company that intends to create value for shareholders by building a low-cost, global natural gas business, profitably delivering natural gas to customers worldwide (the “Business”). We are developing a portfolio of natural gas, LNG marketing, and infrastructure assets that includes an LNG terminal facility (the “Driftwood terminal”), an associated pipeline (the “Driftwood pipeline”), other related pipelines, and upstream natural gas assets. The Driftwood terminal and the Driftwood pipeline are collectively referred to as the “Driftwood Project”. Our existing natural gas assets consist of 11,060 net acres and interests in 78 producing wells located in the Haynesville Shale trend of northern Louisiana. Our Business may be developed in phases.
As part of our execution strategy, which includes increasing our asset base, we will consider various commercial arrangements with third parties across the natural gas value chain. We are also pursuing activities such as direct sales of LNG to global counterparties, trading of LNG, the acquisition of additional upstream acreage and drilling of new wells on our existing or newly acquired upstream acreage. As discussed in “Overview of Significant Events - LNG Sale and Purchase Agreements” below, we entered into four LNG SPAs with three unrelated purchasers, completing the planned sales for plants one and two of the Driftwood terminal (“Phase 1”). We are currently focused on securing financing for the construction of Phase 1.
We continue to evaluate the scope and other aspects of our Business in light of the evolving economic environment, needs of potential counterparties and other factors. How we execute our Business will be based on a variety of factors, including the results of our continuing analysis, changing business conditions and market feedback.
Overview of Significant Events
LNG Sale and Purchase Agreements
Driftwood LNG LLC (“Driftwood LNG”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into the following SPAs with three purchasers for the purchase of a total of 9.0 Mtpa of LNG:
• An SPA with Gunvor Singapore Pte Ltd (“Gunvor”) in May 2021 for the purchase of 3.0 Mtpa of LNG;
• An SPA with Vitol Inc. (“Vitol”) in June 2021 for the purchase of 3.0 Mtpa of LNG; and
• Two SPAs with Shell NA LNG LLC (“Shell”) in July 2021 for the purchase of 3.0 Mtpa of LNG.
The price for LNG sold under the SPAs with Gunvor and Vitol will be a blended average based on the JKM index price and the TTF futures contract price, in each case minus a transportation netback. The price for LNG sold under each SPA with Shell will be based on the JKM index price or the TTF futures contract price, in each case minus a transportation netback. Each SPA has a ten-year term from the date of first commercial delivery from the Driftwood terminal.
Initiated Owner Construction Activities
During the year ended, December 31, 2021 we initiated owner construction activities necessary to proceed under our LSTK EPC agreements with Bechtel Oil, Gas and Chemicals, Inc. (“Bechtel”).
Driftwood Land Lease Agreement
On July 1, 2021, we entered into a long-term ground lease agreement with the Lake Charles Harbor and Terminal District to secure property essential for the construction of the Driftwood terminal.
Environmental, Social, Governance Practices
During the year ended December 2021, the Company began a partnership with the National Forest Foundation on a five-year plan for reforestation and other forest management projects totaling $25 million across the United States. One of the first identified projects is to re-plant 300,000 trees in the Kisatchie National Forest, located near Alexandria, Louisiana, where nearly 40,000 acres of native trees were lost due to extreme weather events during the past few years.
Upstream Drilling Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed the drilling of and put in production four new Haynesville operated natural gas wells. We also participated in the drilling of six Haynesville non-operated natural gas wells. Our 2021 drilling activities increased our proved developed reserves by approximately 51 Bcfe as of December 31, 2021.
Repayment of Borrowing Obligations
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repaid all borrowing obligations that were outstanding at the end of December 31, 2020. For further information regarding the repayment of our borrowing obligations, see Note 10 - Borrowings, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Equity Offering
On August 6, 2021, we sold 35.0 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $3.00 per share. Net proceeds from this offering, after deducting fees and expenses, were approximately $100.8 million. The underwriters were granted an option to purchase up to an additional 5.3 million shares of common stock within 30 days. On August 31, 2021, the underwriters exercised this option, which generated net proceeds, after deducting fees, of approximately $15.1 million.
8.25% Senior Notes due 2028
On November 10, 2021, we sold $50.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.25% Senior Notes due November 30, 2028 (the “Senior Notes”) in a registered public offering. Net proceeds from the sale of the Senior Notes were approximately $47.5 million after deducting fees. The underwriter was granted an option to purchase up to an additional $7.5 million of the Senior Notes within 30 days. On December 7, 2021, the underwriter exercised the option and purchased an additional $6.5 million of the Senior Notes, which generated net proceeds of approximately $6.2 million after deducting fees.
At-the-Market Debt Offering Program
On December 17, 2021, we entered into an at-the-market debt offering program under which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time on the NYSE American, up to an aggregate principal amount of $200.0 million of additional Senior Notes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not sell any additional Senior Notes under the at-the-market debt offering program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
We consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. We are currently funding our operations, development activities and general working capital needs through our cash on hand. Our current capital resources consist of approximately $305.5 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 on a consolidated basis. We currently maintain at-the-market debt and equity offering programs pursuant to which we sell our Senior Notes and common stock from time to time. As of the date of this filing, we have remaining availability to raise aggregate gross sales proceeds of approximately $581.9 million under these programs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total indebtedness of approximately $56.5 million, of which no amounts are scheduled to be repaid within the next twelve months. We also had contractual obligations associated with our finance and operating leases totaling $216.9 million, of which $7.1 million is scheduled to be paid within the next twelve months.
The Company has sufficient cash on hand and available liquidity to satisfy its obligations and fund its working capital needs for at least twelve months following the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements. The Company has the ability to generate additional proceeds from various other potential financing transactions. We are currently focused on securing financing for the construction of plants one and two of the Driftwood terminal.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of our cash and cash equivalents and costs and expenses for the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by approximately $8.4 million compared to the same period in 2020 due to an overall decline in disbursements in the normal course of business.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $56.6 million compared to the same period in 2020. This increase is predominantly driven by increased spending on natural gas development activities, settlement of outstanding liabilities associated with engineering services for the Driftwood terminal and property and equipment purchases.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $260.4 million compared to the same period in 2020. This increase primarily relates to the following:
•Increase of approximately $315.4 million in net proceeds from equity issuances and warrant exercises.
•Increase of approximately $6.3 million in net borrowings as compared to the prior period.
•These increases were partially offset by cash outflows used in principal repayments of our borrowing obligations compared to the prior period.
See Note 10, Borrowings and Note 12, Stockholders’ Equity, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our financing activities.
Capital Development Activities
The activities we have proposed will require significant amounts of capital and are subject to risks and delays in completion. We received all major regulatory approvals for the construction of Phase 1 and, as a result, our business success will depend to a significant extent upon our ability to obtain the funding necessary to construct assets on a commercially viable basis and to finance the costs of staffing, operating and expanding our company during that process. We have initiated certain owner construction activities necessary to proceed under our LSTK EPC agreements and have increased our upstream development activities.
We currently estimate the total cost of the Driftwood Project as well as related pipelines and upstream natural gas assets to be approximately $25.0 billion including owners’ costs, transaction costs and contingencies but excluding interest costs incurred during construction and other financing costs. We have entered into four LSTK EPC agreements currently totaling $15.5 billion, or $561 per tonne, with Bechtel Oil, Gas and Chemicals, Inc. (“Bechtel”) for construction of the Driftwood terminal. The proposed Driftwood terminal will have a liquefaction capacity of up to approximately 27.6 Mtpa and
will be situated on approximately 1,200 acres in Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana. The proposed Driftwood terminal will include up to 20 liquefaction Trains, three full containment LNG storage tanks and three marine berths.
Our strategy involves acquiring additional natural gas properties, including properties in the Haynesville shale trend. We intend to pursue potential acquisitions of such assets, or public or private companies that own such assets. We would expect to use stock, cash on hand, or cash raised in financing transactions to complete an acquisition of this type.
We anticipate funding our more immediate liquidity requirements relative to the commencement of construction of the Driftwood terminal, natural gas development costs, and general and administrative costs through the use of cash on hand, proceeds from operations, and proceeds from completed and future issuances of securities by us. Investments in the construction of the Driftwood terminal and natural gas development may be significant in 2022, but the size of those investments will depend on, among other things, commodity prices, Driftwood Project financing developments and other liquidity considerations, and our continuing analysis of strategic risks and opportunities. Consistent with our overall financing strategy, the Company has considered, and in some cases discussed with investors, various potential financing transactions, including issuances of debt, equity and equity-linked securities or similar transactions, to support its short-term and long-term capital requirements. The Company will continue to evaluate its cash needs and business outlook, and it may execute one or more transactions of this type in the future.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes costs and expenses for the periods presented (in thousands):
Our consolidated net loss was approximately $114.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of approximately $210.7 million for the same period of 2020. The decrease in net loss was primarily a result of the following:
•Absence of proved natural gas Impairment charge, Severance and reorganization charges, and Related party charges of approximately $81.1 million, $6.4 million, and $7.4 million, respectively, that were incurred during 2020.
•Increase of approximately $33.8 million in Total revenue compared to the same period in 2020 attributable to a $21.0 million increase in Natural gas sales revenues as a result of increased realized natural gas prices, partially offset by decreased production volumes, and a $12.8 million increase in LNG sale revenues from the sale of an LNG cargo in April 2021.
•Decrease of approximately $34.1 million in Interest expense due to the decline in interest charges as a result of the repayment of our borrowing obligations that were outstanding at the end of 2020. For further information regarding the repayment of our borrowing obligations, see Note 10 - Borrowings, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Decrease of approximately $5.7 million in DD&A expenses due to utilizing a lower net book value in the calculation of DD&A as a result of the Impairment charge that we recognized in the prior year.
The decrease in net loss was partially offset by the following:
•Increase of approximately $19.2 million in Cost of sales primarily attributable to the purchase of an LNG cargo in April 2021.
•An increase of approximately $22.7 million in Development expenses primarily attributable to an $18.1 million increase in compensation expenses and a $4.6 million increase in professional services, engineering services and other development expenses associated with the Driftwood Project.
•An increase of approximately $38.6 million in General and administrative expenses primarily attributable to a $32.2 million increase in compensation expenses and a $6.4 million increase in professional services.
Our consolidated net loss was approximately $210.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of approximately $151.8 million for the same period of 2019. This $58.9 million increase in net loss was primarily a result of the following:
•Approximately $81.1 million related to an Impairment charge of our proved natural gas properties primarily due to depressed natural gas prices caused by the combined impact of increased natural gas production and falling demand brought about by economic conditions at the time. For further information regarding this impairment charge, see Note 4, Property, Plant and Equipment, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Increase of approximately $27.1 million in Interest expense, net, primarily attributable to incurring interest charges on both the 2019 Term Loan and 2020 Unsecured Note during the current period compared to only incurring charges on a portion of the 2019 Term Loan during the prior period.
•Increase of approximately $10.2 million in Cost of sales primarily attributable to the sale of an LNG cargo.
•Approximately $7.4 million in Related party charges incurred during the period compared to none in the prior period. For further information regarding these Related party charges, see Note 8, Related Party Transactions, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Approximately $6.4 million in Severance and reorganization charges incurred during the period compared to none in the prior period. For further information regarding the Severance and reorganization charges, see Note 13, Severance and Reorganization, of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The above increases in expenses were partially offset by an increase in Total revenue of approximately $8.7 million due primarily to the sale of an LNG cargo and a decrease in General and administrative expenses of approximately $40.1 million as well as a decrease in Development expenses of approximately $32.1 million due to an overall decline in business activities during the current period.
Commitments and Contingencies
The information set forth in Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies, to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report. As disclosed in Note 2, the preparation of financial statements requires the use of judgments and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates. We considered the following to be our most critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment:
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
When there are indicators that our proved natural gas properties carrying value may not be recoverable, we compare expected undiscounted future cash flows at a depreciation, depletion and amortization group level to the unamortized capitalized cost of the asset. If the expected undiscounted future cash flows, based on our estimates of (and assumptions regarding) future natural gas prices, operating costs, development expenditures, anticipated production from proved reserves and other relevant data, are lower than the unamortized capitalized cost, the capitalized cost is reduced to fair value. Fair value
is generally calculated using the income approach in accordance with GAAP. Estimates of undiscounted future cash flows require significant judgment, and the assumptions used in preparing such estimates are inherently uncertain. The impairment review includes cash flows from proved developed and undeveloped reserves, including any development expenditures necessary to achieve that production. Additionally, when probable and possible reserves exist, an appropriate risk-adjusted amount of these reserves may be included in the impairment calculation. In addition, such assumptions and estimates are reasonably likely to change in the future.
Proved reserves are the estimated quantities of natural gas and condensate that geological and engineering data demonstrate with reasonable certainty to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions. Despite the inherent imprecision in these engineering estimates, our reserves are used throughout our financial statements. For example, because we use the units-of-production method to deplete our natural gas properties, the quantity of reserves could significantly impact our DD&A expense. Consequently, material revisions (upward or downward) to existing reserve estimates may occur from time to time. Finally, these reserves are the basis for our supplemental natural gas disclosures. See Item 1 and 2 - Our Business and Properties for additional information on our estimate of proved reserves.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation transactions are measured based on the grant-date estimated fair value. For awards containing only service conditions or performance conditions deemed probable of occurring, the fair value is recognized as expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method. We recognize compensation cost for awards with performance conditions if and when we conclude that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. For awards where the performance or market condition is not considered probable, compensation cost is not recognized until the performance or market condition becomes probable. We reassess the probability of vesting at each reporting period for awards with performance conditions and adjust compensation cost based on our probability assessment. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Recent Accounting Standards
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements or related disclosures.