Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or this Form 10-K. This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “project,” “will,” “would” or the negative or plural of these words or similar expressions or variations. Such forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified herein, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors,” set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K and in our other filings with the SEC. Such risks and uncertainties may be amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business and the global economy. You should not rely upon forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. Furthermore, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
Overview
We are a leading provider of Cyber Exposure solutions. Cyber Exposure is a discipline for managing, measuring and comparing cybersecurity risk in the digital era.
We have continued to expand and diversify our platform offerings from traditional vulnerability management (VM) solutions, which include Tenable.sc and Nessus, to our cloud exposure solutions, which include Tenable.ep, Tenable.io, Tenable.cs, Tenable Web Scanning, or Tenable.io WAS, Tenable.ad and Tenable.ot. Our platform offerings provide broad visibility into security issues such as vulnerabilities, misconfigurations, internal and regulatory compliance violations and other indicators of the state of an organization’s security across IT infrastructure and applications, cloud environments, DevOps environments, Active Directory and Identity environments, and Industrial IoT and OT environments. We also provide deep analytics to help organizations score, trend and compare their cyber exposure over time, and communicate cyber risk in business terms to make better strategic decisions. Our platform offerings integrate and analyze data from our native collectors alongside IT asset, vulnerability and threat data from third-party systems and applications to prioritize security issues for remediation and focus an organization’s resources based on risk and business criticality.
Our platform offerings are primarily sold on a subscription basis with a one-year term. Our subscription terms are generally not longer than three years. These offerings are typically prepaid in advance. To a lesser extent, we recognize revenue ratably from perpetual licenses and from the related ongoing maintenance.
We sell and market our products and services through our field sales force that works closely with our channel partners, which includes a network of distributors and resellers, in developing sales opportunities. We use a two-tiered channel model whereby we sell our enterprise platform offerings to our distributors, which in turn sell to our resellers, which then sell to end users, which we call customers.
Many of our enterprise platform customers initially use either our free or paid version of Nessus, one of the most widely deployed vulnerability assessment solutions in the cybersecurity industry. Nessus, which is sold on a stand-alone basis and is the technology that underpins our enterprise platform offerings, is designed to quickly and accurately identify security vulnerabilities, configuration issues and malware. Our free version of Nessus, Nessus Essentials, allows for vulnerability assessment over a limited number of IP addresses. We believe many of our Nessus customers begin with Nessus Essentials and subsequently upgrade to Nessus Professional, the paid version of Nessus; however, we expect a significant number of users to continue to use Nessus Essentials.
Revenue in 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $541.1 million, $440.2 million and $354.6 million, representing year-over-year growth of 23% and 24%, respectively. Our recurring revenue, which includes revenue from subscription arrangements for software and cloud-based solutions and maintenance associated with perpetual licenses, represented 94.6%, 93.6% and 91.8% of revenue in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our net loss in 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $46.7 million, $42.7 million and $99.0 million, respectively, as we continue to invest in our business and market opportunity. Our cash flows from operating activities were $96.8 million, $64.2 million and $(10.7) million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
COVID-19 Update
While we have not seen a significant adverse impact on our business from the pandemic as of December 31, 2021, the extent to which it will impact our business and operations will depend on future developments that are uncertain. We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers, partners, employees and service providers. We have resumed limited business travel and adopted a hybrid work environment, which we expect will lead to additional costs. For additional information on the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations, see the "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section below and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Financial Highlights
Below are our key financial results:
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Product Leadership
Our enterprise platform offerings provide visibility into the broadest range of traditional and modern IT assets across cloud and on-premises environments. We are intensely focused on continued innovation and ongoing development of our enterprise platform offerings that empower organizations to understand and reduce their Cyber Exposure. Additionally, we continue to expand the capabilities of our Nessus products, specifically as they relate to the ability to scan for and detect the rapidly expanding volume of vulnerabilities.
We intend to continue to invest in our engineering capabilities and marketing activities to maintain our position in the highly-competitive market for cybersecurity solutions. Our results of operations may fluctuate as we make these investments to drive increased customer adoption and usage.
New Enterprise Platform Customer Acquisition
We believe that our customer base provides a significant opportunity to expand sales of our enterprise platform offerings and that our ability to continue to grow the number of enterprise platform customers will increase future opportunities for renewals and follow-on sales. We believe that we have significant room to increase our market share.
We expect to grow our enterprise platform customers by continuing to expand our sales organization and leveraging our channel partner network, which we believe will allow us to identify new enterprise customers, enter new markets, including internationally, as well as to convert more of our existing Nessus Professional customers to enterprise platform customers.
We will continue to invest in our partner network and sales and marketing capability in order to grow domestically and internationally.
Retaining and Expanding Revenue from Existing Customers
Our enterprise platform offerings utilize IT asset-based or IP address-based pricing models. Once enterprise customers have licensed our platform offerings, they typically seek broader coverage over their traditional IT assets, including networking infrastructure, desktops and on-premises servers. As customers launch new applications or migrate existing applications to the cloud and deploy web applications, containers, IoT and OT, they often increase the scope of their subscriptions and/or add additional perpetual licenses to our enterprise platforms.
We are also focused on upselling customers from Nessus Professional to our enterprise platform offerings. Nessus Professional customers are typically organizations or independent security consultants that use Nessus Professional for a single vulnerability assessment at a point in time. We seek to convert these customers to our enterprise platform offerings, which provide continuous visibility and insights into their attack surface, as their needs develop.
Further, we plan to expand existing platform capabilities and launch new products, which we believe will drive new product purchases and follow-on purchases over time, thereby contributing to customer renewals. We believe that there is a significant opportunity to drive additional sales to existing customers, and we expect to invest in sales and marketing and customer success personnel and activities to achieve additional revenue growth from existing customers. However, our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including satisfaction or dissatisfaction with our products and services, competition, pricing, current economic conditions or overall changes in our and our clients' spending levels.
We evaluate our ability to expand sales with existing customers by assessing our dollar-based net expansion rate on a last twelve months, or LTM, basis. We have historically calculated our dollar-based net expansion rate as follows:
•Denominator: To calculate our dollar-based net expansion rate as of the end of a reporting period, we first determine the annual recurring revenue, or ARR, from all active subscriptions and maintenance from perpetual licenses as of the last day of the same reporting period in the prior year. This represents recurring payments that we expect to receive in the next 12-month period from the cohort of customers that existed on the last day of the same reporting period in the prior year.
•Numerator: We measure the ARR for that same cohort of customers representing all subscriptions and maintenance from perpetual licenses based on customer orders as of the end of the reporting period.
We calculate dollar-based net expansion rate by dividing the numerator by the denominator.
Our dollar-based net expansion rate for 2021 exceeded 110% on an LTM basis. Our dollar-based net expansion rate may fluctuate from quarter to quarter if our existing customers choose to reduce or delay technology spending in response to economic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, or as a result of a number of other factors, including our existing customers' satisfaction with our solutions, the pricing of our solutions and the ability of competing solutions and the pricing thereof.
We also utilize an alternative dollar-based net expansion rate to assess our ability to expand sales with existing customers and evaluate the performance of our sales team. This alternative dollar-based net expansion rate is based on the methodology described above, but excludes the annual contract value of prior period multi-year sales from ARR in the numerator and the denominator of the calculation. We believe this methodology more closely aligns with the renewal and expansion goals established for our sales team because it measures net expansion by customers with contracts up for renewal during the period. Applying this methodology would have increased the dollar-based net expansion rate by two to five percentage points in 2020 and 2021.
Investing in Business Growth
Since our founding, we have invested significantly in growing our business. We intend to continue to invest in sales and marketing to grow our sales team, expand brand and Cyber Exposure awareness and optimize our channel partner network. We also intend to continue to invest in our research and development team to further our technological leadership position in Cyber Exposure and enhance the functionality of our solutions. Any investments we make in our
sales and marketing and research and development teams will occur in advance of experiencing the benefits from such investments, so it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating resources in those areas. We expect to acquire businesses, technology and/or development personnel that will expand and enhance the functionality of our platform offerings. These investment activities could increase our net losses over the short term if our revenue growth does not increase at higher rates. However, we expect that these investments will ultimately benefit our results of operations.
Key Operating and Financial Metrics
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we use certain operating metrics and non-GAAP financial measures, as described below, to understand and evaluate our core operating and financial performance. These non-GAAP financial measures, which may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies, are presented to enhance the overall understanding of our financial performance and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We believe that these operating metrics and non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our operating and financial performance, enhance the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects and allow for greater transparency with respect to important metrics used by management for financial and operational decision-making. We include these operating metrics and non-GAAP financial measures to present our operating and financial performance using a management view and because we believe that these measures provide an additional comparison of our core operating and financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Calculated Current Billings
We use the non-GAAP measure of calculated current billings, which we believe is a key metric to measure our periodic performance. Given that most of our customers pay in advance, we typically recognize a majority of the related revenue ratably over time. We use calculated current billings to measure and monitor our ability to provide our business with the working capital generated by upfront payments from our customers.
Calculated current billings consists of revenue recognized in a period plus the change in current deferred revenue in the corresponding period. We believe that calculated current billings, which excludes deferred revenue for periods beyond twelve months in a customer’s contractual term, more closely correlates with annual contract value. Variability in total billings, depending on the timing of large multi-year contracts and the preference for annual billing versus multi-year upfront billing, may distort growth in one period over another.
While we believe that calculated current billings provides valuable insight into the cash that will be generated from sales of our subscriptions, this metric may vary from period-to-period for a number of reasons, and therefore has a number of limitations as a quarter-to-quarter or year-over-year comparative measure. Calculated current billings in any one period may be impacted by the overall timing of sales, including early renewals, as well as the timing and amount of multi-year prepaid contracts, which could favorably or unfavorably impact year-over-year comparisons. For example, an increasing number of large sales transactions, for which the timing has and will continue to vary, may occur in quarters subsequent to or in advance of those that we anticipate. Our calculation of calculated current billings may be different from other companies that report similar financial measures. Because of these and other limitations, you should consider calculated current billings along with revenue and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of revenue, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to calculated current billings:
_______________
(1) Deferred revenue (current), beginning of period for 2021 and 2019 includes $2.6 million and $0.4 million, respectively, related to acquired deferred revenue.
Free Cash Flow and Unlevered Free Cash Flow
We use the non-GAAP measure of free cash flow, which we define as GAAP net cash flows from operating activities reduced by purchases of property and equipment. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity measure of the cash (if any) that is available, after purchases of property and equipment, for investment in our business and to make acquisitions. We believe that free cash flow is useful as a liquidity measure because it measures our ability to generate or use cash.
We also use the non-GAAP measure of unlevered free cash flow, which we define as free cash flow plus cash paid for interest and other financing costs. We believe unlevered free cash flow is useful as a liquidity measure as it measures the cash that is available to invest in our business and meet our current and future financing needs.
Our use of free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results under GAAP. First, free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow are not substitutes for net cash flows from operating activities. Second, other companies may calculate free cash flow, unlevered free cash flow or similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow as tools for comparison. Additionally, the utility of free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow is further limited as it does not reflect our future contractual commitments and does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for a given period. Because of these and other limitations, you should consider free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow along with net cash provided by (used in) operating activities and our other GAAP financial measures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to free cash flow and unlevered cash flow:
_______________
(1) Free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow for the periods presented were impacted by:
Free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow in 2021 were reduced by approximately $8 million due to prepayments of software subscription costs, insurance and rent, offset by a benefit of approximately $15 million from prepayments of similar items made in 2020. The 2020 prepayments reduced free cash flow and unlevered free cash flow by approximately $17 million in 2020.
Enterprise Platform Customers
We believe that our customer base provides a significant opportunity to expand sales of our enterprise platform offerings. The following tables summarize key components of our customer base:
_______________
(1) We define an enterprise platform customer as a customer that has licensed Tenable.ep, Tenable.io, Tenable.cs, Tenable.ad, Tenable.ot or Tenable.sc for an annual amount of $5,000 or greater. New enterprise platform customers represent new customer logos during the periods presented and do not include customer conversions from Nessus Professional to enterprise platforms.
(2) The number of new enterprise platform customers added in 2021 includes 95 legacy customers of our acquisitions.
Non-GAAP Income (Loss) from Operations and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We use non-GAAP income (loss) from operations along with non-GAAP operating margin as key indicators of our financial performance. We define these non-GAAP financial measures as their respective GAAP measures, excluding the effects of stock-based compensation, acquisition-related expenses and amortization of acquired intangible assets. Acquisition-related expenses include transaction expenses and costs related to the intercompany transfer of acquired intellectual property.
We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our core operating results over multiple periods. There are a number of limitations related to the use of the non-GAAP financial measures as compared to GAAP loss from operations and operating margin, including that non-GAAP income (loss) from operations and non-GAAP operating margin exclude stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
The following table presents a reconciliation of loss from operations, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to non-GAAP income (loss) from operations, and operating margin, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to non-GAAP operating margin:
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Earnings (Loss) Per Share
We use non-GAAP net income (loss), which excludes stock-based compensation, acquisition-related expenses and amortization of acquired intangible assets, as well as the related tax impacts, and the tax impact of intra-entity asset transfers resulting from the internal restructuring of legal entities as well as deferred income tax benefits recognized in connection with acquisitions, to calculate non-GAAP earnings (loss) per share. We believe that these non-GAAP measures provide important information because they facilitate comparisons of our core operating results over multiple periods.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss and net loss per share, the most comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, to non-GAAP net income (loss) and non-GAAP earnings (loss) per share:
________________
(1) The tax impact of stock-based compensation is based on the tax treatment for applicable tax jurisdictions.
(2) The tax impact of acquisition-related expenses is not material.
(3) The tax impact of the amortization of acquired intangible assets is included in the tax impact of acquisitions.
(4) The tax impact of acquisitions in 2021 includes a reversal of the $7.9 million income tax benefit recognized for GAAP purposes related to the partial release of our valuation allowance associated with the Accurics acquisition and a reversal of $2.6 million of deferred tax benefits related to the Alsid acquisition. The tax impact of the Indegy acquisition in 2019 includes $6.3 million of current tax expense and $4.2 million of deferred tax expense related to the transfer of acquired intellectual property.
(5) The tax impact of the intra-entity asset transfer is related to the internal restructuring of Indegy, resulting in a current tax payment based on the applicable Israeli tax rate.
(6) An adjustment to reconcile GAAP net loss per share, which excludes potentially dilutive shares, to non-GAAP earnings per share, which includes potentially dilutive shares.
(7) In periods in which there is a non-GAAP net loss, basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding are the same, as potentially dilutive shares would be antidilutive.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from subscription arrangements for our software and cloud-based solutions, perpetual licenses, maintenance associated with perpetual licenses and professional services.
Our subscription arrangements generally have annual or multi-year contractual terms to use our software or cloud-based solutions, including ongoing software updates during the contractual period. For software subscriptions that are dependent on ongoing software updates and the ability to identify the latest cybersecurity vulnerabilities, revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term given the critical utility provided by the ongoing updates that are released through the contract period. When the critical utility of our software does not depend on ongoing updates, we recognize revenue attributable to the license at the time of delivery and the revenue attributable to the maintenance and support ratably over the contract period.
Our perpetual licenses are generally sold with one or more years of maintenance, which includes ongoing software updates. Given the critical utility provided by the ongoing software updates and updated ability to identify network vulnerabilities included in maintenance, we combine the perpetual license and the maintenance into a single performance obligation. Perpetual license arrangements generally contain a material right related to the customer’s ability to renew maintenance at a price that is less than the initial license fee. We apply a practical alternative to allocating a portion of the transaction price to the material right performance obligation and estimate a hypothetical transaction price which includes fees for expected maintenance renewals based on the estimated economic life of perpetual license contracts. We allocate the transaction price between the cybersecurity subscription provided in the initial contract and the material right related to expected contract renewals based on the hypothetical transaction price. We recognize the amount allocated to the combined license and maintenance performance obligation over the initial contractual period, which is generally one year. We recognize the amount allocated to the material right over the expected maintenance renewal period, which begins at the end of the initial contractual term and is generally four years. We have estimated the five-year economic life of perpetual license contracts based on historical contract attrition, expected renewal periods, the lifecycle of our technology and other factors. This estimate may change over time.
Professional services and other revenue is primarily comprised of advisory services and training related to the deployment and optimization of our products. These services do not result in significant customization of our products. Professional services and other revenue is recognized as the services are performed.
We have historically experienced, and expect in the future to experience, seasonality in entering into agreements with customers. We typically enter into a significantly higher percentage of agreements with new customers, as well as renewal agreements with existing customers, in the third and fourth quarters of the year. The increase in customer agreements in the third quarter is primarily attributable to U.S. government and related agencies, and the increase in the fourth quarter is primarily attributable to large enterprise account buying patterns typical in the software industry. The ratable nature of our subscription revenue makes this seasonality less apparent in our overall financial results.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue includes personnel costs related to our technical support group that provides assistance to customers, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation and any severance. Cost of revenue also includes cloud infrastructure costs, the costs related to professional services and training, depreciation, amortization of acquired and developed technology, hardware costs and allocated overhead costs, which consist of information technology and facilities.
We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our cloud-based platform and customer support team as we grow our business. The level and timing of investment in these areas could affect our cost of revenue in the future.
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing of our acquisition of new customers and our renewals of and follow-on sales to existing customers, the costs associated with operating our cloud-based platform, the extent to which we expand our customer support team and the extent to which we can increase the efficiency of our technology and infrastructure through technological improvements.
We expect our gross profit to increase in absolute dollars but our gross margin to decrease over time, as we expect revenue from our cloud-based subscriptions to increase as a percentage of revenue. However, our gross margin could fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of all of these factors, particularly as it relates to cloud infrastructure costs.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation and any severance. Operating expenses also include depreciation and amortization as well as allocated overhead costs, including IT and facilities costs.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists of personnel costs, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment, expenses for conferences, meetings and events and allocated overhead costs. We capitalize sales commissions, including related fringe benefit costs, and recognize the expense over an estimated period of benefit, which ranges between three and four years for subscription arrangements and five years for perpetual license arrangements. Sales commissions on contract renewals are capitalized and amortized ratably over the contract term, with the exception of contracts with renewal periods that are one year or less, in which case the incremental costs are expensed as incurred. Sales commissions on professional services arrangements are expensed as incurred as the contractual periods of these arrangements are generally less than one year.
We intend to continue to make investments in our sales and marketing teams to increase revenue, further penetrate the market and expand our global customer base. We expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars annually and to be our largest operating expense category for the foreseeable future. However, as our revenue increases, we expect our sales and marketing expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term. Our sales and marketing expense may fluctuate from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses, including sales commissions, which may fluctuate depending on the mix of sales and related expense recognition.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists of personnel costs, software used to develop our products, travel and entertainment, consulting and professional fees for third-party development resources as well as allocated overhead. Our research and development expense supports our efforts to continue to add capabilities to our existing products and enable the continued detection of new network vulnerabilities.
We expect our research and development expense to continue to increase annually in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development efforts to enhance the functionality of our cloud-based platform. However, we expect our research and development expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our research and development expense may fluctuate from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists of personnel costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative departments. Additional expenses include travel and entertainment, professional fees, insurance, allocated overhead, and acquisition-related costs.
We expect our general and administrative expense to continue to increase annually in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future due to additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance and investor relations as a public company. However, we expect our general and administrative expense to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our general and administrative expense may fluctuate from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest (expense) income, net consists primarily of interest expense in connection with our senior secured term loan facility, or Term Loan, unused commitment fees on our senior secured revolving credit facility, or Revolving Credit Facility,
and letter of credit fees. Interest (expense) income, net also includes interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net consists primarily of foreign currency remeasurement and transaction gains and losses.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
(Benefit) provision for income taxes has historically consisted of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and the related withholding taxes on sales to foreign customers. We typically maintain a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits, and expect this to continue for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not that some or all of those deferred tax assets may not be realized based on our history of losses.
In 2021, the income tax benefit resulted from a partial release of our valuation allowance associated with the Accurics acquisition and a deferred tax benefit related to post-acquisition activities of Alsid, which were partially offset by tax expense from the restructuring of our research and development operations in Israel as well as income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and the related withholding taxes on sales to foreign customers.
In 2019, the provision for income taxes also included the tax impact related to the intercompany transfer of acquired intellectual property.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods presented:
_______________
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Comparison of 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The following table presents the increase in revenue:
U.S. revenue increased $46.3 million, or 17%. International revenue increased $54.6 million, or 32%.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in cost of revenue of $28.8 million was primarily due to:
•a $17.8 million increase in third-party cloud infrastructure costs;
•a $4.1 million increase in the amortization of acquired intangible assets;
•a $4.0 million increase in personnel costs, primarily due to support for cloud-based products and an increase in headcount, including a $1.3 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $1.2 million increase in professional fees; and
•a $1.1 million increase in hardware costs; partially offset by
•a $0.6 million decrease in allocated overhead expenses.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expense of $45.9 million was primarily due to:
•a $23.3 million increase in personnel costs, related to an increase in headcount, including a $9.6 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $10.5 million increase in expenses for demand generation programs, including advertising, sponsorships, and brand awareness efforts;
•a $10.0 million increase in sales commissions; and
•a $3.8 million increase in selling expenses, including software subscriptions and training programs; partially offset by
•a $1.9 million decrease in meeting and travel costs.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense of $14.7 million was primarily due to:
•a $13.5 million increase in personnel costs, largely associated with an increase in headcount, including a $5.8 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $2.1 million increase in third-party cloud infrastructure costs; and
•a $0.6 million increase in software subscriptions; partially offset by
•a $1.0 million decrease in travel and meeting costs;
•a $0.5 million decrease in allocated overhead; and
•a $0.5 million decrease in depreciation.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expense of $16.8 million was primarily due to:
•a $7.5 million increase in personnel costs, largely associated with an increase in headcount, including a $3.2 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $6.3 million increase in acquisition-related expenses;
•a $2.0 million increase in professional fees; and
•a $1.0 million increase in depreciation and amortization.
Comparison of 2020 and 2019
Revenue
The following table presents the increase in revenue:
U.S. revenue increased $43.0 million, or 19%. International revenue increased $42.6 million, or 33%.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in cost of revenue of $16.7 million was primarily due to:
•a $7.0 million increase in personnel costs, primarily due to support for cloud-based products, including a $0.3 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $6.7 million increase in third-party cloud infrastructure costs;
•a $1.7 million increase in the amortization of acquired intangible assets;
•a $1.0 million increase in the amortization of internal use software; and
•a $0.7 million increase in allocated overhead costs driven by both the increase in average headcount and the overall increase in such costs on a year-over-year basis; partially offset by
•a $1.1 million decrease in travel and meeting expenses.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
The decrease in sales and marketing expense of $3.8 million was primarily due to:
•a $7.7 million decrease in selling expenses, including travel and meeting costs and software subscriptions; and
•a $6.4 million decrease in expenses for demand generation programs, including advertising, sponsorships, and brand awareness efforts; partially offset by
•a $8.9 million increase in personnel costs, primarily due to an increase in average headcount, including a $3.8 million increase in stock-based compensation;
•a $1.0 million increase in allocated overhead costs; and
•a $0.7 million increase in depreciation.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expense of $14.6 million was primarily due to:
•a $14.8 million increase in personnel costs, largely associated with an increase in average headcount, including a $5.9 million increase in stock-based compensation and a decrease of $2.6 million of development costs and stock-based compensation capitalized related to internal use software;
•a $2.0 million increase in allocated overhead; and
•a $0.5 million increase in software subscriptions; partially offset by
•a $1.6 million decrease in travel and meeting costs; and
•a $0.9 million decrease in third-party cloud infrastructure costs.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expense of $3.7 million was primarily due to:
•an $8.7 million increase in personnel costs, including a $6.1 million increase in stock-based compensation; and
•a $1.3 million increase in allocated overhead; partially offset by
•a $3.6 million decrease in acquisition-related expenses;
•a $2.3 million decrease in professional fees; and
•a $1.5 million decrease in travel and meeting costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had $278.0 million of cash and cash equivalents, which consisted of bank deposits and money market funds, and $234.3 million short-term investments, which consisted of commercial paper, asset backed securities, certificates of deposit, U.S. Treasury and agency obligations, and corporate and supranational bonds.
Since our inception, we have primarily financed our operations through cash provided by operations, including payments received from customers using our software products and services. Prior to our IPO, we did not raise any primary institutional capital, and the proceeds of our Series A and Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock financings were used to repurchase shares of capital stock from former stockholders. We have generated significant operating losses, as reflected by our accumulated deficit of $654.5 million at December 31, 2021.
We typically invoice our customers annually in advance and, to a lesser extent, multi-year in advance. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from such prepayments, which are included in deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets. Deferred revenue consists primarily of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions and perpetual licenses, which is subsequently recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. At December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $530.9 million, of which $407.5 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recognized as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met.
Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, expansion of our sales and marketing and research and development activities, investments in infrastructure, including the build-out of our new headquarters, and acquiring complementary businesses and technology. In April 2021, we paid $98.5 million in cash to acquire Alsid, and in October 2021, we acquired Accurics for $160.0 million in cash. In February 2022, we acquired Cymptom for approximately $23 million in cash. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in other complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We expect to continue incurring operating losses in the near term. Even though we generated positive cash flows from operations and unlevered free cash flow in 2021 and 2020, we may not be able to sustain these cash flows. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, the timing and extent of spending to support further infrastructure and research and development efforts, the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in new and existing office spaces, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operating activities, any acquisitions of complementary businesses and technologies, the timing of our introduction of new product capabilities and enhancements of our platform and the continuing market acceptance of our platform. It may be necessary to seek additional equity or debt financing to fund our operating and capital needs. In the event that financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
While we have not seen a significant adverse impact on our business from the pandemic as of December 31, 2021, the extent to which it will impact our business and operations will depend on future developments that are uncertain. Accordingly, the current results and financial conditions discussed herein may not be indicative of our future operating results and trends. See the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility
In July 2021, we entered into a credit agreement, or the Credit Agreement, which is comprised of a $375.0 million Term Loan and a $50.0 million Revolving Credit Facility, with a $15.0 million letter of credit sublimit. The Term Loan bears interest at a rate of 2.75% per annum over LIBOR, subject to a 0.50% floor. The Term Loan will amortize at 1% per annum in equal quarterly installments, starting in March 2022 until the final maturity date on July 7, 2028. We may be subject to mandatory Term Loan prepayments related to the excess cash provisions in the Credit Agreement beginning in 2023. The Revolving Credit Facility bears interest at a rate, depending on first lien net leverage, ranging from 2.00% to 2.50% over LIBOR and matures on July 7, 2026. We will pay a commitment fee during the term ranging from 0.25% to 0.375% per
annum of the average daily undrawn portion of the revolving commitments based on the first lien net leverage ratio. The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. Additionally, if at least 35% of the Revolving Credit Facility is drawn on the last day of the quarter, the total net leverage ratio cannot be greater than 5.50 to 1.00.
At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants and there have been no amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
In connection with the Credit Agreement, we terminated our $45.0 million senior secured credit facility, or the 2020 Credit Facility, with Silicon Valley Bank, including the release of all related guarantees and liens. Prior to its termination, there were no amounts outstanding under our 2020 Credit Facility.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of cash provided by operating activities is cash collections from sales of our products and services, as we typically invoice our customers in advance. Our primary uses of cash are employee compensation costs, third-party cloud infrastructure and other software subscription costs, demand generation expenditures and general corporate costs.
Investing Activities
From 2020 to 2021, net cash used in investing activities increased by $395.7 million, primarily due to an increase of cash paid for acquisitions of $258.2 million, a net increase in short-term investments of $146.2 million, and a $5.0 million simple agreement for future equity investment in 2021, partially offset by a decrease in purchases of property and equipment of $13.7 million.
From 2019 to 2020, cash flows from investing activities increased by $117.1 million, primarily due to a decrease in cash paid for acquisitions of $74.6 million and an increase in our sales, net of purchases, of investments of $42.1 million.
Financing Activities
From 2020 to 2021, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $361.2 million, primarily due to net proceeds from our Credit Facility of $365.7 million. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $3.4 million in the proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $2.0 million of loan proceeds that we received from the state of Maryland in 2020.
From 2019 to 2020, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $2.2 million, primarily due to $2.0 million of proceeds from a loan agreement from the state of Maryland and an increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $2.7 million, which was partially offset by a decrease in stock issued in connection with the employee stock purchase plan of $2.1 million.
Contractual Obligations
We have certain contractual obligations for future payments. Refer to Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our required operating lease payments and Note 9 for our required payments to Amazon Web Services, Inc. for cloud services.
At December 31, 2021, we had other non-cancellable purchase obligations of $8.1 million due in the next twelve months and $11.3 million due thereafter. Additionally, we had $7.6 million of unrecognized tax benefits and $1.2 million of asset retirement obligations, the timing of payments for which is uncertain.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. In recognizing revenue, we apply the following steps:
•Identify the contract with a customer
•Identify the performance obligations in the contract
•Determine the transaction price
•Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognize revenue when or as performance obligations are satisfied
In situations where we enter into a contractual arrangement that includes non-standard terms and conditions, such as acceptance provisions and options to purchase additional products and services, as well as contract modifications, we apply judgment in identifying and assessing the impact on revenue recognition.
We generate revenue from subscription arrangements for our software and cloud-based solutions, perpetual licenses, maintenance associated with perpetual licenses and professional services and other revenue.
Subscription Revenue
Our subscription arrangements generally have annual or multi-year contractual terms and allow customers to use our software or cloud solutions. For our software subscriptions that are dependent on ongoing software updates and the ability to identify the latest cybersecurity vulnerabilities, revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription term given the critical utility provided by the ongoing updates that are released throughout the contract period. When the critical utility of our software does not depend on ongoing updates, we recognize revenue attributable to the license at the time of delivery and the revenue attributable to the maintenance and support ratably over the contract period.
Perpetual License and Maintenance Revenue
Our perpetual licenses are generally sold with one or more years of maintenance, which include ongoing software updates and the ongoing ability to identify the latest cybersecurity vulnerabilities. Given the critical utility provided by the ongoing software updates and updated ability to identify network vulnerabilities included in maintenance, we combine the perpetual license and the maintenance into a single performance obligation. Perpetual license arrangements generally
contain a material right related to the customer’s ability to renew maintenance at a price that is less than the initial license fee. We apply a practical alternative to allocating a portion of the transaction price to the material right performance obligation and estimate a hypothetical transaction price which includes fees for expected maintenance renewals based on the estimated economic life of the perpetual license contracts. We allocate the transaction price between the cybersecurity subscription provided in the initial contract and the material right related to expected contract renewals based on the hypothetical transaction price. We recognize the amount allocated to the combined license and maintenance performance obligation over the initial contractual period, which is generally one year. We recognize the amount allocated to the material right over the expected maintenance renewal period, which begins at the end of the initial contractual term and is generally four years. We have estimated the five-year economic life of perpetual license contracts based on historical contract attrition, expected renewal periods, the lifecycle of the our technology and other factors. While we believe that the estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results.
Professional Services and Other Revenue
Professional services and other revenue is primarily comprised of advisory services and training related to the deployment and optimization of our products. These services do not result in significant customization of our products. Professional services and other revenue is recognized as the services are performed.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
In cases where our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations, the contract transaction price is allocated on a relative standalone selling price basis. We typically determine standalone selling price based on observable selling prices of our products and services.
Variable Consideration
We record revenue from sales at the net sales price, which is the transaction price, including estimates of variable consideration when applicable. Certain of our customers may be entitled to receive credits and in certain circumstances, refunds, if service level commitments are not met. We have not historically experienced significant incidents affecting the ability to meet these service level commitments and any estimated refunds related to these agreements have not been material.
Sales through our channel partner network of distributors and resellers are generally discounted as compared to the price that we would sell to an end user. Revenue for sales through our channel network, which is fixed, is recorded net of any distributor or reseller margin.
Deferred Commissions
Sales commissions, including related incremental fringe benefit costs, are considered to be incremental costs of obtaining a contract, and therefore are deferred over an estimated period of benefit, which ranges between three and four years for subscription arrangements and five years for perpetual license arrangements. We have estimated the period of benefit based on the expected contract term including renewal periods, the lifecycle of our technology and other factors. Sales commissions on contract renewals are capitalized and amortized ratably over the contract term, with the exception of contracts with renewal periods that are one year or less, in which case the incremental costs are expensed as incurred. While we believe that the estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense related to stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units, or RSUs, and purchase rights issued under our 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or the 2018 ESPP, is calculated based on the fair value of the awards granted and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally two to four years. RSUs that include performance-based vesting conditions are expensed using the accelerated attribution method. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Estimating the fair value of stock options and purchase rights under the 2018 ESPP using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires assumptions as to the fair value of our underlying common stock, the estimated term of the option, the risk free interest rates, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock and the expected dividend yield. The assumptions used to estimate the fair value of the option awards reflect our best estimates. If any of the assumptions change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ significantly compared with the awards granted previously.
The assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. See “Valuations” discussion below.
•Expected Term. This is the period of time that the options granted are expected to remain unexercised. We employ the simplified method to calculate the average expected term.
•Volatility. This is a measure of the amount by which a financial variable, such as a share price, has fluctuated (historical volatility) or is expected to fluctuate (expected volatility) during a period. In 2021, we began using the volatility of our common stock to calculate expected volatility. Prior to 2021, we identified several public entities of similar size, complexity and stage of development and estimated our volatility based on the volatility of the common stock of these companies.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. This is the U.S. Treasury rate, having a term that most closely resembles the expected life of the stock option.
•Dividend Yield. We have not and do not expect to pay dividends on our common stock.
Valuations
Following our IPO, we use the market price of our common stock at the date of grant as the fair value. Prior to our IPO, the lack of an active public market for our common stock required our board of directors to exercise reasonable judgment and consider a number of factors in order to make the best estimate of fair value of our common stock, in accordance with the technical practice-aid issued by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid entitled Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Factors considered in connection with estimating the fair value of our common stock underlying our award of restricted stock and stock option awards when performing the fair value calculations with the Black Scholes option-pricing model included:
•The results of independent third-party valuations of our common stock
•Recent arm’s length transactions involving the sale or transfer of our common stock
•The rights, preferences and privileges of our Series A and Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock
•Our historical financial results and future financial projections
•The market value of equity interests in substantially similar businesses, which equity interests can be valued through nondiscretionary, objective means
•The lack of marketability of our common stock
•The likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO given prevailing market conditions
•Industry outlook
•General economic outlook including economic growth, inflation and unemployment, interest rate environment and global economic trends
As described above, the exercise price of our stock option awards was determined by our board of directors, with input from management, taking into account the factors described above, using a combination of valuation methodologies with varying weighting applied to each methodology as of the grant date.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that were highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions would have impacted our valuations as of each valuation date and may have had a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
The fair value of the 2018 ESPP purchase rights were estimated on the offering or modification dates based on the following assumptions:
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations by recognizing the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities. The excess purchase consideration over the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, a non-recurring Level 3 fair value measurement, we make estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets such as identified acquired technology and trade names. We determine the fair value of acquired technology using the multi-period excess earnings method, a form of the income approach. Estimates in valuing identifiable intangible assets include, but are not limited to, projected revenue growth rates, future expected operating expenses, obsolescence projections and an appropriate discount rate. Our estimate of fair value is based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, we may make adjustments to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with offsetting adjustments to goodwill. Any adjustments made after the measurement period will be reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition-related transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill
The excess purchase consideration over the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. We perform our annual impairment assessment on October 1, or more frequently, when events or circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. We operate as one reporting unit and have elected to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the Company as a whole is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. The qualitative assessment includes an evaluation of relevant events and circumstances, including macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, our overall financial performance, and trends in the value of our common stock. During the periods presented, there were no indications of impairment and it was not more likely than not that goodwill was impaired.
Income Taxes
We are subject to federal, state and local taxes in the United States as well as numerous international jurisdictions. These foreign jurisdictions have different statutory tax rates than the United States. Earnings generated by our international entities are related to transfer pricing requirements as applicable under local jurisdiction tax laws.
We record a provision for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of existing assets and liabilities, net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. A valuation allowance is provided if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have valuation allowances in all jurisdictions against deferred tax assets net of deferred tax liabilities that will reverse and provide a source of taxable income. Our evaluation of valuation allowances could change in the future and the impact could have a material impact on our financial statements.
We recognize tax benefits from an uncertain tax position if it is more likely than not to be sustained upon audit by the relevant taxing authority. Interest and penalties associated with such uncertain tax positions are classified as a component of income tax expense.
In connection with the 2021 acquisition of Accurics, we elected to first offset our existing deferred tax assets with acquired deferred tax liabilities. This resulted in releasing $7.9 million of the federal and state valuation allowance, which was recorded as a component of our deferred tax benefit.
In December 2019, subsequent to our acquisition of Indegy, we transferred the acquired intellectual property from Israel to the U.S. and Ireland through an intercompany transaction. The sale of Indegy’s intellectual property for tax purposes resulted in $6.3 million of current tax expense and $4.2 million of deferred tax expense in Israel. In January 2021, we transferred Indegy’s R&D business to another wholly owned Israeli entity through an intercompany transaction. The sale of Indegy’s R&D business resulted in $2.8 million of current tax expense in Israel. The valuation of the intellectual property and R&D business for tax purposes required significant judgment and assumptions with respect to forecasted operating results and discount rates.
Depending on the jurisdiction, distributions of earnings could be subject to withholding taxes at rates applicable to the distributing jurisdiction. As we intend to continue to reinvest the earnings of foreign subsidiaries indefinitely, we have not provided for a U.S. income tax liability and foreign withholding taxes on undistributed foreign earnings of foreign subsidiaries.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.