Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends on December 31 each year.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing a portfolio of small-molecule single-agent and combination therapy candidates to address serious diseases such as non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and obesity. Our programs are based on mechanisms of action that have achieved proof-of-concept in clinical trials. The mechanisms of action targeted by our most advanced drug candidates are the same mechanisms of action targeted by other drug candidates that have achieved clinical proof-of-concept in NASH clinical trials and have demonstrated significant improvements on histological and non-invasive markers of the disease, though no drug has been approved for the treatment of NASH in the United States or Europe. We also have an oral small-molecule glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1R) agonist in pre-clinical development that may target metabolic diseases such as obesity as well as NASH. Beyond NASH, we plan to explore other indications with high unmet need using our pipeline drug candidates.
Our most advanced program is TERN-101, a liver-distributed, non-bile acid Farnesoid X Receptor, or FXR, agonist that has demonstrated sustained liver FXR activation, as well as a favorable tolerability profile across multiple clinical trials. In June 2021, we announced positive top-line data from our Phase 2a LIFT Study of TERN-101 in NASH patients. In the LIFT Study, TERN-101 was generally well-tolerated with a similar incidence of adverse events (AEs) across treatment groups. There were no treatment-related serious adverse events, and no patient discontinued TERN-101 due to any adverse event including pruritus. Multiple secondary and exploratory endpoints were also evaluated, including changes in liver fibro-inflammation measured by MRI corrected T1 (cT1), liver fat content by MRI proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF), pharmacodynamic parameters, and serum NASH biomarkers. We believe TERN-101 is the first FXR agonist product candidate to show significant improvements in cT1, an imaging marker of liver inflammation and fibrosis linked to clinical outcomes, in a 12-week placebo-controlled clinical trial. In light of the positive results, we plan to initiate a Phase 2a clinical trial in NASH patients including both monotherapy and combination arms of TERN-101 and TERN-501 in NASH in the first half of 2022 with top-line data expected in the second half of 2023.
Our second clinical stage program, TERN-201, is a highly selective inhibitor of Vascular Adhesion Protein-1, or VAP-1. We initiated our Phase 1b AVIATION Trial of TERN-201 in NASH in June 2021. We expect to announce top-line data from Part 1 of our Phase 1b AVIATION trial in March 2022. We initiated Part 2 of our AVIATION trial in the first quarter of 2022 with top-line data expected in the second half of 2022. We are also evaluating the potential to co-administer TERN-201 in combination with a metabolically active NASH treatment.
Our third clinical stage program is TERN-501, a Thyroid Hormone Receptor beta, or THR-β, agonist with high metabolic stability, enhanced liver distribution and greater selectivity for THR-β compared to other THR-β agonists in development. In November 2021, we announced positive top-line data from a Phase 1 clinical trial of TERN-501 in healthy volunteers with mildly elevated low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, cholesterol. This Phase 1 trial included single ascending dose (SAD), multiple ascending dose (MAD) and drug-drug interaction (DDI) cohorts evaluating the safety, tolerability, pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of TERN-501. In the SAD and MAD cohorts, single and multiple doses of TERN-501 were generally well-tolerated with a similar incidence of AEs across all TERN-501 treatment groups and placebo. All AEs were mild to moderate with no apparent dose relationship, with no treatment-emergent serious AEs and no discontinuations of study or study drug due to any AE. There were no cardiac safety signals, no incidence of diarrhea and no differences between TERN-501 groups and placebo in change from baseline in heart rate, blood pressure or other vital signs. Thyroid function test results were consistent with THR-β agonists currently in clinical development, and there were no findings of clinical hyper- or hypo-thyroidism. There were no differences between placebo and any TERN-501 dose group in liver function abnormalities or mean change from baseline in liver transaminases at Day 15 in the MAD cohorts. TERN-501 demonstrated a predictable pharmacokinetic profile with low variability: study drug plasma exposures were linear and approximately dose-proportional with no overlap between dose strengths. Significant effects on sex hormone binding globulin, or SHBG, a key pharmacodynamic marker of THR-β engagement linked to NASH histologic efficacy, were observed following treatment with TERN-501. The SHBG increases observed with 14 days of TERN-501 treatment were significant, dose dependent and have been associated with robust reductions in magnetic resonance imaging proton density fat fraction, or MRI-PDFF, and NAFLD Activity Score in a precedent late-stage clinical NASH trial. The overall pharmacokinetic profile from this trial indicates that TERN-501 is well-suited for co-formulation with other small-molecule NASH agents as an oral, once-daily fixed dose combination. In the DDI cohort, the combination of TERN-101 and TERN-501 was well-tolerated. Preliminary pharmacokinetic results support the co-administration of TERN-101 and TERN-501 in NASH patients, with no apparent need for dose adjustment. We plan to initiate a Phase 2a clinical trial in NASH patients including both monotherapy and combination arms of TERN-101 and TERN-501 in the first half of 2022 with top-line data expected in the second half of 2023.
We are also developing an oral small-molecule glucagon-like peptide-1, or GLP-1R, agonist for the treatment of obesity and NASH. Synthetic GLP-1 peptide agonists have been approved for diabetes and obesity, which are conditions that often accompany NASH. We designated a development candidate for our GLP-1R program as TERN-601 in the fourth quarter of 2021 and plan to engage in IND-enabling activities for TERN-601 with the goal of initiating a first-in-human clinical trial in 2023.
Since the commencement of our operations, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
In February 2021, we completed our initial public offering pursuant to which we issued 8,625,000 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $17.00 for total net proceeds of $133.0 million.
We do not have any single-agent or combination therapy candidates approved for commercial sale, and we have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, if ever, will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our single-agent or combination therapy candidates which we expect, if it ever occurs, will take a number of years. We will not generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our single-agent or combination therapy candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our single-agent or combination therapy candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution.
We do not own or operate, and currently have no plans to establish, any manufacturing facilities. We rely, and expect to continue to rely, on third parties for the manufacture of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates for preclinical and clinical testing, as well as for commercial manufacturing if any of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates obtain marketing approval. We believe that this strategy allows us to maintain a more efficient infrastructure by eliminating the need for us to invest in our own manufacturing facilities, equipment and personnel while also enabling us to focus our expertise and resources on the development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates.
COVID-19 developments
The coronavirus disease 2019, or COVID-19, pandemic is rapidly evolving. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact countries worldwide, including the United States and China where we have business operations. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and its impact on our development activities, planned clinical trial enrollment, future trial sites, contract research organizations, or CROs, third-party manufacturers and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, including the duration and/or severity of the outbreak, the impact of any resurgences and new variants that emerge, actions by the government authorities to contain the spread of the virus, the availability, adoption and effectiveness of any vaccines, and when and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. To the extent possible, we are conducting business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications to employee travel and to the on-site and in-person activities of our personnel. We will continue to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities in the United States and China, or that we determine are in the best interest of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. At this point, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and development timelines and plans, including the resulting impact on our expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain.
Results of operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
To date, we have not generated, and do not expect to generate, any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. We may generate revenue from pre-specified clinical, regulatory and sales milestones as part of an exclusive option and license agreement with Hansoh Healthtech Co., Ltd. and Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Group Company Ltd., or collectively Hansoh.
The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was due to Hansoh exercising its exclusive option pursuant to the exclusive option and license agreement.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses and consist primarily of external and internal expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery efforts, preclinical and clinical development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. Costs for certain activities, such as manufacturing and preclinical studies and clinical trials, are generally recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and collaborators.
External expenses include:
•expenses incurred in connection with the discovery, preclinical and clinical development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates, including those incurred under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and CROs;
•the cost of manufacturing products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including payments to contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and consultants;
•the costs of funding research performed by third-party vendors for performing preclinical testing on our behalf;
•the costs of purchasing lab supplies and non-capital equipment used in designing, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
•costs associated with consultants for chemistry, manufacturing and controls development, regulatory, statistics and other services;
•expenses related to regulatory activities, including filing fees paid to regulatory agencies; and
•facility costs including rent, depreciation and maintenance expenses.
We may also incur in-process research and development expense as we acquire or in-license assets from other parties. Technology acquisitions are expensed or capitalized based upon the asset achieving technological feasibility in accordance with management’s assessment regarding the ultimate recoverability of the amounts paid and the potential for alternative future use.
Internal expenses include employee and personnel-related costs and expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees and personnel engaged in research and development functions. We use internal resources primarily to oversee the research and discovery as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities.
Our direct research and development expenses consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to outside consultants, CROs and CMOs in connection with our preclinical development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. Our direct research and development expenses also include fees incurred under our license agreements.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we advance our single-agent and combination therapy candidates or any other future single-agent or combination therapy candidates we may develop into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our single-agent and combination therapy candidates or any other future single-agent or combination therapy candidate that we may develop may be affected by a variety of factors including: the safety and efficacy of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed single-agent and combination therapy candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates or any other future single-agent and combination therapy candidates we may develop. The duration, costs and timing of preclinical studies and clinical trials and development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates will depend on a variety of factors.
The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to a $2.8 million increase in employee-related expenses as higher headcount increased salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation-related charges and a $0.5 million increase related to clinical program expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, human resource and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include corporate facility costs, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance, not otherwise included in research and development expenses, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and tax services.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the foreseeable future as we increase our headcount to support the continued research and development of our programs and the growth of our business. We also anticipate incurring additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased expenses related to accounting, legal and regulatory matters, compliance, director and officer insurance, investor and public relations and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to a $6.7 million increase in employee-related expenses as higher headcount increased salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation-related charges and a $3.9 million increase in insurance, legal, information technology and other professional services consulting.
Interest income
Interest income primarily consists of interest income on our marketable securities.
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million, compared to $0.1 million for the same period in 2020.
Change in fair value of loans payable
The change in fair value of loans payable for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a charge of $2.9 million. The change in the fair value of loans payable was due to the difference in fair value for our convertible loans payable between May 2020, when they were issued, and December 2020. Our U.S. convertible promissory notes and Chinese convertible bridge loan were converted into shares of preferred stock of our company in December 2020, which were ultimately converted into shares of our common stock in connection with our initial public offering in February 2021.
Other income, net
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was less than $0.1 million compared to $0.1 million for the same period in 2020.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.5 million compared to $0.8 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the recording of a full valuation allowance against our U.S. net deferred tax assets as we believe these deferred tax assets were not realizable on a more likely than not basis as of December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
Uses of cash
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures and general and administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures will continue to increase. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities.
Sources of liquidity
We have primarily funded our operations through proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock, convertible preferred stock and sale of our convertible promissory notes. We have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and development activities, organizing and staffing our company, raising capital, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $182.1 million, a net loss of approximately $50.2 million, negative cash flows from operations of approximately $41.8 million, and cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $166.0 million.
In May 2020, we received proceeds of $16.8 million from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, or the 2020 Notes, and a bridge loan.
In December 2020, we issued and sold shares of our convertible preferred stock for gross proceeds of $87.4 million (including conversion of the $15.0 million of 2020 Notes and effective conversion of the $1.8 million bridge loan, plus accrued interest).
In February 2021, we completed our initial public offering of 8,625,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. The net proceeds from this offering were $133.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
We believe that the net proceeds from these transactions, together with our existing cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. We will need substantial additional funding to support our operating activities.
Future funding requirements
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with conducting additional preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future research programs and single-agent and combination therapy candidates, contracting with CROs and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain from additional equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements or other sources.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our research and development activities, business planning, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, continue or initiate clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our single-agent and combination therapy candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for our single-agent and combination therapy candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to any approved products, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of product discovery, preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our single-agent and combination therapy candidates;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we enter into;
•the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, clinical trial costs under collaboration agreements, if any;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other single-agent and combination therapy candidates and technologies;
•the costs of securing manufacturing arrangements for commercial production; and
•the costs of establishing or contracting for sales and marketing capabilities if we obtain regulatory approvals to market our single-agent and combination therapy candidates.
Identifying potential single-agent and combination therapy candidates and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive, and uncertain process that takes many years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our single-agent and combination therapy candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of single-agent and combination therapy candidates that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenues from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a shareholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our future revenue streams, research programs or single-agent and combination therapy candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market single-agent and combination therapy candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $41.8 million and consisted primarily of our net loss of $50.2 million as well as a $1.4 million decrease from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily attributable to the timing of expenses incurred and payments issued. This was partially offset by non-cash adjustments of $8.1 million of stock-based compensation, $0.5 million of depreciation, $0.9 million of net amortization on marketable securities and $0.2 million from changes in deferred tax and uncertain tax positions.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.8 million and consisted primarily of our net loss of $40.6 million. This was partially offset by non-cash adjustments from a $2.9 million loss from the change in fair value of loans payable, $1.7 million of stock-based compensation, a $0.7 million change in deferred taxes and uncertain tax positions, and $0.4 million of depreciation, as well as a $5.1 million increase from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily attributable to program-related services incurred and payable as of December 31, 2020.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $119.7 million and consisted primarily of $166.3 million in purchases of investments and $0.3 million in purchases of property and equipment. This was partially offset by proceeds from the sale and maturity of investments of $46.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.7 million and consisted primarily of $8.0 million in proceeds from the sale and maturity of investments. This was partially offset by $0.7 million in purchases of investments and $0.6 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $134.4 million and consisted primarily of $136.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon closing of the IPO in February 2021 and $0.9 million of proceeds from stock option exercises. This was partially offset by $2.7 million in payments of deferred offering costs and a $0.2 million net payment on loans payable.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $85.5 million and consisted primarily of $69.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock and $16.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of loans payable. This was partially offset by $0.8 million in payments of deferred offering costs related to our IPO completed in February 2021.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical accounting policies and significant estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of our contingent liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1, Nature of the Business, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements.
Fair value of common stock prior to our IPO
Historically, for all periods in 2020, which is prior to the completion of our IPO in February 2021, the fair value of our common stock was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value, our board of directors considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our common stock and preferred stock prepared by unrelated third-party valuation firms in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid.
Given the absence of a public trading market of our shares of capital stock in 2020, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of the shares of our common stock and preferred stock, including:
•the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock and the superior rights and preferences of the convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock;
•the progress of our research and development programs, including the status and results of preclinical studies for our single-agent and combination therapy candidates;
•our stage of development and commercialization and our business strategy;
•external market conditions affecting the biotechnology industry and trends within the biotechnology industry;
•our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results;
•the lack of an active public market for our common stock and convertible preferred stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO, or sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions; and
•the analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in the biotechnology industry.
Significant changes to the key assumptions underlying the factors used could have resulted in different fair values of common stock at each valuation date.
Since becoming a public company in February 2021, we have used our stock price to determine fair value of our common stock.
Common stock valuation methodology prior to our IPO
We obtained contemporaneous third-party valuations of our common stock as of the dates on which our board of directors granted equity awards. In August 2017, June 2018, June 2019 and September 2020, we used third party valuations of our common stock prepared using the income approach, which focuses on the income-producing capability of a business. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate such as cash earnings, cost savings, tax deductions, and the proceeds from disposition. These cash flows are discounted to the present using a rate of return that incorporates the risk-free rate for the use of funds, the expected rate of inflation, and risks associated with the particular investment. The selected discount rate is generally based on rates of return available from alternative investments of similar type, quality, and risk. Once the value of our company was estimated it was allocated to our common shares using the Option Pricing Method, or OPM. This approach allows for the allocation of a company’s equity value among the various equity capital owners (preferred and common stockholders). The OPM uses the preferred stockholders’ liquidation preferences, participation rights, dividend policy, and conversion rights to determine how proceeds from a liquidity event shall be distributed among the various ownership classes at a future date.
The probability weighted expected return method (PWERM) involves the estimation of future potential outcomes for our company, as well as values and probabilities associated with each respective potential outcome. The common stock per share value determined using this approach is ultimately based upon probability-weighted per share values resulting from the various future scenarios, which can include an IPO, merger or sale, dissolution or continued operation as a private company.
These contemporaneous third-party valuations using the OPM method resulted in valuations of our common stock of $1.96 as of August 2017, $2.38 as of March 2018, $6.16 as of October 2018, $6.72 as of June 2019 and $6.86 as of June 2020. In October 2020, in connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we conducted a retrospective valuation of our common stock as of June 2019 and June 2020 and determined that the grant date fair value was $9.24 per share and $12.04 per share, respectively, solely for accounting purposes. In addition, in October 2020, in connection with the preparation of our financial statements, a third-party retrospective valuation of our common stock using the PWERM as of September 2020 resulted in a valuation of $23.38 per share. In November 2020, a third-party retrospective valuation of our common stock using the PWERM resulted in a valuation of $9.24 per share.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented our board of directors’ best estimates at the time they were made, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of the judgment of our board of directors. If we used different factors or expected outcomes or significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Since becoming a public company in February 2021, we have used our stock price to determine fair value of our common stock.
Loans Payable
We have elected to record certain loans payable at fair value on the date of issuance, with gains and losses arising from changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations at each period end while such loans payable are outstanding. Issuance costs are recognized in the statement of operations in the period in which they are incurred. The fair value of the loans payable was determined using a probability weighted expected return model, a scenario-based valuation model in which discrete future outcome scenarios for our company are projected and discounted to present value.
Accrued research and development expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred to discover, research and develop drug candidates, including personnel expenses, stock-based compensation expense, allocated facility-related and depreciation expenses, third-party license fees and external costs, including fees paid to consultants and contract research organizations, or CROs, in connection with nonclinical studies and clinical trials and other related clinical trial fees, such as for investigator grants, patient screening, laboratory work, clinical trial database management, clinical trial material management and statistical compilation and analysis. Non-refundable prepayments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such amounts are recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed, or until it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services rendered. Costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses are charged immediately to research and development expense if the technology licensed has not reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future uses.
From time to time, we have entered into various research and development and other agreements with commercial firms, researchers, universities and others for provisions of goods and services. These agreements are generally cancelable, and the related costs are recorded as research and development expenses as incurred. We record accruals for estimated ongoing research and development costs. When evaluating the adequacy of the accrued liabilities, we analyze progress of the studies or clinical trials, including the phase or completion of events, invoices received and contracted costs. Significant judgments and estimates are made in determining the accrued balances at the end of any reporting period. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates. Since inception, our historical accrual estimates have not been materially different from the actual costs.
Emerging growth company status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies and our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to other public companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for private companies. The JOBS Act also exempts us from having to provide an auditor attestation of internal control over financial reporting under Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404(b).
We will cease to be an “emerging growth company” on the date that is the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which the fifth anniversary of the completion of the IPO occurs, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (iv) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC, which generally is when we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates as of the last day of the second fiscal quarter and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report.
Further, even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a “smaller reporting company” which would allow us to take advantage of many of the same exceptions from disclosure requirements, including reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements. We cannot predict if investors will find our shares of common stock less attractive because we may rely on these exemptions. If some investors find our shares of common stock less attractive as a result, there may be a less active trading market for shares of our common stock and our share price may be more volatile.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
See Note 1, Nature of the Business, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements.