Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Part I, “Item 1: Business”
and Part II, “Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. The various sections of this MD&A contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this filing, including Part I, “Item 1A: Risk Factors.” Our actual results may differ materially from those described in any such forward-looking statement.
Business Overview and Environment
TESSCO Technologies Incorporated (“Tessco”, “we”, “our”, “us”, or the “Company”) architects and delivers innovative product and value chain solutions to support wireless systems. Although we sell products to customers in over 50 countries, approximately 98% of our sales are to customers in the United States. We have operations and office facilities in Timonium and Hunt Valley, Maryland and Reno, Nevada.
On December 2, 2020, we sold most of our Retail inventory and certain other retail-related assets to Voice Comm. In connection with this sale, we assigned or licensed certain Ventev®- related intellectual property to Voice Comm, including our Ventev® trademark for their use in connection with the sale of mobile device and accessory products. Together, this resulted in our exit from our Retail business. Cash proceeds of $9.5 million were received at the time of sale. As part of the sale agreement, we are entitled to royalty payments, up to $3.0 million in the aggregate, on the sale of Ventev® branded products by Voice Comm over a four-year period after closing. Additionally, some customer returns we receive may be resold to Voice Comm over a two-year period after closing. As a result of the disposal, the operating results of our former Retail segment have been included in Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss) for all periods presented. We retain the Ventev® tradename for non-mobile device accessory products.
As a result of changes in the Company’s management structure during fiscal 2022, we now operate as two reportable segments: Carrier and Commercial, for which we provide certain information. Carrier is generally comprised of customers responsible for building and maintaining the infrastructure system and provide airtime service to individual subscribers and Commercial includes value-added resellers, the government channel and private system operator markets. The Company previously operated as one segment in fiscal 2021 and identified a change to our reportable segments in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of changes in organizational structure.
We offer a wide range of products that are classified into three categories: base station infrastructure; network systems; and installation, test, and maintenance. Base station infrastructure products are used to build, repair and upgrade wireless broadband systems. Sales of traditional base station infrastructure products, such as base station radios, cable and transmission lines and antennas are in part dependent on capital spending in the wireless communications industry. Network systems products are used to build and upgrade computing and internet networks. In this category, we have also been growing our offering of wireless broadband, network equipment, security and surveillance products, which are not as dependent on the overall capital spending of the industry. Installation, test, and maintenance products are used to install, tune, and maintain wireless communications equipment. This category is made up of sophisticated analysis equipment and various frequency-, voltage- and power-measuring devices, replacement parts and components as well as an assortment of tools, hardware and supplies required by service technicians. Inventory typically has a life cycle that tends to be tied to changes in regulation or technology and includes products typically used by business entities or governments.
The wireless communications distribution industry is competitive and fragmented, and is comprised of several national distributors. In addition, many manufacturers sell directly to end users. Barriers to entry for distributors are relatively low, and the risk of new competitors entering the market is high. Consolidation of larger wireless carriers has and will most likely continue to impact our current and potential customer base. In addition, the agreements or arrangements with our customers or suppliers looking to us for product and supply chain solutions are typically of limited duration and are terminable by either party upon several months or otherwise short notice. Our ability to maintain these relationships is subject to competitive pressures and challenges. We believe, however, that our strength in service, the breadth and depth of our product offering, our information technology system, our large customer base and our purchasing relationships with more than 300 manufacturers provide us with a significant competitive advantage over new entrants to the market.
Results of Continuing Operations
The following tables summarize the results of our continuing operations for fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020:
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
As noted above, we exited our Retail business during fiscal year 2021 and now report activity from that Retail business as discontinued operations. The analysis below reflects activity and results from continuing operations only. Please refer to our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021 for a discussion of fiscal year ended March 29, 2020.
Revenues. Revenue for fiscal year 2022 increased by 11.8% as compared to fiscal year 2021. Revenues in our Carrier and Commercial segments increased by 20.6% and 5.9%, respectively. The increases in both segments were driven by higher sales volumes and improving macro-economic trends as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business lessened to some extent. Revenues have also increased due to rising product costs from our suppliers, which are largely passed on to our customers.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold for fiscal year 2022 increased by 11.1% as compared to fiscal year 2021. Cost of goods sold in our Carrier and Commercial segments increased by 19.9% and 4.3%, respectively. The increases were primarily due to increases in related revenues in both segments and the increases in cost of goods sold was lower than the increases in revenues, leading to improved gross margins and gross profit, as further discussed below.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased by 15.2% in fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021. This compares to an increase in revenues of 11.8% in fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021. Gross profit margin in our Carrier and Commercial segments increased from 11.1% to 11.6% and from 22.9% to 24.1%, respectively. The increase in the Carrier segment was primarily due to a more favorable customer mix, while the margin growth in the Commercial segment was primarily a result of higher sales of Ventev® products and customer mix. As a result, overall gross profit margin increased from 18.1% in fiscal year 2021 to 18.7% in fiscal year 2022. Gross margins in both segments were also impacted by increased charges to our customers for Performance Delivery Guarantee (“PDG”) to offset increasing freight-out costs driven by global supply chain issues. Freight-out is included in Selling, general and administrative expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Our ongoing ability to earn revenues and gross profits from customers and suppliers looking to us for product and supply chain solutions is dependent upon a number of factors. The terms, and accordingly the factors, applicable to each relationship often differ. Among these factors are the strength of the customer’s or supplier’s business, the supply and demand for the product or service, including price stability, changing customer or supplier requirements, and our ability to support the customer or supplier and to continually demonstrate that we can improve the way they do business. In addition, the agreements or arrangements on which our customer and supplier relationships are based are typically of limited duration, typically do not include any obligation in respect of any specific product purchase or sale and are terminable by either party upon several months or otherwise short notice. Our customer relationships could also be affected by wireless carrier consolidation or global financial crisis, including the COVID-19 pandemic or other events beyond our control.
We account for inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value and, as a result, write-offs/write-downs occur due to damage, deterioration, obsolescence, changes in prices, and other causes. These expenses were 2% or less of overall purchases for each of the last three fiscal years.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Total selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 4.6% during fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021. Total selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased from 22.9% in fiscal year 2021 to 19.5% in fiscal year 2022. The following are descriptions of changes in significant components of selling, general, administrative expenses.
● Compensation and benefits expenses decreased by $1.3 million in fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021, mainly due to a reduction in employee headcount.
● Corporate support expenses decreased by $2.7 million in fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021, primarily attributable to $2.6 million of nonrecurring costs, net of insurance recoveries in fiscal 2021, related to a consent solicitation.
● Information Technology expenses decreased $2.5 million in fiscal year 2022 as compared to fiscal year 2021, primarily attributable to a $1.4 million decrease in depreciation expenses related to assets that became fully depreciated in fiscal 2021, as well as a $1.2 million decrease in general information technology costs.
● Outbound freight expenses increased by $3.2 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021, primarily attributable to the increase in revenues year-over-year and higher third-party freight carrier costs as a result of significantly higher inflationary impacts in fiscal 2022 attributable to global supply chain issues. As mentioned above, these higher freight expenses are largely passed on to customers through PDG charges.
Interest, Net. Net interest expense increased from $0.6 million in fiscal year 2021 to $0.9 million in fiscal year 2022. The increase is primarily related to a higher average amount outstanding on our 2020 Revolving Credit Facility. Refer to Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements included as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our borrowings.
Income Taxes, Net Income and Diluted Earnings Per Share. The Company reported an income tax benefit of $1.1 million in fiscal year 2022, which primarily related to a change in the tax accounting method for computer software development costs, which was adopted during the third quarter of fiscal 2022 and reflected on the fiscal 2021 federal tax return. As a result of the change, the Company expects to receive an additional tax refund for fiscal 2021 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). Including the impact of this change, the total benefit from income taxes for fiscal 2022 was $1.1 million compared to a benefit of $3.8 million for fiscal 2021. The higher tax benefit in fiscal 2021 is attributable to tax rules introduced by the CARES Act, which allowed the Company to carry back certain net operating losses up to five years. Net loss of $3.3 million improved significantly from the net loss of $14.4 million in fiscal 2021, which is attributable to higher revenues and lower operating expenses in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. Diluted loss per share was ($0.37) for fiscal 2022 as compared to ($1.65) for fiscal 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In summary, our cash flows were as follows (includes both continuing and discontinued operations):
We used $2.5 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2022. This outflow was primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable and inventory, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and a decrease in income taxes receivable.
We used $0.7 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2021. This outflow was driven by net loss (net of depreciation and amortization, gain on the retail sale, and non-cash stock compensation expense), and a decrease in accounts payable partially offset by the decreases in accounts receivable and inventory. A decrease in deferred income tax assets was offset by an increase in income taxes receivable. Accounts receivable, inventory, and accounts payable decreased due to our exit of the Retail business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
We generated $0.9 million of net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2020. This inflow was driven by net loss (net of depreciation and amortization, goodwill impairment loss, and non-cash stock compensation expense) and a decrease in accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase in deferred income taxes. Accounts receivable decreased due to the timing of sales at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 as compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased
due to an increase in income taxes receivable. Due to the CARES Act, the Company is able to carry back net operating losses up to five years and receive a refund of taxes paid in prior years.
Capital expenditures of $9.5 million in fiscal year 2022 decreased from $11.9 million in fiscal year 2021 and increased from $6.8 million in fiscal year 2020. Fiscal year 2022, 2021 and 2020 capital expenditures were largely comprised of investments in information technology of $9.5 million, $11.4 million, and $6.8 million, respectively, primarily related to the anticipated replacement of our legacy ERP system with a modern SAP ERP system. In fiscal year 2021, we generated $9.2 million in cash proceeds related to the sale of certain retail assets to Voice Comm.
Cash flows generated from financing activities in fiscal year 2022 were primarily related to net borrowings of $6.3 million from our line of credit and $6.5 million in proceeds from the Company’s mortgage on its Reno, NV facility. Cash flows generated from financing in fiscal year 2021 and 2020 were primarily related to borrowings from our line of credit. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020, the Board of Directors decreased the cash dividend from $0.20 to $0.02 in order to reallocate resources to increase investment in the technology and talent to accelerate the Company’s long-term growth.
On October 29, 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) among the Company, the Company’s primary operating subsidiaries as co-borrowers, the Lenders party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (“Wells”), as Administrative Agent, swingline lender and an issuing bank, and terminated our previous secured Revolving Credit Facility. The Credit Agreement, as amended, provides for a senior secured asset based revolving credit facility of up to $80 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which matures on April 29, 2024. As of March 27, 2022, borrowings under the secured Revolving Credit Facility totaled $36.9 million; therefore, we then had $43.1 million available, subject to the Borrowing Base limitations and compliance with the other applicable terms of the Credit Agreement discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement accrue interest at the rates, and the Company is required to pay a monthly commitment fee, as also discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
At the end of fiscal year 2022, we were in compliance with all required financial covenants applicable under our revolving credit facility with Wells Fargo Bank.
On December 30, 2021, TESSCO Reno Holding LLC (“Reno Holding”), an indirect wholly owned subsidiary and now owner of the Company‘s approximately 115,000 square foot operating facility located in Reno, Nevada (the “Reno Facility”), borrowed an aggregate sum of $6.5 million from Symetra Life Insurance Company. The indebtedness is evidenced by a Real Estate Note of Reno Holding that provides for monthly payments of $47,858, bears interest at a fixed rate of 3.38% per annum for the first 5 years, is subject to adjustment after 5 years and again after 10 years, and matures in approximately 15 years. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion related to the Note.
Working capital (current assets less current liabilities) decreased to $64.5 million as of March 27, 2022 as compared to $67.8 million as of March 28, 2021. Shareholders' equity was $75.9 million as of March 27, 2022, and $76.8 million as of March 28, 2021.
We believe that our existing cash, payments from customers, pending tax refunds and availability under our revolving credit facility (including any amendment or replacement thereof), or if needed, financing we believe would be available to us from other sources, will be sufficient to support our operations for at least the next twelve months. We expect to meet short-term liquidity needs through cash on our balance sheet and operating cash flow, supplemented by our revolving credit facility; and we expect to meet long-term liquidity needs through these same resources. If we were to undertake an acquisition or other major capital expenditures that require funds in excess of our existing sources of liquidity, we would look to sources of funding from additional credit facilities, debt and/or equity issuances. There can be no assurances that such additional future sources of funding, either to fund an acquisition or major capital expenditures, or to support our cash flow needs in the event of the termination of our existing revolving credit facility before it can be replaced with an asset-based facility, would be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
In addition, our liquidity could be negatively impacted by decreasing revenues and profits resulting from a decrease in demand for our products or a reduction in capital expenditures by our customers, or by the weakened financial conditions of our customers or suppliers, in each case as a result of a possible downturn in the global economy, caused in part by the COVID-19 pandemic among other factors. Anticipated capital expenditures, including amounts incurred but not yet paid in fiscal year 2022, for fiscal year 2023 are expected to range from $10 million to $15 million.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures
We believe that presenting certain non-GAAP financial measures may enhance an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We further believe that these financial measures are useful in assessing our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business. We also use certain of these financial measures for business planning purposes, including management incentives.
Accordingly, the below selected financial data includes certain non-GAAP financial measures we believe are commonly used by investors to evaluate our performance and that of our competitors. The use of EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) and Adjusted EBITDA (EBITDA, less stock compensation and goodwill impairment) should not be considered as an alternative to operating income (loss), net income (loss) or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP as measures of operating performance, operating cash flows or liquidity.
In accordance with the SEC staff Financial Reporting Manual and in conjunction with the filing of this fiscal 2022 Form 10-K, we elected not to recast the selected financial data for fiscal year 2018 for the sale of our Retail business that occurred in fiscal 2021 as discontinued operations. As such, the below selected financial data for fiscal year 2018 includes the results of the since divested Retail segment, while fiscal years 2022, 2021, 2020, and 2019 exclude that Retail activity.
Contractual Obligations
The following tables reflect a summary of our contractual cash obligations and other commercial commitments as of March 27, 2022:
(1) We are subject to a variable interest rate on the outstanding balance on our revolving credit facility and a 0.25% fee on the unused portion of our revolving credit facility. This balance includes projected variable interest payments based on there being no movement on the line from what was outstanding at March 27, 2022, with the variable payments based on a static rate of 2.7% on the outstanding balance and 0.25% related to the unused commitment fee.
(2) Other Long-Term Liabilities reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheet include amounts owed under a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations:
Revenue Recognition. We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We recognize revenue when control of promised goods is transferred to the customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods.
In most cases, shipments are made using Freight on Board (“FOB”) shipping terms. FOB destination terms are used for a portion of sales, and revenue for these sales is recorded when the product is received by the customer. Prices are always fixed at the time of sale. Historically, there have not been any material price concessions provided to customers, future discounts provided by the Company, or other incentives subsequent to a sale. The Company sells under normal commercial terms and, therefore, only records sales on transactions where collectability is reasonably assured. The Company recognizes revenues net of sales tax.
We recognize revenues from sales transactions containing sales returns provisions at the time of the sale. The potential for customer returns are considered a component of variable consideration under ASC 606 and it is therefore considered when estimating the transaction price for a sale. We use the most likely amount method to determine the amount of expected returns. The amount of expected returns is recognized as a refund liability, representing the obligation to return the customer’s consideration. The return asset is measured at the former carrying amount of the inventory, less any expected costs to recover the goods. Customers may have volume incentive rebate agreements, which are earned based on total purchases during a defined period. These rebates are included in the transaction price as a reduction to revenue at the time of the sale.
Our current and potential customers are continuing to look for ways to reduce their inventories and lower their total costs, including distribution, order taking and fulfillment costs, while still providing their customers excellent service. Some of these companies have turned to us to implement supply chain solutions, including purchasing inventory, assisting in demand forecasting, configuring, packaging, kitting and delivering products and managing customer and supplier relations, from order taking through cash collections. In performing these solutions, we assume varying levels of involvement in the transactions and varying levels of credit and inventory risk. As our offerings continually evolve to meet the needs of our customers, we constantly evaluate our revenue accounting based on the guidance set forth in accounting standards generally accepted in the United States. When applying this guidance in accordance with the FASB standard regarding revenue recognition for principal-agent considerations, we look at the following indicators: whether we are the primary obligor in the transaction; whether we have general inventory risk; whether we have latitude in establishing price; whether the customer holds us responsible for the acceptability of the product; whether the product returns are handled by us; and whether an obligation exists between the other parties and our customer. Each of our customer relationships is independently evaluated based on the above guidance and revenues are recorded on the appropriate basis. Based on a review of the factors above, in the majority of our sales relationships, we have concluded that we are the principal in the transaction, and we record revenues based upon the gross amounts earned and booked. However, we do have certain relationships where we are not the principal and we record revenues on a net fee basis, regardless of amounts billed (less than 1% of our total revenues for fiscal year 2022).
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. We use estimates to determine the amount of the allowance for doubtful accounts necessary to reduce accounts receivable to their expected net realizable value. We estimate the amount of the required allowance by reviewing the status of past-due receivables and analyzing historical bad debt trends. Actual collection experience has not varied significantly from estimates, due primarily to credit policies, collection experience and our stability as it relates to our current customer base. Typical payments from commercial customers are due 30 days from the date of the invoice. We write-off receivables deemed to be uncollectible to the allowance for doubtful accounts. Accounts receivable balances are not collateralized by our customers.
Inventory Reserves. We establish inventory reserves for excess and obsolete inventory. We regularly review inventory to evaluate continued demand and identify any obsolete or excess quantities of inventory. We record a provision for the difference between the carrying value of excess and obsolete inventory and its estimated net realizable value. Estimated net realizable value is based on anticipated future product demand, market conditions and liquidation values. Actual results differing from these projections could have a material effect on our results of operations.
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability. This review is based on historical taxable income, projected future taxable income and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. Based on this review, we have established a valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets that are not more likely than not realizable.
We account for income taxes under ASC 740, Income Taxes, to account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. This standard prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. It also provides guidance on de-recognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
Stock-Based Compensation. We record stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. We account for forfeitures as they occur rather than estimate expected forfeitures. The standard also requires stock awards granted or modified after the adoption of the standard that include both performance conditions and graded vesting to be amortized by an accelerated method rather than the straight-line method.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained herein, including statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, strategy and plans, and our expectations for future operations, are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may generally be identified by the use of the words “may,” “will,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions, but the absence of these words or phrases does not necessarily mean that a statement is not forward looking.
We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, strategy, short- and long-term business operations and objectives, and financial needs. Forward looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those described in or contemplated by any such forward-looking statement for a variety of reasons, including those described in Part I, Item IA “Risk Factors.” In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events and circumstances included herein may not occur, and actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. Consequently, the reader is cautioned to consider all forward-looking statements in light of the risks to which they are subject. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about:
● our expectations regarding the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, revenues, profits, customers or suppliers;
● our ability to sustain or grow our customer base and market share;
● our ability to sustain and grow our supplier relationships;
● our expectations regarding the size and growth in markets;
● the needs and demands of our customers and the production capacity of our suppliers;
● trends in the wireless communications industry, our competitors and competing business models;
● the execution of our business plans and strategies;
● our ability to benefit from the disposition of our Retail business, including royalty revenues;
● our ability to benefit from our Commercial and Carrier segments;
● our liquidity and working capital requirements and ability to access capital;
● our ability to secure, maintain and upgrade our information technology, telecommunications and e-commerce systems;
● our ability to anticipate and navigate existing and changes in laws or regulations, including tariffs and trade restrictions, applicable to our business;
● our ability to pass on cost increases from manufacturers to our customers;
● our ability to enter into and perform contracts and to realize anticipated revenues or anticipated savings; and
● our expectations regarding future revenues, expenses and profitability, and financial results generally.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, level of activity, performance or achievements. In addition, neither we nor any other person assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of any of these forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement made by us in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is made. We disclaim any duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report to confirm these statements to actual results or revised expectations.
The above list should not be construed as exhaustive and should be read in conjunction with our other disclosures,
including but not limited to the risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report. Other risks may be described from time to time in our filings made under the securities laws. New risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible for our management to predict all risks.
Available Information
Our internet web site address is: www.tessco.com. We make available free of charge through our website, our Annual Report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act as soon as reasonably practicable after such documents are electronically filed with, or furnished to, the Securities and Exchange Commission. Also available on our website is our Code of Business Conduct and Ethics. We have not incorporated herein by reference the information on our website, and it should not be considered a part of this filing.