Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
We were formed as a Delaware corporation on January 24, 2018 for the purpose of developing and commercializing innovative drug products based on our patented Thin Film Freezing, or TFF, technology platform”. Since our formation, we have focused on the development of our initial drug candidates, the establishment of strategic relationships with established pharmaceutical companies for the licensing of our TFF technology platform and the pursuit of additional working capital. We have not commenced revenue-producing operations.
Since our organization in 2018, we have engaged in the following financing transactions:
Series A Preferred Stock Placements. In March 2018, we conducted a private placement of 5,662,000 shares of our Series A preferred stock, at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for the gross proceeds of approximately $14.2 million, and in May 2019 we conducted a private placement of 3,268,000 shares of our Series A preferred stock, at an offering price of $2.50 per share, for the gross proceeds of approximately $8.2 million. The shares of our Series A preferred stock accumulated dividends at the rate of 6% per annum. The shares of Series A preferred stock, including all accrued but unpaid dividends on the Series A preferred stock, which totaled $1,603,709, automatically converted into 9,571,692 shares of our common stock concurrent with the completion of our initial public offering at the conversion price of $2.50.
Initial Public Offering. On October 25, 2019, we conducted an initial public offering of 4,400,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. After the payment of underwriter discounts and offering expenses, and after giving effect to the underwriters’ exercise of its overallotment option on November 20, 2019 to purchase an additional 479,300 shares of our common stock at the offering price of $5.00 per share, we received net proceeds of approximately $21.8 million.
August 2020 Private Placement. On August 13, 2020, we conducted a private placement of 3,048,654 shares of common stock, at a purchase price per share of $8.50, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $25,914,000, before deducting selling commissions and other offering expenses. After deducting the placement agent commissions and offering expenses, we received net proceeds of approximately $24,280,000.
March 2021 Public Offering. On March 30, 2021, we conducted a public offering of 2,140,000 shares of common stock, at a purchase price per share of $14.00, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $30,000,000, before deducting underwriter discounts and offering expenses. After deducting the underwriter discounts and offering expenses, we received net proceeds of approximately $28,015,000.
Results of Operations
We were formed in January 2018 and have not commenced revenue-producing operations. To date, our operations have consisted of the development and early-stage testing and Phase 1 human clinical trials of our initial product candidates. In connection with our organization on January 24, 2018, we entered into a Contribution and Subscription Agreement with Lung Therapeutics, Inc., or LTI, our former parent, pursuant to which we agreed to acquire from LTI certain of LTI’s non-core intellectual property rights and other assets, or the Acquired Assets, all of which relate to our Thin Film Freezing technology. We closed on the acquisition of the Acquired Assets concurrent with the close of the initial Series A preferred stock financing in March 2018.
In December 2019, we established a wholly-owned Australian subsidiary, TFF Pharmaceuticals Australia Pty Ltd. in order to conduct clinical research.
As of the date of this report, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a relatively insignificant impact on our operations. During 2020, we experienced a temporary suspension of dosing in the Phase I clinical trial for our TFF Tac-Lac due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the pandemic has otherwise caused minor slowing in the timing of certain non-clinical and clinical activities by us and our collaborators and service providers during 2020 and the first quarter of 2021. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has not caused us to forego, abandon or materially delay any proposed activities. While we believe we have been able to effectively manage the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to date, there can be no assurance that our operations, including the development of our drug candidates, will not be disrupted or materially adversely affected in the future by the COVID-19 pandemic or an epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease like the outbreak of COVID-19.
The following table summarizes our results of operations with respect to the items set forth below for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 together with the percentage change for those items.
We have entered into feasibility and material transfer agreements with third parties that provide us with funds in return for certain research and development activities. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $88,161 and $0, respectively, of grant revenue.
During the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $21.3 million and $10.7 million of research and development expenses and $10.6 million and $8.0 million of general and administrative expenses, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses during 2021 was mainly due to increased manufacturing costs of approximately $5.3 million, which includes approximately $1.6 million related to the Augmenta monoclonal antibody, clinical and preclinical expenses of approximately $1.7 million and $1.7 million, respectively, related to Niclosamide, TFF Vori and TFF Tac-Lac, increased payroll and related expense of approximately $671,000 and increased stock-based compensation of approximately $319,000. The increase in research and development expenses also includes our preliminary analysis and testing of dry powder formulations of several drugs and vaccines owned or licensed by third parties we believe may lead to the out-licensing of our TFF technology for the development of dry powder product candidates. We expect our spending on research and development activities to continue to increase in upcoming quarters due primarily to clinical trial activity.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2021 from the prior year was mainly a result of increases in insurance and investor relation expenses of approximately $576,000, increased consulting and business development expenses of approximately $399,000, payroll and related expenses of approximately $280,000 and increased stock-based compensation of approximately $1.0 million, along other general increases due to the increase in our operations. While we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase over the next few years, we anticipate the rate of increase has begun to decrease.
The following table summarizes our other income and interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 together with the percentage change for those items.
Other income in 2021 consists of $652,877 of refundable Australian research and development incentive program payments for expenditures incurred during 2020 and $43,836 received from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service related to research and development tax credits for expenditures incurred during 2020. Interest income decreased during fiscal 2021 due to lower interest rates on interest-bearing accounts.
We incurred a net loss of $31.0 million and $18.6 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2021, we had total assets of approximately $40.7 million and working capital of approximately $36.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity included approximately $33.8 million of cash and cash equivalents. We believe that our cash on-hand as of the date of this report is sufficient to fund our proposed operating plan for, at least, the 12 months following the date of this report. However, as of the date of this report, we believe that we will need additional capital to fund our operations through to the marketing approval for TFF Vori and TFF Tac-Lac, assuming such approval can be obtained at all, and to engage in the substantial development of any other of our drug candidates, such as formulation, early-stage animal testing and formal toxicology studies. If we encounter unforeseen delays or expenses, we may require additional capital in order to fund our current level of ongoing costs over the next twelve months. We intend to seek additional funds through various financing sources, including the sale of our equity and debt securities, licensing fees for our technology and co-development and joint ventures with industry partners, with a preference towards licensing fees for our technology and co-development and joint ventures with industry partners. In addition, we will consider alternatives to our current business plan that may enable to us to achieve revenue producing operations and meaningful commercial success with a smaller amount of capital. However, there can be no guarantees that such funds will be available on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. If such financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to further pursue our business plan and we may be unable to continue operations, in which case you may lose your entire investment.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in cash used in operating activities is primarily a result of higher operating losses in 2021 due to our business expansion, including additional personnel and increased product candidate development activity. The investing activity is related to purchases of property and equipment. The financing activity primarily consists of the August 2020 private placement and the March 2021 public offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included herein, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We compute stock-based compensation in accordance with authoritative guidance. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to determine the fair value of its stock options. The Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model includes various assumptions, including the fair market value of our common stock, expected life of stock options, the expected volatility and the expected risk-free interest rate, among others. These assumptions reflect our best estimates, but they involve inherent uncertainties based on market conditions generally outside our control.
As a result, if other assumptions had been used, stock-based compensation cost, as determined in accordance with authoritative guidance, could have been materially impacted. Furthermore, if we use different assumptions on future grants, stock-based compensation cost could be materially affected in future periods.
For grants of our common stock, we use the closing stock price on the date of grant as the fair value of the common stock.
Research and Development Expenses
In accordance with authoritative guidance, we charge research and development costs to operations as incurred. Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs for the design, development, testing and enhancement of our technology, and certain other allocated costs, such as depreciation and other facilities related expenditures.
Collaborative Arrangements
We consider the nature and contractual terms of arrangements and assesses whether an arrangement involves a joint operating activity pursuant to which we are an active participant and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the activity. If we are an active participant and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of the activity, we account for such arrangement as a collaborative arrangement.
For collaborative arrangements where a collaborative partner is not a customer for certain research and development activities, we account for payments received for the reimbursement of research and development costs as a contra-expense in the period such expenses are incurred. This reflects the joint risk sharing nature of these activities within a collaborative arrangement. We classify payments owed or receivables recorded as other current liabilities or prepaid expenses and other current assets.
If payments from the collaborative partner to us represent consideration from a customer in exchange for distinct goods and services provided, then we account for those payments within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Research and Development Tax Incentive
We are eligible to obtain a cash refund from the Australian Taxation Office for eligible research and development expenditures under the Australian R&D Tax Incentive Program (the “Australian Tax Incentive”). The Company recognizes the Australian Tax Incentive when there is reasonable assurance that the cash refund will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred, and the consideration can be reliably measured.
As we have determined that it has reasonable assurance that we will receive the cash refund for eligible research and development expenditures, we record the Australian Tax Incentive as a reduction to research and development expenses as the Australian Tax Incentive is not dependent on us generating future taxable income, our ongoing tax status, or tax position. At each period end, management estimates the refundable tax offset available to us based on available information at the time.