Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Registration Statement. Some of the statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” “Description of Business” and elsewhere herein may include forward-looking statements which reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. These statements include forward-looking statements both with respect to us specifically and the renewable energy industry in general. Statements which include the words “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “project,” “anticipate,” “will,” and similar statements of a future or forward-looking nature identify forward-looking statements for purposes of the federal securities laws or otherwise. The safe harbor provisions of the federal securities laws do not apply to any forward-looking statements contained in this Registration Statement. All forward-looking statements address such matters that involve risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, there are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or review any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise. If one or more of these or other risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may vary materially from what we projected. Any forward-looking statements you read herein reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to these and other risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to our written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or individuals acting on our behalf and such statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on September 6, 2019. We have developed a cyber threat intelligence application that integrates with top end security platforms to gather, analyze, then proactively identify threats to an enterprise network. The Tego Guardian app takes in vetted and curated threat data and through a proprietary process compiles, analyzes, and delivers that data to an enterprise network in a format that is timely, informative and relevant. The first version of the Tego Guardian app integrates with the Splunk SIEM (Security Information and Event Management) platform. Splunk is a recognized industry leader in data analytics and has an established user base of over 22,000 enterprise clients including 90 of the Fortune 100 companies. The Tego Guardian app will be marketed as a value-add enhancement to an existing Splunk SIEM environment. Tego Guardian adds value by providing data enrichment: a detailed ‘who, what, when and where’ of any potential cyberthreat within an enterprise network environment. Other similar applications identify that something is ‘bad’ but do not provide any additional context, so it is up to the enterprise’s cybersecurity team to analyze the threat data to establish which threats need to be acted upon. It is then up to the enterprise’s cybersecurity team to analyze the threat data to establish which threats need to be acted upon. Tego Guardian automates this process thereby saving the enterprise time and money. The Tego Guardian app is now available to Splunk SIEM platform users via direct download through Splunk’s app store: Splunkbase. Tego Cyber plans to develop future versions of the Tego Guardian app for integration with other leading SIEM platforms including Elastic, Devo, IBM QRadar, AT&T Cybersecurity, Exabeam and Google Chronical. The goal is to have a version of the Tego Guardian available for integration with these SIEM platforms within the next two years. For more information, please visit www.tegocyber.com.
Results of operations for fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to year ended June 30, 2021
Revenues
We are in development stage and only generated $3,550 of revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $8,100 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Operating Expenses
We incurred total operating expenses of $3,085,319 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared to $674,918 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. These amounts consisted of the following:
Overall operating expenses increased by $2,410,401 to $3,085,319 for the year ended June 30, 2022, as compared to $674,918 for the year ended June 30, 2021. General and administration increased by $890,739 as result of increased operational expenses due to the growth of the overall business and setting up of the infrastructure in preparation of full commercialization of the first version of the Tego Guardian. Professional fees increased by $510,713 as a result of being fully reporting with the SEC for one full year and the additional expenditures that go along with being a publicly traded company. Sales and marketing increased by $239,381 as a result of the initial commercialization of the first version of the Tego Guradian. Share-based compensation expense increased $905,962 as a result of the issuance of the non-qualified stock options and performance stock units. .
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of $3,147,901 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to a net loss of $923,180 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As at June 30, 2022, we have a working capital surplus of $48,945, a net loss of $3,147,901 and have earned limited revenue to cover our operating costs. We have $47,742 cash on hand and our burn rate is approximately $150,000 per month. We intend to fund future operations through debt or equity financing arrangements. Our ability to realize our business plan is dependent upon, among other things, obtaining additional financing to continue operations, and development of our business plan. In response to these problems, management intends to raise additional funds through debt, public or private placement offerings. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the cash flows used in our operating activities was $1,618,526 compared to $578,415 for the same period ended June 30, 2021. This amount was primarily related to a (i) net loss of $3,147,901; (ii) share based compensation of $905,962; and (iii) shares issued for services of $458,250
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the net cash used in investing activities by the Company was $341,949 compared to $54,250 for the same period ended June 30, 2021. The amount was related to the capitalization of software development costs of $335,372 and purchase of computer equipment of $6,577.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the net cash provided by financing activities by the Company was $1,425,202 compared to $1,133,808 for the same period ended June 30, 2021. The cash provided by financing activities is related to the proceeds received from sales of our common stock.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.
Future Financings
We will continue to rely on equity sales of our common shares and debt proceeds in order to continue to fund our business operations. Issuances of additional shares will result in dilution to existing stockholders. There is no assurance that we will achieve any additional sales of the equity securities or arrange for debt or other financing to fund our operations and other activities.
Expected Purchase or Sale of Significant Equipment
We do not anticipate the purchase or sale of any significant equipment, as such items are not required by us at this time or in the next twelve months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
This summary of significant accounting policies is presented to assist in understanding the financial statements. The financial statements and notes are representations of the Company’s management, who are responsible for their integrity and objectivity. These accounting policies conform to US GAAP and have been consistently applied in the preparation of the financial statements.
Basis of Preparation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared to present the balance sheets the statements of operations, statements of changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows of the Company for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
Use of Estimates
In preparing financial statements in conformity with US GAAP, management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Management makes these estimates using the best information available at the time the estimates are made. However, actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to significant concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash and accounts receivable. During the fiscal periods ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, substantially all of the Company’s cash was held by major financial institutions located in the United States, which management believes are of high credit quality. With respect to accounts receivable, the Company extended credit based on an evaluation of the customer’s financial condition. The Company generally did not require collateral for accounts receivable and maintained an allowance for doubtful accounts of accounts receivable if necessary.
Cash
Cash consists of cash held at major financial institutions and is subject to insignificant risk of changes in value.
Receivables and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Trade accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value and do not bear interest. No allowance for doubtful accounts was made during the period ended June 30, 2021, based on management’s best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in accounts receivable. The Company evaluates its allowance for doubtful accounts based upon knowledge of its customers and their compliance with credit terms. The evaluation process includes a review of customers’ accounts on a regular basis. The review process evaluates all account balances with amounts outstanding for more than 60 days and other specific amounts for which information obtained indicates that the balance may be uncollectible. As of June 30, 2022, there was no allowance for doubtful accounts and the Company does not have any off-balance-sheet credit exposure related to its customers.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”, adopted January 1, 2008, defines fair value, establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosures of fair value measurement and enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measures. The Company’s financial instruments include cash, current receivables and payables. These financial instruments are measured at their respective fair values. The three levels are defined as follows:
Level 1 - inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2 - inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the assets or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instruments.
Level 3 - inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value.
For cash, accounts receivables, subscription receivables, and accounts payable and accrued liabilities, it is management’s opinion that the carrying values are a reasonable estimate of fair value because of the short period of time between the origination of such instruments and their expected realization and if applicable, their stated interest rate approximates current rates available.
Management believes it is not practical to estimate the fair value of related party receivables and payables because the transactions cannot be assumed to have been consummated at arm’s length, the terms are not deemed to be market terms, there are no quoted values available for these instruments, and an independent valuation would not be practical due to the lack of data regarding similar instruments, if any, and the associated potential costs.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), was adopted by the Company as of September 6, 2019. The Company’s revenue recognition disclosure reflects its updated accounting policies that are affected by this new standard. The Company applied the “modified retrospective” transition method for open contracts for the implementation of Topic 606. As revenues are and have been primarily from consulting and management services, and the Company has no significant post-delivery obligations, this new standard did not result in a material recognition of revenue on the Company’s accompanying financial statements for the cumulative impact of applying this new standard. The Company made no adjustments to its previously reported total revenues, as those periods continue to be presented in accordance with its historical accounting practices under Topic 605, Revenue Recognition.
Revenue from providing consulting and management services under Topic 606 is recognized in a manner that reasonably reflects the delivery of services to customers in return for expected consideration and includes the following elements:
-
executed contracts with the Company’s customers that it believes are legally enforceable;
-
identification of performance obligations in the respective contract;
-
determination of the transaction price for each performance obligation in the respective contract;
-
allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation; and
-
recognition of revenue only when the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
These five elements as applied to the Company’s consulting and management services results in revenue recorded as services are provided.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes pursuant to ASC 740 “Income Taxes”. ASC 740 requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes and allows recognition and measurement of deferred tax assets based upon the likelihood of realization of tax benefits in future years. Under the asset and liability approach, deferred taxes are provided for the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Valuation allowances are provided for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not these items will either expire before the Company is able to realize their benefits, or that future deductibility is uncertain. The provision for income taxes represents current taxes payable net of the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share are computed by dividing income available to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed similar to basic earnings per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. If applicable, diluted earnings per share assume the conversion, exercise or issuance of all common stock instruments unless the effect is to reduce a loss or increase earnings per share. The Company had no dilutive securities for the periods ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2018-07, “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting”, to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. ASU 2018-07 simplifies the accounting for nonemployee share-based payments, aligning it more closely with the accounting for employee awards.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB (including its Emerging Issues Task Force) did not or are not expected to have a material impact on the Company's present or future financial statements.
Item 7.A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk.
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.