Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere herein.
OVERVIEW
Business
We are a major supplier to the aerospace industry and have two reportable segments: (i) Systems & Support, whose companies’ revenues are derived from integrated solutions, including design, development and support of proprietary components, subsystems and systems, production of complex assemblies using external designs, as well as full life cycle solutions for commercial, regional and military aircraft; and (ii) Aerospace Structures, whose companies supply commercial, business, regional, and military manufacturers with large metallic and composite structures and produce close-tolerance parts primarily to customer designs and model-based definition, including a wide range of aluminum, hard metal and composite structure capabilities.
Divestitures
In May 2021, we completed the divestiture of our composites manufacturing operations located in Milledgeville, Georgia, and Rayong, Thailand, as well as our large structure manufacturing operations located in Red Oak, Texas. The related assets and liabilities associated with these divestitures were classified as held for sale as of March 31, 2021, and we recognized combined net losses of approximately $102.5 million in the year ended March 31, 2021. Upon the completion of the divestiture, we recognized an additional loss of approximately $6.0 million primarily as a result of changes in working capital balances. These losses are presented on the accompanying consolidated statements of operations within loss on sale of assets and businesses. The operating results associated with the composites and large structure manufacturing operations were included within Aerospace Structures through the date of divestiture.
In February 2022, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our manufacturing operations located in Stuart, Florida. The Stuart operations specialize in the assembly of large, complex metallic structures such as wing and fuselage assemblies. Upon closing of the sale of the Stuart operations, we will have substantially exited our metallic structures business and reshaped our portfolio of companies to consist of businesses providing systems and aftermarket services. Closing is expected to occur in the first half of calendar 2022. The operating results associated with the Stuart operations are included within Aerospace Structures. During the year ended March 31, 2022, the Stuart operations generated approximately $246.7 million of the $1.46 billion of consolidated net sales (or approximately 16.9% of consolidated net sales).
Refer to Note 3 for a discussion of other less significant divestitures and asset sales occurring in fiscal year 2022. Including the $6.0 million loss referred to above, in the twelve months ended March 31, 2022, the Company recognized total losses on the sale of assets and businesses of approximately $9.3 million.
Summary of Significant Financial Results
Significant financial results for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, include:
•Net sales for fiscal 2022 decreased 21.9% to $1.46 billion
•Operating income for fiscal 2022 was $104.3 million.
•Net loss for fiscal 2022 was $42.8 million or $0.66 per diluted common share.
•Backlog decreased 24.2% over the prior year to $1.42 billion. The decrease in backlog is primarily the result of the exclusion from backlog, as of March 31, 2022, of purchase orders related to our manufacturing operations in Stuart, Florida. This exclusion was based on the expectation disclosed above that we expect the related divestiture to close in the first half of calendar 2022.
•We used $137.0 million of cash flows in operating activities.
Restructuring
We have committed to several plans that incorporated the restructuring of certain of our businesses. These plans were substantially completed as of March 31, 2021. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, we incurred approximately $21.6 million and $53.2 million in restructuring costs, respectively.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response
While domestic revenue passenger kilometers ("RPK's") are expected to recover to calendar 2019 levels by the end of calendar 2022, non-domestic markets recovery remains uncertain. As a result, we are unable at this time to reasonably estimate potential future additional financial impacts or a range of loss, if any, due to continued uncertainties related to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, supply chain, and customers. Any such impacts, including any changes in our estimates, could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. Key factors determining the potential impacts include the severity and duration of the pandemic which could be impacted by the emergence and circulation of new variants of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19; governmental, business, and individuals' actions in response to the
pandemic; and the development, availability, and public acceptance of effective treatments and vaccines. These factors are not within our control.
As disclosed in Note 1, in November 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with the Department of Transportation (“DOT”) under the Aviation Manufacturing Jobs Protection Program (“AMJP”) and expects to receive funding under this agreement of approximately $18.8 million. The receipt of the full award is primarily conditioned upon the Company committing to not furlough or lay off a defined group of employees during the six-month period of performance between November 2021 and May 2022, and the grant benefit is being recognized over the six-month performance period as a reduction to cost of sales in proportion to the compensation expense that the award is intended to defray. In the year ended March 31, 2022, approximately $14.1 million of the grant benefit has been recognized as a reduction in cost of sales.
Significant Developments in Key Programs
Discussion of significant developments on key programs is included below.
Boeing 787
The Boeing 787 program represented approximately 2% and 6% of revenue for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. During 2020, Boeing experienced significant reductions in deliveries due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as production issues and associated rework. Boeing expanded the scope of its production inspections, and those inspections and associated rework have and continue to delay scheduled deliveries. While Boeing resumed deliveries of the 787 aircraft in March 2021, Boeing announced in July 2021 that additional rework requirements on undelivered 787 aircraft had been identified and that, based on their assessment of the time required to complete the rework, the 787 production rate would temporarily be reduced and gradually return to a higher rate. In October 2021, Boeing announced that the 787 production was being reduced to two per month, gradually returning to five per month over time. In January 2022, Boeing announced that the rework activities will take longer than previously expected and that program production rates remain low. Boeing also disclosed that China is a significant market for the 787 program, and if the program is unable to obtain orders from China in future quarters, Boeing may be required to adjust production rate assumptions further.
Boeing 767
Boeing's 767 program includes the commercial program and a derivative to support the related tanker program. The 767 currently has a production rate of three aircraft per month. Of our $1.42 billion in backlog as of March 31, 2022, approximately 2% relates to 767 production. 767 purchase orders associated with 767 production at our Stuart, Florida, operations have been excluded from reported backlog due to the expected divestiture of these operations as described above.
Boeing 747-8
Production on this program has substantially completed as of September 30, 2021. Production facility exit plans are complete and certain storage facility exit plans are nearing completion and remaining costs are not expected to be significant.
Although none of the programs noted above individually are expected to have a material impact on our net revenues, they do have the potential, either individually or in the aggregate, to materially and negatively impact our consolidated results of operations if future changes in estimates result in the need for a forward loss provision. Absent any such loss provisions, we do not anticipate that any of these programs will significantly dilute our future consolidated margins, although a prolonged impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could result in changes in expectations.
In the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, we completed several strategic divestitures. Refer to Note 3 for further discussion of these transactions.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following includes a discussion of our consolidated and business segment results of operations for the year ended March 31, 2022, compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. Our diverse structure and customer base do not provide for precise comparisons of the impact of price and volume changes to our results. However, we have disclosed the significant variances between the respective periods. A discussion of our consolidated and business segment results of operations for the year ended March 31, 2021, compared with the year ended March 31, 2020, can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") on May 20, 2021, and is incorporated by reference.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We prepare and publicly release annual audited and quarterly unaudited financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In accordance with SEC rules, we also disclose and discuss certain non-GAAP financial measures in our public filings and earnings releases. Currently, the non-GAAP financial measures that we disclose are Adjusted EBITDA, which is our net loss
before interest, income taxes, amortization of acquired contract liabilities, legal settlements, loss on divestitures, share-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization; and Adjusted EBITDAP, which is Adjusted EBITDA, before pension expense or benefit, including the effects of curtailments, settlements, and other early retirement incentives. We disclose Adjusted EBITDA on a consolidated and Adjusted EBITDAP on a consolidated and a reportable segment basis in our earnings releases, investor conference calls and filings with the SEC. The non-GAAP financial measures that we use may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Also, in the future, we may disclose different non-GAAP financial measures in order to help our investors more meaningfully evaluate and compare our future results of operations with our previously reported results of operations.
We view Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP as operating performance measures and, as such, we believe that the U.S. GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to such measures is net loss. In calculating Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP, we exclude from net loss the financial items that we believe should be separately identified to provide additional analysis of the financial components of the day-to-day operation of our business. We have outlined below the type and scope of these exclusions and the material limitations on the use of these non-GAAP financial measures as a result of these exclusions. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP are not measurements of financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as a measure of liquidity, as an alternative to net loss, or as an indicator of any other measure of performance derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Investors and potential investors in our securities should not rely on Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDAP as a substitute for any U.S. GAAP financial measure, including net loss. In addition, we urge investors and potential investors in our securities to carefully review the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP to net loss set forth below, in our earnings releases, and in other filings with the SEC and to carefully review the U.S. GAAP financial information included as part of our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and our Annual Reports on Form 10-K that are filed with the SEC, as well as our quarterly earnings releases, and compare the U.S. GAAP financial information with our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP are used by management to internally measure our operating and management performance and by investors as a supplemental financial measure to evaluate the performance of our business that, when viewed with our U.S. GAAP results and the accompanying reconciliation, we believe provides additional information that is useful to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business. We have spent more than 20 years expanding our product and service capabilities, partially through acquisitions of complementary businesses. Due to the expansion of our operations, which included acquisitions, our net loss has included significant charges for depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP exclude these charges and provide meaningful information about the operating performance of our business, apart from charges for depreciation and amortization. We believe the disclosure of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP helps investors meaningfully evaluate and compare our performance from quarter to quarter and from year to year. We also believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP are measures of our ongoing operating performance because the isolation of noncash charges, such as depreciation and amortization, and nonoperating items, such as interest, income taxes, pension and other postretirement benefits, provides additional information about our cost structure and, over time, helps track our operating progress. In addition, investors, securities analysts, and others have regularly relied on Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP to provide financial measures by which to compare our operating performance against that of other companies in our industry.
Set forth below are descriptions of the financial items that have been excluded from our net income to calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP and the material limitations associated with using these non-GAAP financial measures as compared with net loss from continuing operations:
•Gains or losses from sale of assets and businesses may be useful for investors to consider because they reflect gains or losses from the sale of operating units or other assets. We do not believe these earnings necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash earnings related to our operations.
•Legal judgments and settlements, when applicable, may be useful for investors to consider because it reflects gains or losses from disputes with third parties. We do not believe these earnings necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash earnings related to our operations.
•Non-service defined benefit income or expense from our pension and other postretirement benefit plans (inclusive of certain pension related transactions such as curtailments, settlements, early retirement or other incentives) may be useful for investors to consider because they represent the cost of postretirement benefits to plan participants, net of the assumption of returns on the plan's assets and are not indicative of the cash paid for such benefits. We do not believe these earnings necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash earnings related to our operations.
•Amortization of acquired contract liabilities may be useful for investors to consider because it represents the noncash earnings on the fair value of off-market contracts acquired through acquisitions. We do not believe these earnings necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash earnings related to our operations.
•Amortization expense and nonrecurring asset impairments (including goodwill, intangible asset impairments, and nonrecurring rotable inventory impairments) may be useful for investors to consider because it represents the estimated attrition of our acquired customer base and the diminishing value of tradenames, product rights, licenses, or, in the case of goodwill, other assets that are not individually identified and separately recognized under U.S. GAAP, or, in the case of nonrecurring asset impairments, the impact of unusual and nonrecurring events affecting the estimated recoverability of
existing assets. We do not believe these charges necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash charges related to our operating cost structure.
•Depreciation may be useful for investors to consider because it generally represents the wear and tear on our property and equipment used in our operations. We do not believe these charges necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash charges related to our operating cost structure.
•Share-based compensation may be useful for investors to consider because it represents a portion of the total compensation to management and the board of directors. We do not believe these charges necessarily reflect the current and ongoing cash charges related to our operating cost structure.
•The amount of interest expense and other we incur may be useful for investors to consider and may result in current cash inflows or outflows. However, we do not consider the amount of interest expense and other to be a representative component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
•Income tax expense may be useful for investors to consider because it generally represents the taxes that may be payable for the period and the change in deferred income taxes during the period and may reduce the amount of funds otherwise available for use in our business. However, we do not consider the amount of income tax expense to be a representative component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
Management compensates for the above-described limitations of using non-GAAP measures only to supplement our U.S. GAAP results and to provide additional information that is useful to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business. Beginning in the current year, we began excluding share-based compensation from net income when calculating Adjusted EBITDAP in order to improve comparability with certain of our peers that have similar adjustments and measurements and to more closely align the calculation with Adjusted EBITDAP as defined in certain of our debt agreements.
The following table shows our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAP reconciled to our net loss for the indicated periods (in thousands):
* Includes impairment charges related to intangible and other long-lived assets
The following tables show our Adjusted EBITDAP by reportable segment reconciled to our operating (loss) income for the indicated periods (in thousands):
* Includes impairment charges related to intangible assets
The fluctuations from period to period within the amounts of the components of the reconciliations above are discussed further below within Results of Operations.
Fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, compared with fiscal year ended March 31, 2021
Net Sales
Organic sales adjusted for inter-segment sales increased $4.5 million, or 0.3%, with additional declines from the composites and large structure manufacturing operations, G650, and Staverton, United Kingdom, divestitures of $299.9 million and sunsetting programs (i.e., 747-8 and G280) of $114.4 million. Organic sales increased primarily due to increased sales volume on commercial narrow body platforms and increased repair and overhaul services, partially offset by decreased volume on the 787 as a result of an announced production pause and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on other commercial wide body platform production rates. Net sales for the year ended March 31, 2022, included $22.4 million in total nonrecurring revenues, as compared with $43.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Segment Operating Income
Organic segment operating loss decreased by $368.9 million, or 174.6%, to operating income, partially offset by declines from the divestitures and sunsetting programs of $37.2 million. Organic gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, was 26.0% compared with 22.5% for the year ended March 31, 2021. The gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, increased primarily as a result of the prior period impairment of rotable inventory of approximately $23.7 million, the recognition of grant benefits under the AMJP agreement with the DOT of approximately $14.1 million, approximately $4.0 million recognized as a result of a nonrecurring licensing transaction, and changes in sales mix, partially offset by decreased profit of approximately $10.8 million resulting from the exit of our Spokane, Washington, operations. In addition to the impact from improving gross margins, organic segment operating income increased primarily due to the prior period long-lived asset impairment of $252.4 million, decreased depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $41.2 million, decreased restructuring costs of $24.3 million, decreased administrative compensation cost on lower headcount of approximately $8.2 million, and decreased bad debt expense of approximately $4.4 million.
Gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, included net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments on long-term contracts of $16.0 million. The favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments to operating income included gross favorable adjustments of $30.6 million and gross unfavorable adjustments of $14.5 million. Gross margins for the year ended March 31, 2021, included net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments of $12.3 million.
Corporate Expense
Corporate expenses decreased primarily due to decreased loss on sale of assets and businesses of $95.4 million.
Interest Expense and Other
Interest expense and other decreased due to lower relative debt levels as a result of current period redemptions as well as favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates of approximately $5.6 million.
Non-service Defined Benefit Income
Non-service defined benefit income decreased by $44.1 million, or 89.1%, to $5.4 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, compared with $49.5 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to the recognition of curtailment and settlement losses of approximately $52.0 million in the aggregate upon the completion of the composites and large structure manufacturing divestitures, the settlement of the fully-funded pension obligation we had retained subsequent to our fiscal year 2019 divestiture of Triumph Geared Solutions - Toronto, and the settlement of pension obligations of certain retired participants in our qualified U.S. pension plan. These decreases were partially offset by increases due to changes in actuarial assumptions and experience that increased income for the year ended March 31, 2022, by $8.2 million.
Income Taxes
The income tax expense was $4.9 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, reflecting an effective tax rate of (13.5)%. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we adjusted the valuation allowance against the consolidated net deferred tax asset by ($0.2) million primarily due a utilization of net operating loss carryforward, the expiration of a portion of the company’s capital loss carryforwards and changes to temporary differences related to the impairment of long-lived intangible assets, interest disallowance, and pension and other postretirement benefit plans. As of March 31, 2022, management determined that it was necessary to maintain a valuation allowance against principally all of our net deferred tax assets.
Business Segment Performance
We report our financial performance based on the following two reportable segments: Systems & Support and Aerospace Structures. Our Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM") utilizes Adjusted EBITDAP as a primary measure of profitability to evaluate the performance of our segments and allocate resources.
The results of operations among our reportable segments vary due to differences in competitors, customers, extent of proprietary deliverables and performance. For example, Systems & Support, which generally includes proprietary products and/or arrangements where we become the primary source or one of a few primary sources to our customers, our unique manufacturing capabilities command a higher margin. Also, OEMs are increasingly focusing on assembly activities while outsourcing more manufacturing and repair to third parties, and as a result, are less of a competitive force than in previous years. This compares to Aerospace Structures, which generally includes long-term sole-source or preferred supplier contracts and the success of these programs provides a strong foundation for our business and positions us well for future growth on new programs and new derivatives.
Refer to Item 1 for further details regarding the operations and capabilities of each of our reportable segments.
We currently generate a majority of our revenue from clients in the commercial aerospace industry, the military, the business jet industry and the regional airline industry. Our growth and financial results are largely dependent on continued demand for our products and services from clients in these industries. If any of these industries experiences a downturn, our clients in these sectors may conduct less business with us. The following table summarizes our net sales by end market by business segment. The loss of one or more of our major customers or an economic downturn in the commercial airline or the military and defense markets could have a material adverse effect on our business.
In fiscal 2022, the proportion of our sales mix arising from the commercial aerospace end market increased as a result of initial recoveries from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the reduction in our sales mix arising from the business jets end market as a result of our strategic divestitures within Aerospace Structures.
Business Segment Performance-Fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, compared with fiscal year ended March 31, 2021
Systems & Support:
Net Sales
Organic net sales decreased by $13.5 million, or 1.3%, with additional declines from the Staverton, United Kingdom, divestiture of approximately $16.1 million. Organic net sales decreased primarily due to decreased volume on the 787 as a result of an
announced production pause and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on other commercial wide body platform production rates, partially offset by increased commercial narrow body production, increased repair and overhaul services, and approximately $4.0 million recognized as a result of a nonrecurring licensing transaction.
Operating Income and Adjusted EBITDAP
Organic operating income increased by $52.5 million, or 47.0%, partially offset by declines from the Staverton, United Kingdom, divestiture of $2.5 million. Organic gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, was 32.0% compared with 26.5% for the year ended March 31, 2021. The organic gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, increased primarily as a result of the prior period impairment of rotable inventory of approximately $23.7 million, the recognition of grant benefits under the AMJP agreement with the DOT of approximately $14.0 million, approximately $4.0 million recognized as a result of a nonrecurring licensing transaction, and changes in sales mix. The increase in organic operating income and Adjusted EBITDAP are the result of these changes in gross margin, with the exception of the prior year rotable inventory asset impairment, which is excluded from Adjusted EBITDAP.
Operating Margin and Adjusted EBITDAP Margin
Systems & Support operating income and Adjusted EBITDAP as a percentage of segment sales both increased due to the factors described above, with the exception of the prior year rotable inventory asset impairment, which is excluded from Adjusted EBITDAP.
Aerospace Structures:
Net Sales
Organic net sales increased by $13.4 million, offset by declines from the composites and large structure manufacturing operations and G650 divestitures of $283.9 million and sunsetting programs (i.e., 747-8 and G280) of $114.4 million. Organic net sales increased due to initial recoveries from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic mainly reflected in increased volumes on 767 and increased volume on 737 MAX as production rates have gradually increased since 2020. These increases were partially offset by decreased volume on the 787 as a result of the announced production pause. Net sales for the year ended March 31, 2022, included $18.4 million in total nonrecurring revenues, as compared with $43.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Operating Income and Adjusted EBITDAP
Organic operating loss decreased by $316.4 million, or 98.0%. This improvement was partially offset by declines from the divestitures and sunsetting programs of $34.7 million. Organic gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, was 9.8% compared with 11.2% for the year ended March 31, 2021. The organic gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, decreased primarily due to decreased profit of approximately $10.8 million resulting from the exit of our Spokane, Washington, operations.
Fiscal 2022 organic operating loss decreased as compared with fiscal 2021 primarily due to the prior period long-lived asset impairment of $252.4 million, decreased depreciation and amortization expense of approximately $40.1 million, decreased restructuring costs of $22.3 million, decreased administrative compensation cost on lower headcount of approximately $12.4 million, and decreased bad debt expense of approximately $3.4 million. The decrease in organic operating loss and the increase in Adjusted EBITDAP are the result of these changes in gross margin, with the exception of the long-lived asset impairment and depreciation and amortization expense, which are excluded from Adjusted EBITDAP.
Gross margin for the year ended March 31, 2022, included net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments on long-term contracts of $16.2 million. The favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments to operating income included gross favorable adjustments of $30.6 million and gross unfavorable adjustments of $14.3 million. Gross margins for the year ended March 31, 2021, included net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments of $11.5 million.
Operating Margin and Adjusted EBITDAP Margin
Aerospace Structures operating income and Adjusted EBITDAP as a percentage of segment sales both increased due to the increase in operating income as noted above, with the exception of the long-lived asset impairment and depreciation and amortization expense, which are excluded from Adjusted EBITDAP.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Cash flows
Our working capital needs are generally funded through our current cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, and proceeds from the Securitization Facility. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we had a net cash outflow of $137.0 million from operating activities, compared with a net cash outflow of $173.1 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, an improvement of $36.1 million. Cash flows included reduced inventory levels and lower accounts payable and contract liabilities, including approximately $83.2 million in the liquidation of prior period customer advances. Reflecting the change in our portfolio of businesses that is a result of our strategic divestitures, working capital stability has improved in the twelve months ended March 31, 2022, compared with the twelve months ended March 31, 2021. Including $9.1 million in redemption premiums, interest payments were approximately $147.0 million for the twelve months ended March 31, 2022, as compared with approximately $116.5 million for the twelve months ended March 31, 2021. The increase in interest payments was the specific timing of interest payments under the First Lien Notes and the 2022 Notes as compared with the related redemptions disclosed in Note 10.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was signed into law. The CARES Act provided for, among other things, deferred payment of the employer portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021, and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. Of the approximately $17.8 million of these deferred payments, we paid approximately $8.9 million in December 2021. The remaining $8.9 million will be repaid in December 2022 in accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act described above. The deferred amounts are recorded within accrued expenses on our consolidated balance sheet as of March 31, 2022.
As disclosed in Note 1, in November 2021 the Company entered into an agreement with the DOT under the AMJP. The Company received the first installment payment under this agreement of $10.6 million in the year ended March 31, 2022, and expects to receive approximately $8.2 million in additional funds in the first half of fiscal 2023. These cash receipts are classified within cash from operations. Refer to Note 1 for further discussion.
Investing Cash Flows
Cash flows provided by investing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, increased $190.5 million from the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. Cash flows provided by investing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, included cash from the sale of assets and businesses of $224.5 million as a result of the completion of the divestiture of our composites and large structure manufacturing operations, the asset sales associated with the exit of our Spokane, Washington, manufacturing operations, and the sale of certain legacy product lines of our Staverton, United Kingdom, operations as described in Note 3. As part of the activities necessary to bring the composites and large structure manufacturing operations divestiture to completion, we used approximately $21.6 million net of transaction related costs to acquire the manufacturing facility in our Rayong, Thailand, operations. This facility was included in the assets transferred in the divestiture. We also used approximately $19.7 million for capital expenditures and approximately $2.1 million as part of the formation of a joint venture to which future cash and non-cash contributions are expected to be insignificant. Cash flows used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, included cash from the sale of assets and businesses of approximately $15.9 million offset by capital expenditures of $25.2 million. We currently expect capital expenditures in fiscal 2023 to be in the range of $32.0 million, of which approximately $26.0 million pertains to our core Systems & Support operating segment. The majority of our fiscal 2023 capital expenditures are capital investments designed to improve our manufacturing efficiency and expand our capabilities.
Financing Cash Flows
Cash flows used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, were $392.7 million, compared with cash flows provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, of $277.2 million. In the year ended March 31, 2022, the following significant financing cash flow events occurred:
•We used approximately $236.5 million to redeem 100% of the outstanding principal balance under the 5.25% Senior Notes due June 1, 2022 (the "2022 Notes").
•As disclosed in Note 10, under the terms of the First Lien Notes indenture, we were required to use approximately $145.9 million to redeem approximately $136.8 million of the outstanding principal balance and pay a redemption premium of approximately $9.1 million.
The remainder of financing cash flows pertains primarily to borrowings and payments under finance leases and the repurchase of common stock to satisfy employee tax withholding obligations resulting from equity compensation. As of March 31, 2022, we had $240.9 million of cash on hand and approximately $76.7 million was available under our receivable securitization facility (the “Securitization Facility”) (subject to any additional constraints arising from the balance of eligible receivables at that time) after giving effect to approximately $23.3 million in outstanding letters of credit, all of which were accruing interest at 1.25% per annum.
As disclosed in Note 17, the exit of our composites manufacturing operations in Spokane, Washington could trigger a multiemployer pension plan withdrawal obligation that, if incurred, would likely be satisfied through annual payments over a period of at least ten years.
While we currently expect fiscal 2023 operations to result in net cash outflows due to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales volume, the impact of the 787 rate reductions described above, and cash use on the final steps of our exit of the 747-8 program, we believe, based on an assessment of our current cash holdings as presented on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet as of March 31, 2022, as well as current market conditions, that cash flows from operations and borrowings under our receivable securitization facility (the “Securitization Facility”) will be sufficient to meet anticipated cash requirements for our current operations for at least the next 12 months. We also believe, based on our current cash, our fiscal 2023 operating cash flow expectations, the expected recovery of cash flows from operations subsequent to fiscal 2023, and, upon the closing of the Stuart, Florida, manufacturing operations transactions, the completion of our multiyear reshaping of our program and business portfolio through strategic divestiture, that we have the ability to generate and obtain adequate amounts of cash to meet anticipated cash requirements for the foreseeable future, including cash requirements to liquidate approximately $103.8 million in customer advances in fiscal 2023. We are evaluating additional funding options from the U.S. government via the U.S. Treasury and various Federal Reserve programs. We are also considering various opportunities to access credit and capital markets. There can be no assurance that such funding sources will be available to us on terms favorable to us, if at all. We may also seek transactions to extend the maturity of our indebtedness, reduce leverage, or decrease interest expense. Such transactions could include one or more repurchases or exchanges of our outstanding indebtedness. These transactions could
increase our total amount of secured indebtedness or be dilutive to stockholders. There can be no assurances if or when we will consummate any such transactions or the timing thereof.
The Senior Notes are our senior obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other existing and future senior indebtedness and senior in right of payment to all of our existing and future subordinated indebtedness.
The First Lien Notes are (a) effectively senior to all existing and future second lien obligations (including the 2024 Notes) and all existing and future unsecured indebtedness of the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries, but only to the extent of the value of the Collateral (as defined below), and after giving effect to any permitted additional first lien secured obligations and other permitted liens of senior or equal priority; (b) secured by the Collateral on a pari passu basis with any future permitted additional first lien secured obligations, subject to a collateral trust agreement; (c) effectively subordinated to any existing and future obligations of the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries that are secured by assets that do not constitute the Collateral, in each case, to the extent of the value of the assets securing such obligations; and (d) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that do not guarantee the First Lien Notes, including the Securitization Facility.
The 2024 Notes are (a)effectively subordinated to all obligations of the Company and its subsidiary guarantors that are either (1) secured by a lien on the Collateral (as defined below) that is senior or prior to the second-priority liens securing the 2024 Notes, including the first-priority liens securing the First Lien Notes and certain cash management and hedging obligations, or (2) secured by assets that do not constitute the Collateral, in each case to the extent of the value of the assets securing such obligations; (b) effectively senior to all existing and future unsecured debt of the Company and its subsidiary guarantors, but only to the extent of the value of the Collateral (after giving effect to any senior liens on the Collateral); and (c) are structurally subordinated in right of payment to all indebtedness and other liabilities of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 2024 Notes, including the Receivables Securitization Facility.
The 2025 Notes are effectively subordinated to all obligations of the Company and its subsidiary guarantors that are (A) secured by a lien on the Collateral (including the First Lien Notes and the 2024 Notes) and certain cash management and hedging obligations, or (B) secured by assets that do not constitute the Collateral, in each case to the extent of the value of the assets securing such obligations.
The Senior Notes are guaranteed on a full, joint and several basis certain of the Company’s domestic restricted subsidiaries (the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). Currently, our only consolidated subsidiaries that are not guarantors of the Senior Notes (the "Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries") are: (i) the receivables securitization special purpose entity, and (ii) the foreign operating subsidiaries. The First Lien Notes and the related guarantees are secured by first-priority liens on substantially all of our assets and our subsidiary guarantors, whether now owned or hereafter acquired (the “Collateral”). The 2024 Notes, and the related guarantees are secured, subject to permitted liens, by second-priority liens on the Collateral. The Senior Notes and the related guarantees are not secured by the assets of Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. Some of our assets are excluded from the Collateral, including certain real property assets.
Pursuant to the documentation governing the Senior Notes, we may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes prior to their stated maturities, subject to certain limitations set forth in the indenture governing the applicable Senior Notes and, in certain cases, subject to significant prepayment premiums. We are obligated to offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at specified prices as a result of certain change-of-control events and a sale of all or substantially all of our assets. These restrictions and prohibitions are subject to certain qualifications and exceptions.
The indentures governing the Senior Notes, as well as Securitization Facility, contain covenants and restrictions that, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of any of the Guarantor Subsidiaries to (i) grant liens on our assets; (ii) make dividend payments, other distributions or other restricted payments; (iii) incur restrictions on the ability of the Guarantor Subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other payments or investments; (iv) enter into sale and leaseback transactions; (v) merge, consolidate, transfer or dispose of substantially all of their assets; (vi) incur additional indebtedness; (vii) use the proceeds from sales of assets, including capital stock of restricted subsidiaries (in the case of the Senior Notes); and (viii) enter into transactions with affiliates. We are currently in compliance with all covenants under our debt documents and expect to remain in compliance for the foreseeable future.
In November 2021, the Company amended the Securitization Facility, increasing the purchase limit from $75.0 million to $100.0 million, modifying certain other terms to increase eligible receivables and availability, and extending the term through November 2024. For further information on our long-term debt, see Note 10.
The following tables present summarized financial information of the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis. The combined summarized financial information eliminates intercompany balances and transactions among the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and equity in earnings and investments in any Guarantor Subsidiaries or Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The summarized financial information is provided in accordance with the reporting requirements of Rule 13-01 under SEC Regulation S-X for the issuer and Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Our expected future cash flows for the next five years for long-term debt, leases and other obligations are as follows:
(1)Includes fixed-rate interest only.
The above table includes approximately $284.6 million of total contractual obligations pertaining to the manufacturing operations located in Stuart, Florida that, subsequent to the closing of these transactions, will no longer be contractual obligations of the Company. The $284.6 million total contractual obligations primarily represent purchase obligations, of which approximately 53% were expected to be paid in less than one year. The above table excludes unrecognized tax benefits of $12.0 million as of March 31, 2022, since we cannot predict with reasonable certainty the timing of cash settlements with the respective taxing authorities.
In addition to the financial obligations detailed in the table above, we also had obligations related to our benefit plans at March 31, 2022, as detailed in the following table. Our other postretirement benefits are not required to be funded in advance, so benefit payments are paid as they are incurred. Our expected net contributions and payments are included in the table below:
Current plan documents reserve our right to amend or terminate the plans at any time, subject to applicable collective bargaining requirements for represented employees.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Critical accounting policies are those accounting policies that can have a significant impact on the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations, and that require the use of complex and subjective estimates based upon past experience and management's judgment. Because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates. Below are those policies applied in preparing our consolidated financial statements that management believes are the most dependent on the application of estimates and assumptions. For additional accounting policies, refer to Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition and Contract Balances
Our accounting policy regarding revenue recognition is disclosed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. As described in Note 2, for certain contracts and performance obligations, we are required to exercise judgment when developing assumptions regarding expected total costs to fulfill performance obligations, variable consideration, and the standalone selling price of a performance obligation. These assumptions are most significant within the Aerospace Structures business segment because the size and long-term nature of our contracts with customers. Specifically, assumptions regarding the total costs require significant judgment with regard to materials, labor, and overhead costs that are affected by our ability to achieve technical requirements and schedule requirements, as well as our estimation of internal and subcontractor performance projections, anticipated volume, asset utilization, labor agreements, and inflation trends. We continually review and update our assumptions based on market trends and program performance. When we satisfy a performance obligation and recognize revenue over time, material changes in assumptions may result in positive or negative cumulative catch-up adjustments related to revenues previously recognized or, in some cases, forward loss contract reserves.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Refer to Note 2 and Note 7 for details on our goodwill and intangible asset accounting policies. As disclosed in Note 7, as of March 31, 2022, Aerospace Structures had goodwill of $475.3 million which was fully impaired during fiscal year 2018. The goodwill of one of the reporting units within Systems & Support had goodwill of $66.1 million which was fully impaired during fiscal year 2020. No reporting units have goodwill with a material carrying value that is at risk of impairment as of March 31, 2022.
We review identified intangible assets with definite lives and subject to amortization for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Determining whether an impairment loss has occurred requires the use of our internal forecast to estimate future cash flows and the useful life over which these cash flows will occur. As disclosed in Note 2, in May 2020, we concluded that the planned divestitures of our composites manufacturing operations located in Milledgeville, Georgia and Rayong, Thailand, represented a significant change in the manner in which the related asset group was expected to be used and that the asset group therefore needed to be tested for recoverability and impairment. We applied a discount rate of 15.0% to the estimated future excess earnings and cash flows of the asset group in order to estimate the fair value of the asset group as of the measurement date and recognized a total noncash impairment charge of $252.4 million, primarily allocated to definite-lived intangible assets.
Postretirement Plans
Certain of our current and former employees participate in defined benefit pension and other postretirement defined benefit plans (collectively, referred to as “defined benefit plans”) in the United States and the United Kingdom, which we sponsor. The determination of projected benefit obligations and the recognition of expenses related to defined benefit pension plans are dependent on various assumptions. The most significant of these assumptions are the discount rates and the long-term expected rates of return on plan assets. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and amortized for each plan to the extent required over the estimated future life expectancy of plan participants.
Significant Assumptions
We develop assumptions using relevant experience, in conjunction with market-related data for each plan. Assumptions are reviewed annually with third party consultants and adjusted as appropriate. Refer to Note 15 for details regarding the assumptions used to estimate projected benefit obligations and net periodic benefit cost as they pertain to our defined benefit pension plans.
Expected Return on Plan Assets
We determine our expected return on plan assets by evaluating both historical returns and estimates of future returns. Specifically, we consider the plan’s actual historical annual return on assets and historical broad market returns over long-term time frames based on our strategic allocation, which is detailed in Note 15. Future returns are based on independent estimates of long-term asset class returns. Based on this approach, the weighted average long-term expected annual rate of return on assets was estimated at 7.91% and 7.94% for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Discount Rate
The discount rate is used to calculate the present value of expected future benefit payments at the measurement date. A decrease in the discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and generally decreases pension expense. The discount rate assumption is based on current investment yields of high-quality fixed income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The pension discount rate is determined by considering an interest rate yield curve comprising AAA/AA bonds, with maturities between zero and thirty years, developed by the plan’s actuaries. Annual benefit payments are then discounted to present value using this yield curve to develop a single discount rate matching the plan’s characteristics. The discount rate assumption will change from measurement date to measurement date as market yields on high quality corporate bonds change.
Sensitivity Analysis
Pension Expense
A 25 basis point change in each of the long-term expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate would have the following effect on the combined U.S. defined benefit pension plans’ pension income for the next 12 months:
Projected Benefit Obligation
Funded status is derived by subtracting the respective year-end values of the projected benefit obligations (“PBO”) from the fair value of plan assets. The sensitivity of the PBO to changes in the discount rate varies depending on the magnitude and direction of the change in the discount rate. Refer to Note 15 for a quantitative sensitivity analysis for the PBO.
Income Tax
We follow ASC 740, Income Taxes, which prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute criteria for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, as well as guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement basis and the tax basis of assets, liabilities, net operating losses and tax carryforwards. A valuation allowance is required to be recognized to reduce the recorded deferred tax asset to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income by jurisdiction during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible or when carryforwards can be utilized. We consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in this assessment. As of March 31, 2022, we have a valuation allowance against substantially all of our net deferred tax assets given the insufficient positive evidence to support the realization of our deferred tax assets. A reduction in the valuation allowance could result in a significant decrease in income tax expense in the period that the reduction is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the reduction in our valuation allowance are unknown at this time and will be subject to the earnings level we achieve as well as our projected income in future periods.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 for disclosure of the effects of any recently issued accounting guidance that are significant to our financial reporting.