Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and other financial information, which are included elsewhere in this Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those identified below and those discussed in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, our financial statements and the financial information included in this Report reflect our organizational transactions and have been prepared as if our current corporate structure had been in place throughout the relevant periods.
Overview
Treasure Global Inc. (“TGI”, “we”, “our”, or the “Company”) is a holding company incorporated on March 20, 2020, under the laws of the State of Delaware. TGI has no substantive operations other than holding all of the outstanding shares of Gem Reward Sdn. Bhd. (“GEM”), which was established under the laws of the Malaysia on June 6, 2017, through a reverse recapitalization.
Prior to March 11, 2021, TGI and GEM were separate companies under the common control of
Kok Pin “Darren” Tan, which resulted from Mr. Tan’s prior 100% ownership of TGI and his prior 100% voting and investment control over GEM pursuant to the Beneficial Shareholding Agreements. For a more detailed description of the Beneficial Shareholding Agreements and Mr. Tan’s common control over TGI and GEM see “Prospectus Summary-Corporate Structure.
On March 11, 2021, TGI and GEM were reorganized into a parent subsidiary structure pursuant to the Share Swap Agreement in which TGI exchanged the Swap Shares for all equity of GEM. Pursuant to the Share Swap Agreement, the purchase and sale of the Swap Shares was completed on March 11, 2021, but the issuance of the Swap Shares did not occur until October 27, 2021 when TGI amended its certificate of incorporation to increase the number of its authorized common stock to a number that was sufficient to issue the Swap Shares. As a result of the Share Swap Agreement, (i) GEM became the 100% subsidiary of TGI and Kok Pin “Darren” Tan no longer had any control over the GEM ordinary shares and (ii) Kok Pin “Darren” Tan, the Initial GEM Shareholders and Chong Chan “Sam” Teo owned 100% of the shares of TGI common stock (Kok Pin “Darren” Tan owning approximately 97%). Subsequent to the date of the Share Swap Agreement, Kok Pin “Darren” Tan transferred 9,529,002 of his 10,000,000 shares of TGI common stock to 16 individuals and entities and currently owns less than 5% of our common stock.
On August 15, 2022, we had closed our initial underwritten public offering of 2,300,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.00001 per share, at $4.00 per share. Meanwhile we received net proceeds of approximately $8.2 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and fees, and other estimated offering expenses amounted to approximately $1.0 million.
We have created an innovative O2O e-commerce platform business model offering consumers and merchants instant rebates and affiliate cashback programs, while providing a seamless e-payment solution with rebates in both e-commerce (i.e., online) and physical retailers/merchant (i.e., offline) settings.
Our proprietary product is an App branded “ZCITY App”, which was developed through GEM. The ZCITY App was successfully launched in Malaysia June 2020. GEM is equipped with the know-how and expertise to develop additional/add-on technology-based products and services to complement the ZCITY App, thereby growing its reach and user base.
Through simplifying a user’s e-payment gateway experience, as well as by providing great deals, rewards and promotions with every use, we aim to make the ZCITY App Malaysia’s top reward and loyalty platform. Our longer-term goal is for the ZCITY App and its ever-developing technology to become one of the most well-known commercialized applications more broadly in Southeast Asia and Japan.
As of December 5, 2022, we had over 2,312,114registered users and over 1,998 registered merchants.
SEA consumers have access to a plethora of smart ordering, delivery and “loyalty” websites and apps, but in our experience, SEA consumers very rarely receive personalized deals based on their purchases and behavior.
The ZCITY App targets consumer through the provision of personalized deals based on consumers’ purchase history, location and preferences. Our technology platform allows us to identify the spending trends of our customers (the when, where, why, and how much). We are able to offer these personalized deals through the application of our proprietary artificial intelligence (or “AI”) technology that scours the available database to identify and create opportunities to extrapolate the greatest value from the data, analyze consumer behavior and roll out attractive rewards-based campaigns for targeted audiences. We believe this AI technology is currently a unique market differentiator for the ZCITY App.
We operate our ZCITY App on the hashtag: “#RewardsOnRewards”. We believe this branding demonstrates to users the ability to spend ZCITY App-based Reward Points (or “RP”) and “ZCITY Cash Vouchers” with discount benefits at checkout. Additionally, users can earn rewards from selected e-Wallet or other payment methods.
ZCITY App users do not require any on-going credit top-up or need to provide bank card number with their binding obligations. We have partnered with Malaysia’s leading payment gateway, IPAY88, for secure and convenient transactions. Users can use our secure platform and enjoy cashless shopping experiences with rebates when they shop with e-commerce and retail merchants through trusted and leading e-wallet providers such as Touch’n Go eWallet, Boost eWallet, GrabPay eWallet and credit card/online banking like the “FPX” (the Malaysian Financial Process Exchange) as well as more traditional providers such as Visa and Mastercard.
Key Factors that Affect Operating Results
We believe the key factors affecting our financial condition and results of operations include the following:
Our Ability to Create Value for Our Users and Generate Revenue
Our ability to create value for our users and generate our revenues from merchants is driven by the factors described below:
·
Number and volume of transactions completed by our consumers
. Consumers are attracted to ZCITY by the breadth of personalized deals/rewards and the interactive user experience our platform offers. The number and volume of transaction completed by our member consumers is affected by our ability to continue to enhance and expand our product and service offerings and improve the user experience.
·
Empowering data and technology.
Our ability to engage our member consumers and empower our merchants and their brands is affected by the breadth and depth of our data insights, such as the accuracy of our members’ shopping preferences, and our technology capabilities and infrastructure, and our continued ability to develop scalable services and upgrade our platform user experience to adapt to the quickly evolving industry trends and consumer preferences.
Our Investment in User Base, Technology, People and Infrastructure
We have made, and will continue to make, significant investments in our platform to attract consumers and merchants, enhance user experience and expand the capabilities and scope of our platform. We expect to continue to invest in our research and development team as well as in our technology capabilities and infrastructure, which will lower our margins but deliver overall long-term growth.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The current outbreak of COVID-19 has globally resulted in the loss of life, business closures, restrictions on travel, and widespread cancellation of social gatherings. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, including:
·
new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the disease in Southeast Asia (or “SEA”);
·
the duration and spread of the outbreak;
·
the severity of travel restrictions imposed by geographic areas in which we operate, mandatory or voluntary business closures;
·
regulatory actions are taken in response to the pandemic, including MCOs, which may impact merchant operations, consumer and merchant pricing, and our product offerings;
·
other business disruptions that affect our workforce;
·
the impact on capital and financial markets; and
·
action taken throughout the world, including in markets in which we operate, to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or treat its impact.
In addition, the current outbreak of COVID-19 has resulted in a widespread global health crisis and adversely affected global economies and financial markets, and similar public health threats could do so in the future. Such events have impacted, and could in the future impact, demand for merchants and consumer purchase patterns, which in turn, could adversely affect our revenue and results of operations.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, all our merchant clients have been affected by COVID-19 measures for Food and Beverage (“F&B”) as these measures temporarily stopped restaurant dine-ins.
·
Some of our restaurant clients ceased operations permanently and many were closed since June 2020 without any notice of reopening their business to date.
·
We may face continuing challenges to onboard new merchant clients.
With the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we also face challenges in our operation as follows:
·
disruptions of operations in SEA where staff have had to work from home;
·
on ground Marketing Strategic for new users onboard, is even more difficult; and
·
marketing events being delayed.
The pandemic, however, has also created more advantages for us as follows:
·
usage of e-wallet technology has widened and become more common to the general public, people prefer to go cashless and utilize the “Scan and Pay” features ZCITY offers;
·
our teams have transitioned from on-ground marketing strategies to digital marketing strategies in order to maintain and boost user recruitment;
·
during the pandemic “lockdown phases, our business operations have carried on without significant disruption even as most all of our employees’ work remotely; and
·
we have taken advantage of the push to digitalization posture taken by the Malaysian government, by providing a platform and channel to meet users daily essential payment needs such as processing bill payments, online shopping vouchers, “gaming pin” and e-wallet top-up vouchers.
In this regard, ZCITY has acted as an aggregator payment gateway, but not a digital wallet itself. We believe the business model has further enhanced user experience and reliance and developed user loyalty to our platform. We have experienced a slow-down in hiring new personnel. We believe this is due to a downturn in the available human capital in the employment market generally in Malaysia. However, with the existing talents in the organization, everyone is playing their role to fulfil the business needs while waiting for the vacancies to be filled. We have a detailed plan to attract suitable talents to join us.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our business practices, including employee travel, employee work locations in certain cases, and cancellation of physical participation in certain meetings, events and conferences and further actions may be taken as required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and other business partners. The pandemic period is challenging, yet ZCITY is able to generate more sales revenue through virtual meetings and training to our business partners and potential markets. We are monitoring the global outbreak of the pandemic in SEA.
Because of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 outbreak, the financial impact related to the outbreak of and response to the COVID-19 cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Inflation
Although Malaysia is experiencing a high inflation rate, we do not believe that inflation has had a material adverse effect on our business as of June 30, 2022, but we will continue to monitor the effects of inflation on our business in future periods.
Supply Chain Disruptions
Although there have been global supply chain disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or Russia’s recent invasion of Ukraine that may have affected the operations of some of our online or offline merchants, these disruptions have not had a material adverse effect on our business as of June 30, 2022, but we will continue to monitor the effects of supply chain disruptions on our business in future periods.,
Key Operating Metrics
Our management regularly reviews a number of metrics to evaluate our business, measures our performance, identifies trends, formulates financial projections and makes strategic decisions. The main metrics we consider, and our results for each quarter during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2022, are set forth in the table below:
(1) Registered are persons who have registered on the ZCITY App.
(2) Active users are users who have logged into the ZCITY App at least once.
We have experienced substantial growth in registered users and active users since we launched ZCITY platform in June 2020. As of June 30, 2022, we recorded 1,967,996 registered users and 443,430 active users from ZCITY platform. Our average percentage of growth of register and active users throughout the quarter ended June 30, 2022 since the establishment of the ZCITY platform was approximately 143.4% and 283.8%, respectively. However, the average percentage of growth of registered and active users decreased in the last five quarters from June 30, 2022 which was a result of the resurgence of the COVID-19 outbreak and the imposition by the Malaysian Government of a Movement Control Order (“MCO”)
in May and June of 2021 as the majority of our participating merchants are restaurant owners or service providers and required the spending from our participating members to be in person. Despite the negative impact of the COVID-19 resurgence, we expect our product and loyalty program revenue to continue to grow in 2022 and beyond as a growing proportion of the Malaysian population have been fully vaccinated
and we expect to continue to attract more people to engage with our platform.
We continuously monitor the development and participation of active users as a proportion of its total registered user base to ensure the effectiveness of our marketing and feature implantation strategies. Accordingly, the proportion of total registered users that we consider active users at the end of each quarter is as follows:
We continuously monitor the development of the churn and retention rates of the active user base. Active users churn rate is the percentage of customers who had stop subscribing in our platform while retention rate is the percentage of customers who is retained in our platform. Accordingly, our churn and retention rates of the active user base at the end of each quarter is as follows:
The retention rate and churn rate for our active users are calculated as follows:
Retention rate of active users for any quarter
=
Existing active users
Total active users in the past quarter
Churn rate of active users for any quarter
=
Total active users from past quarter minus current quarter existing active users
Total active users in the past quarter
Over the last 21 months, we have used different strategies to build and maintain our users and increase their engagement. Initially, we focused on mass marketing strategies to attract registered users. Subsequently, we have shifted to a more targeted approach focused on increasing user engagement and user spending.
Results of Operation
For the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
Revenue
Our breakdown of revenues by categories for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, is summarized below:
Total revenues increased by approximately $ 65.7 million or 468.3% to approximately $79.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 from approximately $14.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was mainly attributable to the exponential growth of the registered user from our O2O e-commerce platform known as “ZCITY” platforms as we had acquired 1,364,874 new registered users for year ended June 30, 2022 compared to 603,122 new registered users for the same period in 2021. The increase of registered users enhanced the traffic of our platform and allowed us to monetize our revenue streams including product revenue, loyalty program revenue, transaction revenue and member subscription revenue. The change for each revenue stream was as follows:
Product and loyalty program revenue
Product revenue was generated through sales of our e-voucher, health care products, and other products through our ZCITY platform while loyalty program revenue was recognized when our customers redeem their previously earned reward points from our loyalty program or upon expiration of the reward point. We have experienced significant growth in register users and active users since we launched our ZCITY platform in June 2020. As of June 30, 2022, we recorded 1,967,996 registered users and 443,430 active users from ZCITY platform. Our average percentage of growth of registered and active users throughout the quarter ended June 30, 2022 since the establishment of ZCITY platform was approximately 143.4% and 283.8%, respectively. However, the average percentage of growth of register and active user was decreased in last five quarters as of June 30, 2022 which was resulted from the resurgence of COVID-19 outbreak and MCO
in May and June of 2021 as majority of our participated merchants are restaurant owners or service providers and required the spending from our participated members to be in person. Despite the negative impact of COVID-19 resurgence, we expect our product and loyalty program revenue continued to grow for 2022 and beyond as more population in the Malaysia have been fully vaccinated
and we will continue to attract more people to engage with our platform.
Transaction revenue
The transactions revenue primarily consists of fees charged to merchants for participating in our ZCITY platform upon successful sales transaction and payment service taken place between the merchants and their customers online. Our transaction revenue increased by approximately $23,000 or 75.6% to approximately $54,000 for the year ended June 30, 2022 from approximately $31,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was mainly attributable to the fact that we engaged with 1,985 local merchants to connect them with their customers through our ZCITY platform as of June 30, 2022 compared to 1,905 as of June 30, 2021. Our average percentage of growth of new merchants was approximately 36.0% throughout the quarters as of June 30, 2022 since the establishment of ZCITY platform. Even though we experienced slowdown in adding new merchants to our platform during the last five quarters ended June 30, 2022, as a result of resurgence of COVID-19.
Agent subscription revenue
Agent subscription revenue primarily consists of fees charged to the agents in exchange for rights by introducing merchants to join our merchant network and to earn a future fixed percentage of commission fees upon completion of each sales transaction between the referred merchants and their customers. Agent subscription revenue decreased by $100,406 or 99.9% to $15 for the year ended June 30, 2022 from $100,421 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease was mainly due to our shift of business strategies to Zmember subscription revenue which is a member oriented program designated to attract more customer to engage with our ZCITY platform.
Member subscription revenue
Member subscription revenue primarily consists of fees charged to customers who signed up for Zmember, a membership program that includes exclusive saving, bonus, and referral rewards.
Member subscription revenue increased by 100.0% to $211,441 for the year ended June 30, 2022 as we launch the Zmember program for the year end June 30, 2022 to enhance our customer engagement with our ZCITY platform. As of June 30, 2022 we had 9,370 customers who subscribed to our Zmember program.
Cost of Revenue
Our breakdown of cost of revenues by categories for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, is summarized below:
Cost of revenues mainly consist of the purchases of the gift card or “E-voucher” pin code, and health care product which is directly attributable to our product revenue. Total cost of revenue increased by approximately $65.3 million or 470.6% for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared with the same period in 2021. The increase was in line with our increase revenue.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit from our major revenue categories is summarized as follows:
Gross profit for the year ended June 30, 2022 amounted to approximately $0.5 million as compared to approximately $0.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. Gross margin was approximately 0.6% and 1.0% for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in gross profit was mainly due to increase of revenue in product and loyalty revenue and transaction revenue as result of exponential growth of registered users and active users for the year ended June 30, 2022. The decrease in gross margin was mainly due to the increase of product and loyalty program revenue which brought up the denominator of our gross profit and resulted in lower overall gross margin for the year ended June 30, 2022. In the year ended June 30, 2021, our agent subscription revenue had 100% gross margin and with lower denominator of our gross profit and resulted in higher overall gross margin for the year ended June 30, 2021. Our product and loyalty program gross margin increased from 0.1% for the year ended June 30, 2021 to 0.3% for the year ended June 30, 2022. As we had more member signed up our platform, we had slightly reducing our discount to attract users to sign up with our platform and resulted in higher product and loyalty program gross margin for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of selling expenses, general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, and stock-based compensation.
Selling expenses
Selling expenses amounted to approximately $6.3 million and $3.0 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Representing an increase of approximately $3.2 million or 107.1%. The increase was mainly due to increase in marketing and promotion expense of approximately $3.4 million related to promoting our ZCITY platform and eventually attracting more people to sign up as members. Marketing and promotion expense also consists of redemptions of reward points which is generated from non-spending related activities (registration as a new user, referral of a new user and Spin & Win eligibility to receive reward points) in exchange for discounted credit of purchasing our products upon conversion of using the reward points. For the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we incurred approximately $2.8 million and $0.4 million, respectively, in marketing and promotion expense, and recognized the same amount of product revenue at the time of redemption of the non-spending related activities reward points by our customers.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expenses amounted to approximately $2.8 million and $4.2 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Representing a decrease of approximately $1.5 million or 34.9%. The decrease was mainly due to decrease of approximately $2.4 million in professional/ consulting fees (including related parties) as we incurred less consulting fees related to early preparation of our initial public offering in the United States for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to the same period in 2021. The decrease was offset by an increase of approximately $0.6 million in salaries expenses as a result of expansion of our business operation after the launch of our ZCITY platform.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expense amounted to approximately $0.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately $0.1 million or 38.8%. The decrease was mainly due to our ZCITY platform becoming more sophisticated as less maintenance was required for the year ended June 30, 2022.
Stock-Based Compensation expenses
Stock-based compensation expenses amounted to approximately $1.3 million and $0 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, representing increase of approximately $1.3 million. The increase was mainly due to we engaged with Exchange Listing, LLC, to provide advisory service in capital market advisory, corporate governance, and organizational meeting related to our initial public offering in the United States.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net amounted to approximately $1.5 million and $0.3 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Representing an increase of approximately $1.2 million or 374.3%. The increase was mainly attributable to the interest expense incurred as well as amortization of debt discount from convertible notes. For the year ended June 30, 2022, we incurred interest expense of approximately $0.3 million and amortization of debt discount of approximately $1.3 million. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred interest expense of approximately $0.2 million and amortization of debt discount of approximately $0.2 million.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income tax were amount to $15,600 and $2,000 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. The amount was attributable to tax imposed on Treasure Global Inc from the State of Delaware, as we are required to remit franchise tax to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
We also were subject to controlled foreign corporations Subpart F income (“Subpart F”) tax, which is a tax primarily on passive income from controlled foreign corporations with a tax rate of 35%. In addition, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act imposed a global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) tax, which is a tax on certain off-shore earnings at an effective rate of 10.5% for tax years (50% deduction of the current enacted tax rate of 21%) with a partial offset for 80% foreign tax credits. If the foreign tax rate is 13.125% or higher, there will be no U.S. corporate tax after the 80% foreign tax credits are applied.
For the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, our foreign subsidiary did not generate any income that are subject to Subpart F tax and GILTI tax.
Net Loss
Our net loss increased by approximately $3.8 million from approximately $8.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 to approximately $11.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2022, predominately due to reasons as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In assessing liquidity, we monitor and analyze cash on-hand and operating expenditure commitments. Our liquidity needs are to meet working capital requirements and operating expense obligations. To date, we financed our operations primarily through cash flows from contribution from shareholders, issuance of convertible notes, related party loans, and our completion of initial underwritten public offering.
As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had approximately $1.8 million and $2.8 million, respectively, in cash and cash equivalent which primarily consists of bank deposits, which are unrestricted as to withdrawal and use. We have a working capital deficit of approximately $15.9 million and $1.6 million at June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, respectively.
Subsequent to June 30, 2022, we have additionally borrowed approximately $2.7 million under Tophill Loan Agreement 2 on terms identical to the Tophill Loan Agreement 1 which all principal and accrued and unpaid interest outstanding will automatically be converted into shares of our common stock at a conversion price that is equal to 80% of the initial public offering price.
On August 15, 2022, we had closed our initial underwritten public offering of 2,300,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.00001 per share, at $4.00 per share. We had received aggregate net proceeds from the closing of approximately $8.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and fees, and other estimated offering expenses which amounted to approximately $1.0 million.
After the completion of the underwritten initial public offering, following the conversion of convertible notes payable, net of unamortized discounts to equity, we expect our working capital to change from a deficit of approximately $15.9 million to a positive working capital of approximately $5.6 million.
Despite of receiving the net proceeds from our initial underwritten public offering,
the management is of the opinion that we will not have sufficient funds to meet the working capital requirements and debt obligations as they become due starting from one year from the date of this report due to our recurring loss. Therefore, the
management has determined there is substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to generate significant revenue, we may be required to curtail or cease its operations. Management is trying to alleviate the going concern risk through the following sources:
●
Equity financing to support its working capital;
●
Other available sources of financing (including debt) from Malaysian banks and other financial institutions; and
●
Financial support and credit guarantee commitments from the Company’s related parties.
The following summarizes the key components of our cash flows for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was approximately $8.7 million and were mainly comprised of the net loss of approximately $11.7 million, decrease of account payable (including related parties) of approximately $0.2 million as we had pay out some of the account payable balance to the third parties or related parties vendors timely, decrease of customer deposits, related parties of approximately $0.2 million as we had returned the deposit related to I.T professional service back to the related parties due to projects abandoned, and decrease of other payables, related parties as we paid out the remaining balance of professional fee incurred from two related parties of approximately $0.1 million. The net cash used in operating activities was mainly offset by amortization of debt discount of approximately $1.3 million, stock-based compensation of approximately $1.3 million, decrease of inventories of approximately $0.2 million as we improved our inventories turnover rate due to demand of our product, and the increase in other payables and accrued liability of approximately $0.7 million mainly related to the accrued professional expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $6.8 million and were mainly comprised of the net loss of approximately $7.9 million, increase of inventories of approximately $0.4 million as we need to stock up the gift card or “E-voucher” after the launch of our ZCITY platform for resale and the increase in prepayments of approximately $0.2 million as our vendors required us to make more deposits to secure our E-voucher purchases. The net cash used in operating activities was mainly offset by the amortization of debt discount of approximately $0.2 million, the decrease in other receivable and other current assets of approximately $0.5 million as we collected back our security deposits during the period, the increase in accounts payable (including related parties) of approximately $0.2 million as we make more purchase on account, the increase in customer deposits (including related parties) of approximately $0.3 million as we collected customer deposit from third parties and related parties related to our I.T professional service, and the increase in other payables and accrued liabilities (including related party)
of approximately $0.5 million mainly related to the accrued professional expenses
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was approximately $0.3 million, which was in respect of purchase of equipment for our operations.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $85,000, which was in respect of purchase of equipment for our operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was approximately $8.2 million, which were mainly comprised of proceeds received from the issuance of convertible note from third parties and related parties of approximately $8.6 million, and proceeds received from third parties loans of approximately $1.5 million, offset by repayment to related parties loan of approximately $1.8 million, and approximately $0.1 million payment of deferred offering costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $9.8 million, which were mainly comprised of capital contributions received from the shareholders of approximately $0.2 million, proceeds received from the issuance of convertible note from third parties and related parties and senior note of approximately $5.5 million and proceeds borrowed from our related parties of approximately $4.0 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of June 30, 2022, we have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to our stockholders.
Critical Accounting Estimate
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements and accompanying notes requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis of making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We have identified certain accounting estimates that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These estimates are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting estimates involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Significant accounting estimates reflected in our consolidated financial statements include the estimated retail price per point and estimated breakage to calculate the revenue recognized in our loyalty program revenue, the useful lives of property and equipment, impairment of long-lived assets, allowance for doubtful accounts, realization of deferred tax assets and uncertain tax position, and fair value of our stock price to determine the
beneficial conversion feature ("BCF") within the convertible note
. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Accounts receivable, net
Accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount less an allowance for any uncollectible accounts and do not bear interest, which are due after 30 days. Accounts receivable include money due from agent subscription revenue and sales of health care product on its Z-city platform. Management reviews the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts on an ongoing basis, using historical collection trends and aging of receivables. Management also periodically evaluates individual customer’s financial condition, credit history, and the current economic conditions to make adjustments in the allowance when it is considered necessary. Account balances are charged off against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. Our management continues to evaluate the reasonableness of the valuation allowance policy and update it if necessary.
Our allowance for accounts receivables were $227 and $25,690, as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively,
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, cost being determined on a first-in-first-out method. Costs include gift card or “E-voucher” pin code which are purchased from our suppliers as merchandized goods or store credit, and healthcare products. Management compares the cost of inventories with the net realizable value and if applicable, an allowance is made for writing down the inventory to its net realizable value, if lower than cost. On an ongoing basis, inventories are reviewed for potential write-down for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventories which equals the difference between the costs of inventories and the estimated net realizable value based upon forecasts for future demand and market conditions. When inventories are written-down to the lower of cost or net realizable value, it is not marked up subsequently based on changes in underlying facts and circumstances. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, impairments of inventories amounted to $8,805 and $0, respectively, were provided for E-vouchers.
Other receivables and other current assets, net
Other receivables and other current assets primarily include refundable advance to third party service provider and other deposits. Management regularly reviews the aging of receivables and changes in payment trends and records allowances when management believes collection of amounts due are at risk. Accounts considered uncollectable are written off against allowances after exhaustive efforts at collection are made. No allowance of other receivable and other current assets were recorded as of June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Prepayments
Prepayments and deposits are mainly cash deposited or advanced to suppliers for future inventory purchases. This amount is refundable and bears no interest. For any prepayments determined by management that such advances will not be in receipts of inventories, services, or refundable, we will recognize an allowance account to reserve such balances. Management reviews its prepayments on a regular basis to determine if the allowance is adequate, and adjusts the allowance when necessary. Delinquent account balances are written-off against allowance for doubtful accounts after management has determined that the likelihood of collection is not probable. Our management continues to evaluate the reasonableness of the valuation allowance policy and update it if necessary. No allowance of prepayments were recorded as of June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Impairment for long-lived assets
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment with finite lives are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances (such as a significant adverse change to market conditions that will impact the future use of the assets) indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. We assessed the recoverability of the assets based on the undiscounted future cash flows the assets are expected to generate and recognize an impairment loss when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset plus net proceeds expected from disposition of the asset, if any, are less than the carrying value of the asset. If an impairment is identified, we would reduce the carrying amount of the asset to its estimated fair value based on a discounted cash flows approach or, when available and appropriate, to comparable market values. No impairment for long-lived assets were recorded as of June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Revenue recognition
Loyalty program
- Performance obligations satisfied over time
Our Z-City reward loyalty program allows members to earn points on purchases that can be redeemed for rewards that include discounts on future purchases. When members purchase our product or make purchase with our participated vendor through Z-City, we allocate the transaction price between the product or service, and the reward points earned based on the relative stand-alone selling prices and expected point redemption. The portion allocated to the reward points is initially recorded as contract liability and subsequently recognized as revenue upon redemption or expiration.
The two primary estimates utilized to record the contract liability for reward points earned by members are the estimated retail price per point and estimated breakage. The estimated retail price per point is based on the actual historical retail prices of product purchased or service obtained through the redemption of reward points. We estimate breakage of reward points based on historical redemption rates. We continually evaluate its methodology and assumptions based on developments in retail price per point redeemed, redemption patterns and other factors. Changes in the retail price per point and redemption rates have the effect of either increasing or decreasing the contract liability through current period revenue by an amount estimated to represent the retail value of all points previously earned but not yet redeemed by loyalty program members as of the end of the reporting period.
Income taxes
Deferred taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method in respect of temporary differences arising from differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and the corresponding tax basis used in the computation of assessable tax profit. In principle, deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable temporary differences. Deferred tax assets are recognized to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilized. Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realized or the liability is settled. Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement, except when it is related to items credited or charged directly to equity, in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Current income taxes are provided for in accordance with the laws of the relevant taxing authorities.
An uncertain tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded.
Convertible notes
We evaluate our convertible notes to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is recorded at fair value each reporting period and recorded as a liability. In the event that the fair value is recorded as a liability, the change in fair value is recorded in the statements of operations as other income or expense.
In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument is required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument.
If the conversion features of conventional convertible debt provide for a rate of conversion that is below market value at issuance, this feature is characterized as a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”). A BCF is recorded by us as a debt discount pursuant to ASC Topic 470-20 “Debt with Conversion and Other Options.” In those circumstances, the convertible debt is recorded net of the discount related to the BCF, and we amortize the discount to interest expense, over the life of the debt.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.