ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements about our plans and expectations of what may happen in the future. Forward-looking statements are based on a number of assumptions and estimates that are inherently subject to significant risks and uncertainties, and our results could differ materially from the results anticipated by our forward-looking statements as a result of many known or unknown factors, including, but not limited to, those factors discussed in “Risk Factors.” See also the “Special Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set forth at the beginning of this report.
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and our consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this report.
Overview
TG Therapeutics is a fully-integrated, commercial stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the acquisition, development and commercialization of novel treatments for B-cell malignancies and autoimmune diseases. In addition to an active research pipeline including five investigational medicines across these therapeutic areas, we have received accelerated approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for UKONIQ (umbralisib), for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory marginal zone lymphoma who have received at least one prior anti-CD20-based regimen and relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma who have received at least three prior lines of systemic therapies. Currently, we have two programs in Phase 3 development for the treatment of patients with relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (RMS) and patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and several investigational medicines in Phase 1 clinical development. We also actively evaluate complementary products, technologies and companies for in-licensing, partnership, acquisition and/or investment opportunities.
Following FDA approval of UKONIQ on February 5, 2021, we commenced commercial sales of UKONIQ in the US and began generating product revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our only sources of product revenues were from the sales of UKONIQ. Product revenues are recorded net of estimates of variable consideration. For further discussion of our revenue recognition policy, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates” below.
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of materials and third-party manufacturing costs, as well as freight and royalties owed to our licensing partner for UKONIQ sales. Based on our policy to expense costs associated with the manufacture of our products prior to regulatory approval, the manufacturing costs of UKONIQ units recognized as revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 were expensed prior to receipt of FDA approval on February 5, 2021, and therefore are not included in costs of product revenue during the current period.
Our other research and development expenses consist primarily of expenses relating to the design, development, manufacture, testing and enhancement of our drug candidates and technologies, milestone expenses related to in-licensing of new product candidates, fees paid to consultants and outside service providers for clinical and laboratory development, personnel expenses and other facilities-related expenses. We expense our research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $198.5 million, $151.9 million and $148.4 million, respectively, excluding noncash compensation expenses related to research and development.
The following table sets forth the research and development expenses per project, exclusive of noncash compensation expenses, for the periods presented.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues. Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the comparable periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, due to net product revenues from U.S. sales of our sole commercial product, UKONIQ, which was approved by the FDA on February 5, 2021.
Cost of Product Revenue. Cost of product revenue consists primarily of freight and royalties on net sales of UKNOIQ owed to our licensing partner. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the cost of product revenue was $0.8 million. Based on our policy to expense costs associated with the manufacture of our products prior to regulatory approval, the manufacturing costs of UKONIQ units recognized as revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 were expensed as research and development expenses prior to receipt of FDA approval on February 5, 2021, and therefore are not included in costs of product revenue during the current period. We expect the cost of product revenues to remain low, as we sell through certain inventory that was expensed prior to FDA approval of UKONIQ in February 2021.
Noncash Compensation Expense (Research and Development). Noncash compensation expense (research and development) related to equity incentive grants totaled $24.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $14.0 million during the comparable period in 2020. The increase in noncash compensation expense was primarily due to vesting of milestone-based grants, an increase in research and development personnel and the vesting of grants at a higher stock price during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Research and Development Expense. Other research and development expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 by approximately $46.6 million to $198.5 million as compared to the comparable period ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expense is primarily attributable to increased manufacturing expense of approximately $34.4 million in preparation for commercialization and for our Phase 3 clinical trials. Additionally, an increase in personnel expense of $9.5 million associated with the buildout of our regulatory and late-stage development groups.
Noncash Compensation Expense (Selling, General and Administrative). Noncash compensation expense (selling, general and administrative) related to equity incentive grants totaled $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $66.3 million during the comparable period in 2020. The decrease in noncash compensation expense was primarily related to more milestone-based vesting of restricted stock granted to executive personnel occurring during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Selling, General and Administrative. Other selling, general and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 by approximately $49.3 million to $90.9 million as compared to the comparable period ended December 31, 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense is primarily attributable to increased personnel and other selling, general and administrative costs associated with execution of the launch of UKONIQ and planning for the potential launches of U2 in CLL and ublituximab in RMS.
Interest Expense. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.6 million compared to $6.3 million for the comparable period ended December 31, 2020. The $0.7 million decrease is mainly due to an increase in interest expense related to administrative fees in connection with contract manufacturing costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income. Other income increased by $1.9 million to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is mainly due to greater interest income and an increase in the change in fair value of notes payable during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues. License revenue was approximately $0.2 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. License revenue is related to the amortization of an upfront payment of $2.0 million associated with our license agreement with Ildong.
Noncash compensation expense (research and development). Noncash compensation expense (research and development) related to equity incentive grants totaled $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $5.8 million during the comparable
period in 2019. The increase in noncash compensation expense was primarily due to an increase in research and development personnel and the vesting of grants with a higher stock price during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Research and Development Expense. Other research and development expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by approximately $3.6 million to $151.9 million compared to the comparable period ended December 31, 2019. The increase in research and development expense is primarily attributable to the achievement of various license agreement milestones, offset by a decrease in manufacturing expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Noncash Compensation Expense (General and Administrative). Noncash compensation expense (general and administrative) related to equity incentive grants totaled $66.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $5.5 million during the comparable period in 2019. The increase in noncash compensation expense was primarily related to more milestone-based vesting of restricted stock granted to executive personnel occurring during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other General and Administrative. Other general and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 by approximately $32.0 million to $41.5 million compared to the comparable period ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to commercial costs, including personnel, incurred in preparation for the launch of UKONIQ.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased by $1.0 million to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to expense of $5.3 million for year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is mainly due to interest expense related to administrative fees in connection with contract manufacturing costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income. Other income decreased by $1.0 million to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in other income is mainly due to a decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect our other income to remain at a comparable level during 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our major sources of cash have been proceeds from private placement and public offering of equity securities, and from our loan and security agreements executed with Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules) (see Note 6 for more information). In February of 2021, umbralisib, now referred to as UKONIQ, was granted accelerated approval in the United States for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory MZL who have received at least one prior anti-CD20 based regimen and adult patients with relapsed or refractory FL who have received at least three prior lines of systemic therapy. Commercial sales of UKONIQ commenced in the first quarter of 2021. We have generated limited revenues to date from product sales. Even with the commercialization of UKONIQ and the potential future commercialization of our other drug candidates, we may not become profitable. Our ability to achieve profitability depends on many factors, including our ability to generate revenue, our ability to obtain regulatory approvals for our drug candidates, our ability to successfully complete any post-approval regulatory obligations and our ability to successfully commercialize our drug candidates. We may continue to incur substantial operating losses even as we begin to generate revenues from product sales.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $350.3 million in cash and cash equivalents, and investment securities. We anticipate that our cash and cash equivalents, and investment securities as of December 31, 2021 will provide sufficient liquidity for more than a twelve-month period from the date of filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The actual amount of cash that we will need to operate is subject to many factors, including, but not limited to, the timing, design and conduct of clinical trials for our drug candidates. We are dependent upon significant future financing to provide the cash necessary to execute our current operations, including the commercialization of any of our drug candidates.
Discussion of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $295.6 million as compared to $214.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was due primarily to increased expenditures associated with execution of the launch of UKONIQ, our scale-up for manufacturing, ongoing clinical development programs and paydown of accounts payable and accrued expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million as compared to cash used in investing activities of $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to greater investment in short-term securities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $41.4 million as compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $679.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities related to net proceeds from the issuance of common stock as part of our ATM program and public offerings that took place during the year ended December 31, 2020.
ATM Program
In May 2017, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the 2017 S-3), which was declared effective in June 2017. Under the 2017 S-3, we may sell up to a total of $300 million of securities. In connection with the 2017 S-3, we entered into an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the 2017 ATM) with Jefferies LLC, Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., FBR Capital Markets & Co., SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc., Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc. and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (each a 2017 Agent and collectively, the 2017 Agents), relating to the sale of shares of our common stock. Under the 2017 ATM we paid the 2017 Agents a commission rate of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of any shares of common stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold a total of 13,620,165 shares of common stock under the 2017 ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $99.3 million at an average selling price of $7.29 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $97.5 million after deducting commissions and other transactions costs.
On September 5, 2019, we filed an automatic “shelf registration” statement on Form S-3 (the 2019 WKSI Shelf) as a “well-known seasoned issuer” as defined in Rule 405 under the Securities Act, which registered an unlimited and indeterminate amount of debt or equity securities for future issuance and sale. The 2019 WKSI Shelf was declared effective in September 2019. In connection with the 2019 WKSI Shelf, we entered into an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the 2020 ATM) with Jefferies LLC, Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and B. Riley Securities, Inc. (each a 2020 Agent and collectively, the 2020 Agents), relating to the sale of shares of our common stock. Under the 2020 ATM, we paid the 2020 Agents a commission rate of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of any shares of common stock. In November 2020, we entered into an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the 2021 ATM) with the same terms and agents (each a 2021 Agent and collectively, the 2021 Agents) as the 2020 ATM.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold a total of 8,528,286 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $187.5 million at an average selling price of $21.99 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $184.2 million after deducting commissions and other transactions costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold a total of 804,100 shares of common stock under the 2021 ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $33.9 million at an average selling price of $42.18 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $33.3 million after deducting commissions and other transactions costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold a total of 72,000 shares of common stock under the 2021 ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $2.5 million at an average selling price of $34.25 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $2.4 million after deducting commissions and other transactions costs.
The 2019 WKSI Shelf is currently our only active shelf-registration statement. We may offer any combination of the securities registered under the 2019 WKSI Shelf from time to time in response to market conditions or other circumstances if we believe such a plan of financing is in the best interests of our stockholders. We believe that the 2019 WKSI Shelf provides us with the flexibility to raise additional capital to finance our operations as needed.
Equity Financings
On March 1, 2019, we completed a public offering of 4,100,000 shares of our common stock (plus a 30-day underwriter overallotment option to purchase up to an additional 615,000 shares of common stock, which was exercised) at a price of $5.87 per share. Proceeds from this offering, including the overallotment, after underwriting discounts and offering expenses were approximately $27.5 million.
On December 22, 2019, we completed a securities purchase agreement with an institutional investor in which we agreed to sell 5,434,783 shares of our common stock at a price of $9.20 per share. Net proceeds from this offering were approximately $50.0 million.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 8,500,000 shares of our common stock (plus an underwriter option to purchase up to an additional 1,275,000 shares of common stock, which was exercised) at a price of $18 per share. Net proceeds from this offering, including the overallotment, were approximately $165.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses of approximately $10.8 million.
On December 17, 2020, we completed a public offering of 6,320,000 shares of our common stock (plus a 30-day underwriter overallotment option to purchase up to an additional 948,000 shares of common stock, which was exercised) at a price of $43.50 per share. Net proceeds from this offering, including the overallotment, were approximately $297.2 million after underwriting discounts and offering expenses of approximately $19.0 million.
Debt Financings
On February 28, 2019 (the Closing Date), we entered into a term loan facility of up to $60.0 million (Term Loan) with Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules), the proceeds of which were used for research and development programs and for general corporate purposes. The Term Loan is governed by a loan and security agreement, dated February 28, 2019 (the Loan Agreement), which provides for up to four separate advances. The first advance of $30.0 million was drawn on the Closing Date. An additional $30.0 million was available with different milestones and time points that have lapsed.
On December 30, 2021 (the First Amendment Closing Date), the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the Amended Loan Agreement) with Hercules Capital, Inc. The Amended Loan Agreement amended the terms of the Loan Agreement to, among other things, (i) increase the aggregate principal amount of the loan, available at the Company’s option, from $60.0 million to $200.0 million (the Amended Term Loan), (ii) issue a first advance of $70.0 million drawn at the First Amendment Closing date, a portion of which was used to refinance the current outstanding loan balance of approximately $7.8 million and pay for expenses incurred by the Lender in executing the agreements, (iii) change the draw amounts and dates available in Tranche 2 through Tranche 4 including increasing the amount available under Tranche 2 subject to the achievement of performance milestones from $10.0 million to $20.0 million, increasing the amount available under Tranche 3 subject to the achievement of performance milestones from $10.0 million to $45.0 million, and increasing the amount under Tranche 4 subject to the approval of Hercules’ investment committee from $10.0 million to $65.0 million, (iv) extend the maturity date of the facility from the original March 1, 2022 to January 1, 2026, (v) reset and extend the interest only period from April 1, 2021 to February 1, 2025 and extendable to August 1, 2025 subject to the achievement of certain performance milestones, and (vi) modify the cash interest rate to be the greater of either (a) the “prime rate” as reported in The Wall Street Journal plus 2.15%, and (b) 5.40%. The performance milestones are based on achievement of certain U.S. Food and Drug Administration approvals and impact the potential extension of the interest only period, access to future advances under the Loan Agreement and minimum cash levels required under the Amended Loan Agreement.
The Amended Loan Agreement contains financial covenants from and after October 15, 2022 that require the Company to maintain certain levels of unrestricted cash and additional financial covenants related to market capitalization and unrestricted cash commencing on July 1, 2023 at any time when the Amended Term Loan advances made under the Amended Loan Agreement are greater than $70 million.
The Amended Loan Agreement also contains warrant coverage of 2.95% of the total amount funded. A warrant (the Warrant) was issued by the Company to Hercules to purchase 115,042 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $17.95 for the initial amount funded at closing. The Warrant shall be exercisable for seven years from the date of issuance. Hercules may exercise the Warrant either by (a) cash or check or (b) through a net issuance conversion.
In addition, the Company is required to pay a final payment fee equal to 5.95% of the aggregate principal amount of the Term Loan Advances.
The Company may, at its option, prepay the Amended Term Loan in full or in part, subject to a prepayment penalty equal to (i) 2.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs prior to the first anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date, (ii) 1.5% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the first anniversary and prior to the second anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date, and (iii) 1.0% of the principal amount prepaid if the prepayment occurs on or after the second anniversary and prior to the third anniversary of the First Amendment Closing Date.
Leases
In October 2014, we entered into an agreement (the Office Agreement) with Fortress Biotech, Inc. (FBIO) to occupy approximately 45% of the 24,000 square feet of New York City office space leased by FBIO. The Office Agreement requires us to pay our respective share of the average annual rent and other costs of the 15-year lease. We approximate an average annual rental obligation of $1.4 million under the Office Agreement. We began to occupy this new space in April 2016, with rental payments beginning in the third quarter of 2016. At January 1, 2020, we recognized a lease liability and corresponding right of use (ROU) asset based on the present value of the remaining lease payments for all of our leased office spaces, the majority of which is comprised of our New York City office space. The present values of our lease liability and corresponding ROU asset are $11.3 million and $8.6 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021. Our leases have remaining lease terms of 2 years to 10 years. One lease has a renewal option to extend the lease for an additional term of two years.
Under the Office Agreement, we agreed to pay FBIO our portion of the build-out costs, which have been allocated to us at the 45% rate mentioned above. The allocated build-out costs have been recorded in Leasehold Interest, net on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets and will be amortized over the 15-year term of the Office Agreement. The initial commitment period of the 45% rate was for a period of three (3) years. We and FBIO currently determine actual office space utilization annually and if our utilization differs from the amount we have been billed, we will either receive credits or be assessed incremental utilization charges. As of December 31, 2021, the allocation rate is 63% and will be evaluated again in August 2022 for the following rent year. Also, in connection with this lease, in October 2014 we pledged $0.6 million to secure a line of credit as a security deposit for the Office Agreement, which has been recorded as restricted cash in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Additional collateral of $0.6 million was pledged in April 2018 to increase the letter of credit for the office space.
In October 2019, we finalized a five-year lease for office space in New Jersey (the NJ Lease). We approximate an average annual rental obligation of $0.3 million under the NJ Lease. We took possession of this space in October 2019, with rental payments beginning in November 2019.
In October 2021, we finalized a five-year lease for office space in North Carolina (the NC Lease). We approximate an average annual rental obligation of $0.2 million under the NC Lease. We took possession of this space in February 2022, with rental payments beginning in April 2022.
Total rental expense was approximately $2.2 million, $2.7 million and 2.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Future minimum lease commitments as of December 31, 2021 total, in the aggregate, approximately $18.5 million through December 31, 2032. Our future minimum lease commitments include our office leases in New York, New Jersey and North Carolina as of December 31, 2021.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have not entered into any transactions with unconsolidated entities whereby we have financial guarantees, subordinated retained interests, derivative instruments or other contingent arrangements that expose us to material continuing risks, contingent liabilities, or any other obligations under a variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides us with financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the applicable period. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define critical accounting policies as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties and which may potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. In applying these critical accounting policies, our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in making certain estimates. These estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our critical accounting policies include the following:
Revenue Recognition. Pursuant to Topic 606, we recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, Topic 606 includes provisions within a five-step model that includes i) identifying the contract with a customer, ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, iii) determining the transaction price, iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and v) recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Revenue, Net - The Company recognizes product revenues, net of variable consideration related to certain allowances and accruals, when the customer takes control of the product, which is typically upon delivery to the customer. Product revenue is recorded at the net sales price, or transaction price. The Company records product revenue reserves, which are classified as a reduction in product revenues, to account for the components of variable consideration. Variable consideration includes the following components, which are described below: chargebacks, government rebates, trade discounts and allowances, product returns, and co-payment assistance.
These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is expected to be settled with a credit against the Company's customer account) or a liability (if the amount is expected to be settled with a cash payment). The Company's estimates of reserves established for variable consideration are calculated based upon a consistent application of the expected value method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. These estimates reflect the Company's current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be subject to constraint and is included in net product revenues only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration received may ultimately differ from the Company's estimates. If actual results vary, the Company adjusts these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment. For a complete discussion of the accounting for product revenue, see Note 1 - Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stock Compensation. We have granted stock options and restricted stock to employees, directors and consultants, as well as warrants to other third parties. For employee, director and consultant grants the value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes model takes into account volatility in the price of our stock, the risk-free interest rate, the estimated life of the option, the closing market price of our stock and the exercise price. We base our estimates of our stock price volatility on the historical volatility of our common stock and our assessment of future volatility; however, these estimates are neither predictive nor indicative of the future performance of our stock. For purposes of the calculation, we assumed that no dividends would be
paid during the life of the options and warrants. The estimates utilized in the Black-Scholes calculation involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. In addition, because some of the options, restricted stock and warrants issued to employees, consultants and other third parties vest upon the achievement of certain milestones, the total expense is uncertain. Compensation expense for such awards that vest upon the achievement of milestones is recognized when the achievement of such milestones becomes probable.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses. As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include:
● fees paid to contract research organizations (CROs) in connection with clinical studies;
● fees paid to contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs);
● fees paid to trial sites in connection with clinical studies; and
● fees paid to vendors associated with licenses/milestones.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to an initial negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing certain service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have an effect on the Company’s financial statements.