ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Caution Regarding Forward-Looking Information
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward- looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
The following section reflects management’s views on the financial condition as of December 31, 2021, and the results of operations and cash flows for the period ended December 31, 2021. This section is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Company’s audited financial statements and related notes to the financial statements contained elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated on February 8, 2021, as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
While our efforts to identify a target business may span many industries and regions worldwide, we intend to focus our search for prospects within the space technology, financial technology, technology, media and telecom (“TMT”) industries and related sectors. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. Though our sponsor is a Hong Kong company, a majority of our management are located outside of China (including Hong Kong and Macau) and we will not undertake our initial business combination with any entity that conducts a majority of its business or is headquartered in China (including Hong Kong and Macau). We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the private placement of the placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the IPO or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of current shareholders, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Our sponsor is Tsangs Group Holdings Limited (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on November 2, 2021 (File No. 333-258773) (the “Registration Statement”). On November 5, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 11,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares” and the warrants included in the Units being offered, the “Public Warrants”) at $10.00 per Unit, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment of 1,500,000 Units. Transaction costs amounted to $3,040,822 consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting commissions, $575,000 of fair value of the Units issued to ThinkEquity LLC (“ThinkEquity”), the representative of the underwriters, $579,110 of fair value of the Founder Shares sold to advisors in excess of proceeds, and $736,712 of other offering costs, and were charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, the Company consummated the private placement of 5,500,000 Warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $5,500,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, an amount of $117,300,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of Units in the IPO and a portion of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was deposited into a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S. government securities with a maturity of 180 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to us to pay franchise and income tax obligations (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), the proceeds from the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will not be released from the Trust Account until the earliest of: (a) the completion of the initial Business Combination; (b) the redemption of any Public Shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated certificate of incorporation: (i) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to allow redemption in connection with the initial Business Combination or certain amendments to our charter prior thereto or to redeem 100% of the Public Shares if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of the IPO, May 5, 2023; or (ii) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-Business Combination activity; and (c) the redemption of 100% of the Public Shares if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the required time frame (subject to the requirements of applicable law).
We have 18 months from the closing of the IPO, until May 5, 2023 (the “Combination Period”) to complete the initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but no more than ten business days thereafter subject to lawfully available funds therefor, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) above to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of up to $400,000. As of December 31, 2021, we had $664,626 in our operating bank account, and working capital of $825,580.
After consummation of the IPO on November 5, 2021, we had $688,590 in our operating bank account, and working capital of $976,890. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor has committed to provide us Working Capital Loans as defined in Note 5. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Our sponsor has confirmed that they are willing and able to provide the Company with any additional funds it needs to carry out its operations. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination, as well as other routine operating costs.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the Initial Public Offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $1,073,167, which consisted of formation and operating costs amounting to $375,267 and $705,630 in director stock compensation, offset by interest income amounting to $7,730.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
We entered into an administrative services agreement on November 2, 2021, pursuant to which we will pay an affiliate of the Sponsor, $445 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement that was signed prior to the effective date of the Registration Statement, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to the Class A common stock). The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of the initial Business Combination.
Underwriting Agreement
On November 5, 2021, we paid a cash underwriting discount of 1.0% per Unit, or $1,150,000.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Deferred Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1. Deferred offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments to be issued in the IPO based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Upon closing of the IPO on November 5, 2021, offering costs associated with the Class A common stock and the warrants were charged to stockholders’ equity. Transaction costs amounted to $3,040,822, all of which was allocated to stockholders’ equity.
Share Based Compensation
The Company complies with ASC 718 Compensation- Stock Compensation, regarding interests in founder shares acquired by directors and advisors of the Company as compensation. The interests in the founder shares vested upon the Company completing the initial public offering and compensation expense has been recorded accordingly at that date based upon the initial grant date fair value. The determination of the fair value of the share-based compensation awards represents a significant estimate within the financial statements. The fair value is based upon a Monte Carlo valuation that considers the probability of an initial public offering, business combination and other risk factors.
The interest in the founder shares was issued on November 2, 2021. Since the approach in ASC 718 is to determine the fair value without regard to the vesting date, the Company determined the valuation of the Class B shares as of November 2, 2021. Consideration of $810 was paid for the interest in the founder shares.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and is subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common Share
The Company complies with the accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The Company has not considered the effect of the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 5,500,000 of our Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net loss per common stock is the same as basic net loss per common stock.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. We account for our outstanding warrants as equity-classified instruments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section102 (b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.