Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer Thunder Bridge Capital Partners IV, Inc. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
The Company is a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. The Company intends to effectuate its initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement units, the proceeds of the sale of our securities in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), our shares, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of our common stockholders, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of shares of our Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our units, Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, we had $559,285 held outside the trust account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and $236,535,659 held inside the trust account.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $165,906 and a loss from operations of $905,815. Our entire activity from inception to July 2, 2021 was in preparation for our initial public offering. Since the consummation of our initial public offering through December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of potential initial business combination candidates, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We are incurring increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the consummation of our initial public offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of founder shares for $25,000 by the sponsor, and a total of $105,000 of loans and advances by the sponsor.
On July 2, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering in which we sold 22,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit generating gross proceeds of $225,000,000 before underwriting fees and expenses. Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 625,000 placement units, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $6,250,000. Each placement unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one fifth of one redeemable warrant. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
On August 9, 2021, the Underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in part and purchased an additional 1,152,784 units, generating gross proceeds of $11,527,840 and consummated a sale of an additional 23,055 placement units to the Sponsor at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,550. Following the closing, an additional $11,527,840 of proceeds was placed in the Trust Account. In connection with the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the expiration of the over-allotment option, 555,554 shares of Class B common stock were forfeited for no consideration.
In connection with our initial public offering and the exercise of the over-allotment option, the Company incurred offering costs of $12,793,700 (including an underwriting fee of $4,730,557 and deferred underwriting commissions of $8,278,474). Other incurred offering costs consisted principally of formation and preparation fees related to our initial public offering. A total of $236,527,840, comprised of $231,797,283 of the proceeds from the initial public offering and the underwriters exercise of the over-allotment option and $4,730,557 of the proceeds of the private placement, was placed in a U.S.-based trust account, established for the benefit of our public stockholders. Prior to the closing of our initial public offering, the sponsor had made $100,000 in loans and advances to the Company. The loans and advances were non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the completion of our initial public offering. The loans of $105,000 were fully repaid upon the consummation of our initial public offering on July 2, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $559,285 of cash on our balance sheet and working capital of $346,385. We will use these funds primarily to find and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earn on the investments in our trust account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with the initial business combination, on March 25, 2022 the Company and TBCP III, LLC (the “Sponsor”) executed a promissory note to loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes the initial business combination, the Company would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that the initial business combination does not occur, the Company may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the placement units issued to the sponsor. The terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Company does not expect to seek loans from parties other than the sponsor or its directors or officers or their respective affiliates as it does not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in the trust account. No monies have been advanced under the note.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting fee of 2% of gross proceeds of the initial public offering and the over-allotment option, or $4,730,557. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to aggregate deferred underwriting commissions of $8,278,474 consisting of (i) 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement by and among the Company and Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period.
The calculation of diluted loss per share does not consider the effect of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, because the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net loss per share:
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under FASB ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the balance sheet primarily due to their short term nature.
Offering Cost
Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to our initial public offering. Offering costs amounting to $13,427,731 were charged to stockholders’ equity upon the completion of our initial public offering.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position.
The provision for income taxes was deemed to be immaterial for the period from January 7, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021.
Shares subject to possible redemption
The Company accounts for its shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company accounts for derivative financial instruments in accordance with ASC Topic 815. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value upon issuance and remeasured at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. The classification of derivative financial instruments is evaluated at the end of each reporting period.
Warrants
The Company accounts for the public warrants and placement warrants as liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent reporting period while the warrants are outstanding. Because the Company does not control the occurrence of events, such as a tender offer or exchange, that may trigger cash settlement of the warrants where not all of the stockholders also receive cash, the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, as such, the warrants must be recorded as derivative liability.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.