Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and summary of selected financial data for THC Therapeutics, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
Plan of Operation
THC Therapeutics is focused on the wellness and nutraceutical industry. The Company is developing a sanitizing herb dryer, the dHydronator®, with multiple design, function, and usage patents. This innovative, laboratory-proven product is specifically designed for the drying and sanitizing (i.e., reducing the bacterial count) of freshly harvested cannabis, and other herbs, flowers, and tea leaves. The dHydronator® can reduce moisture content of cannabis to 10-15% in only 10-14 hours. Traditional herbal drying times can take up to two weeks. The Company also intends to establish a float spa facility that will allow each guest to customize their wellness experience, at their own pace, based on their individual needs.
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020, which are included herein.
Our financial statements are stated in U.S. Dollars and are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“GAAP”).
Going Concern Qualification
Several conditions and events cast substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred cumulative net losses of approximately $36.5 million since its inception and requires capital for its contemplated operational and marketing activities to take place. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital through the future issuances of common stock is unknown. The obtainment of additional financing, the successful development of the Company’s contemplated plan of operations, and its transition, ultimately, to the attainment of profitable operations are necessary for the Company to continue operations. The ability to successfully resolve these factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
For the Year Ended July 31, 2021 and 2020:
Our operating results for the year ended July 31, 2021 and 2020, and the changes between those periods for the respective items are summarized as follows:
Revenues
We did not earn any revenues during the fiscal years ending July 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We do not anticipate earning significant revenues until such time that we have fully developed our operational strategy and launched sales of our herb dryer product.
Operating Income (Loss)
Our loss from operations decreased by $450,433 during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, from an operating loss of $1,390,410 for the 2020 fiscal year. The following table presents operating expenses for the 2021 and 2020 fiscal years:
We realized a decrease of $61,917 in professional fees during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to 2020 fiscal year, primarily due to a decrease in legal fees. We also realized a decrease of $406,143 in consulting fees during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to the 2020 fiscal year, primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation.
We realized a decrease of $3,744 in depreciation expenses during fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, due to an asset becoming fully depreciated mid-way through the year ended July 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table presents other income and expenses for the fiscal years ended July 31, 2020 and 2021:
Gain/loss on change in derivative liability decreased by $517,578 during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to the 2020 fiscal year, due to the fluctuations in the price of our common stock between reporting periods. Loss on settlement of debts decreased by $165,000 during the year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to 2020 fiscal year, due to more debt settlements in the prior year. Loss on sale of investment decreased by $12,149 during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, compared to the 2020 fiscal year, due to a decrease in the sale of investments in the 2021 year. Interest expense increased by $64,050 during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, as compared to the 2020 fiscal year, due to a default on a loan payable in the 2021 fiscal year.
Net Income (loss)
Net loss increased to $(1,885,445) during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, from a net loss of $(1,931,399) in the 2020 fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based upon our current financial condition, we do not have sufficient cash to operate our business at the current level for the next twelve months. We intend to fund operations through sales of our herb dryer and debt and/or equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund expenditures or other cash requirements. We plan to seek additional financing in a private equity offering to secure funding for operations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional funding. If we are not able to secure additional funding, the implementation of our business plan will be impaired. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Working Capital
The following table presents our working capital position as of July 31, 2021, and July 31, 2020:
The change in working capital during the year ended July 31, 2021, was primarily due to an increase in current assets of $258,307 and an increase in current liabilities of $1,028,474. Current assets increased due to an increase in cash and prepaid expenses as of July 31, 2021. Current liabilities increased due to a default on a convertible note, which resulted in convertible notes payable, net of $561,346, advances from related parties of $96,313, convertible notes payable - related party, net of $200,000, derivative liability of $1,001,213, as compared to convertible notes payable, net of $305,110, advances from related parties of $83,660, convertible notes payable - related party, net of $124,931, derivative liability of $735,496 as of July 31, 2020. Cash increased as of July 31, 2021, by $252,891 to $296,130, primarily caused by the sale of common stock and preferred stock in the fiscal year ending July 31, 2021.
Cash Flow
We fund our operations with cash received from advances from officer’s and related parties, debt, and issuances of equity.
The following tables presents our cash flow for the fiscal years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We did not generate positive cash flows from operating activities for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021.
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, net cash flows used in operating activities consisted of a net loss of $1,885,445, reduced by depreciation of $16,370, stock-based compensation of $115,692, amortization of debt discounts of $277,845, loss on change in derivative liability of $393,718, convertible loan increase due to default of $179,960, and increased by a net increase in change of operating assets and liabilities of $513,383. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2020, net cash flows used in operating activities consisted of a net loss of $1,931,399, reduced by depreciation of $20,114, stock-based compensation of $438,434, amortization of debt discounts of $426,376, offset by a gain on change in derivative liabilities of $136,040, loss on settlement of debts of $165,000, and increased by a net increase in change of operating assets and liabilities of $429,582.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, net cashflows used in investing activities consisted of purchases of silver of $152,785. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2020, no cashflows were used in investing activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, we received $91,081 from loans from related party, we received $506,500 from the sale of common stock, we received $300,000 from the sale of preferred stock, and used $78,428 for net repayments on related party debts and $25,000 for net repayments on convertible notes payable. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2020, we received $163,499 from convertible notes, we received $128,522 from loans from related party, we received $288,014 from loans, and we used $149,081 for net repayments on related party debts and $117,333 for net repayments on notes payable.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
We estimate that our expenses to further implement our plan of operations over the next 12 months, will be approximately $3,810,000 as described in the table below. These estimates may change significantly depending on the nature of our future business activities and our ability to raise capital from shareholders or other sources. We further anticipate incurring additional costs and expenses for accounting, legal, and other miscellaneous fees relating to compliance with SEC requirements and the filing of the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part.
Given that our cash needs are strongly driven by our growth requirements, we also intend to maintain a reserve sum for other risk contingencies that may arise.
We intend to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months through the use of the cash we have on hand and through business operations, future equity financing, debt financing, or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares. We currently do not have any other arrangements in place to complete any private placement financings and there is no assurance that we will be successful in completing any such financings on terms that will be acceptable to us.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material.
Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures.
Principles of Consolidation - The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include estimates used to review the Company’s goodwill, impairments and estimations of long-lived assets, revenue recognition on percentage of completion type contracts, allowances for uncollectible accounts, inventory valuation, and the valuations of non-cash capital stock issuances. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Cash and Cash Equivalents - For purposes of the statement of cash flows, the Company considers all highly liquid investments and short-term instruments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments - The carrying amounts reflected in the balance sheets for cash, accounts payable and accrued expenses approximate the respective fair values due to the short maturities of these items.
As required by the Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures Topic of the FASB ASC, fair value is measured based on a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value as follows: (Level 1) observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets; (Level 2) inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, that are observable either directly or indirectly; and (Level 3) unobservable inputs in which there is little or no market data, which require the reporting entity to develop its own assumptions.
The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are described below:
Level 1: Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities;
Level 2: Quoted prices in markets that are not active, or inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or liability;
Level 3: Prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable (supported by little or no market activity).
Revenue Recognition: We recognize revenue in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as outlined in the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers, which requires that five steps be followed in evaluating revenue recognition: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identity the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price; and (v) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfied a performance obligation.
We did not have a cumulative impact as of January 1, 2018 due to the adoption of Topic 606 and there was not an impact to our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020 as a result of applying Topic 606.
The company has made an accounting policy election to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are collected by the company from its customers (sales and use taxes, value added taxes, some excise taxes).
Product Sales - Revenues from the sale of products are recognized when title to the products are transferred to the customer and only when no further contingencies or material performance obligations are warranted, and thereby have earned the right to receive reasonably assured payments for products sold and delivered.
Costs of Revenue - Costs of revenue includes raw materials, component parts, and shipping supplies. Shipping and handling costs is not a significant portion of the cost of revenue.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets - The Company follows Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (FASB) Codification Topic 350-10 (“ASC 350-10”), “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other.” According to this statement, goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are no longer subject to amortization, but rather an annual assessment of impairment by applying a fair-value based test. Fair value for goodwill is based on discounted cash flows, market multiples and/or appraised values as appropriate. Under ASC 350-10, the carrying value of assets are calculated at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows.
Long-Lived Assets - In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounts Standard Codification (ASC) ASC 360-10, “Property, Plant and Equipment,” the carrying value of intangible assets and other long-lived assets is reviewed on a regular basis for the existence of facts or circumstances that may suggest impairment. The Company recognizes impairment when the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset. Impairment losses, if any, are measured as the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its estimated fair value.
Segment Reporting - Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise for which separate financial information is available and evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, or decision-making group, in deciding the method to allocate resources and assess performance. The Company currently has one reportable segment for financial reporting purposes, which represents the Company’s core business.
Income Taxes - The Company accounts for its income taxes in accordance with FASB Codification Topic ASC 740-10, “Income Taxes”, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Stock-Based Compensation - The Company follows the guidelines in FASB Codification Topic ASC 718-10 “Compensation-Stock Compensation”, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options and employee stock purchases related to an Employee Stock Purchase Plan based on the estimated fair values.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share - The Company reports earnings (loss) per share in accordance with FASB Codification Topic ASC 260-10 “Earnings Per Share.” Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing income (loss) available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares available. Diluted earnings (loss) per share is computed similar to basic earnings (loss) per share except that the denominator is increased to include the number of additional common shares that would have been outstanding if the potential common shares had been issued and if the additional common shares were dilutive. Diluted earnings (loss) per share has not been presented since the effect of the assumed exercise of options and warrants to purchase common shares (common stock equivalents) would have an anti-dilutive effect.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company” under the federal securities laws and will be subject to reduced public company reporting requirements. In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We are choosing to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We do not expect the adoption of any recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our net results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.
Seasonality
We do not expect our sales to be impacted by seasonal demands for our products and services.