ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, Item 6, "Selected Financial Data" and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. The discussions in this section contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in Item 1A, "Risk Factors." Actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Please refer to the section entitled "Forward-Looking Statements."
Overview
For a complete overview of our business, please refer to Item 1. "Business" disclosed within this document.
Recent Developments. The global economy has been negatively impacted by the war between Russia and Ukraine. Furthermore, governments in the United States, Canada, and European Union, among others, have imposed trade controls on certain products and economic sanctions on certain industry sectors and parties in Russia. Further escalation of geopolitical tensions related to the war, including increased trade barriers or restrictions on global trade, could result in, among other things, cyberattacks, supply disruptions, lower customer demand, and changes to foreign exchange rates and financial markets, any of which may adversely affect our business and supply chain. Refer to Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding our risks. Also, we disclose the quantitative risk our exposure to the Ruble could have on our net income in Item 7A, "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in this annual report on Form 10-K.
The Company has paused new investments in and new orders by our Russian affiliate. We will continue to fulfill our existing agreements while remaining in compliance with applicable laws, including applicable sanctions and export controls. We continue to assess the impact on our results of operations, financial position and overall performance as the situation develops and any broader implications it may have on the global economy.
Our Russian affiliate represented approximately 5% of Thermon’s worldwide revenue during fiscal 2022. The carrying value of Thermon’s net assets in Russia was approximately $8.8 million as of March 31, 2022. This consisted of $3.1 million of cash, $1.8 million of accounts receivables, net, $4.5 million of inventories, net, $1.9 million of other current assets, $0.3 million of property, plant, and equipment, net, $0.8 million of other non-current assets, and $3.6 million of current liabilities.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures being taken to address and limit the spread of the virus and its variants have adversely affected the economies and financial markets of many countries, resulting in an economic downturn that negatively impacted, and may impact in the future, global demand for our products and services. Although we believe the general economic environment in which we operate has improved significantly since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience a decline in the demand of our products and services or disruptions in raw materials or labor required for manufacturing that could materially and negatively impact our business, financial condition, results of operation and overall financial performance in future periods. The effect of loosening pandemic restrictions along with pent-up demand from periods of stagnant lockdown and uncertainty has combined to strengthen our customer demand from most regions we serve, especially in our US-LAM and Canada segments.
The Company continues to invest in our three long-term strategic initiatives: diversifying our revenues into adjacent markets as the global economy transitions to a more sustainable energy future, increased investment in developing markets as a response to a growing middle class, and offering technology enabled maintenance solutions that improve our customer’s efficiency and safety. Our efforts to diversify the business's end markets is starting to show early signs of success through increased customer engagement in diversified end markets such as rail and transit, food and beverage, commercial and power. Additionally, we are continuing to receive orders from key customers related to our recently launched Genesis Network technology, which helps our customers more efficiently and safely monitor and maintain their heating systems by utilizing our software, analytics, hardware and process heating maintenance expert services. We are benefiting from the increasing global demand for our solutions, particularly in North America. While we are seeing improvements in many key metrics by which we measure the business, including revenue, we also recognized higher costs in fiscal 2022, due to higher raw material and labor costs due to global supply chain challenges as discussed above.
Revenue. Our revenues are derived from providing customers with a full suite of innovative and reliable process heating solutions, including electric and steam heat tracing, tubing bundles, control systems, design optimization, engineering services, installation services, portable power solutions and software. Additionally, our process heating products offer a complementary suite of advanced heating and filtration solutions for industrial and hazardous area applications. Historically, our sales are primarily to industrial customers for petroleum and chemical plants, gas production facilities and power generation
facilities. While our petroleum customers represent an important portion of our business, we have been successfully broadening our customer base by earning business from numerous other industries, including chemical processing, power generation, transportation, food and beverage, commercial, pharmaceutical, and mineral processing.
Demand for industrial heat tracing solutions falls into two categories: (i) new facility construction, which we refer to as Greenfield projects, and (ii) recurring maintenance, repair and operations and facility upgrades or expansions, which we refer to as MRO/UE. Greenfield construction projects often require comprehensive heat tracing solutions. We believe that Greenfield revenue consists of sales revenue by customer in excess of $1 million annually (excluding sales to resellers), and typically includes most orders for projects related to facilities that are new or that are built independent of existing facilities. We refer to sales revenue by customer of less than $1 million annually, which we believe are typically derived from MRO/UE, as MRO/UE revenue. Based on our experience, we believe that $1 million in annual sales is an appropriate threshold for distinguishing between Greenfield revenue and MRO/UE revenue. However, we often sell our products to intermediaries or subcontract our services; accordingly, we have limited visibility into how our products or services may ultimately be used and can provide no assurance that our categorization may accurately reflect the sources of such revenue. Furthermore, our customers do not typically enter into long-term forward maintenance contracts with us. In any given year, certain of our smaller Greenfield projects may generate less than $1 million in annual sales, and certain of our larger plant expansions or upgrades may generate in excess of $1 million in annual sales, though we believe that such exceptions are few in number and insignificant to interpreting our overall results of operations. THS has been excluded from the Greenfield and MRO/UE calculations. Most of THS's revenue would be classified as MRO/UE under these definitions.
We believe that our pipeline of planned projects, in addition to our backlog of signed purchase orders, provides us with visibility into our future revenue. Historically we have experienced few order cancellations, and the cancellations that have occurred in the past have not been material compared to our total contract volume or total backlog. The small number of order cancellations is attributable in part to the fact that a large portion of our solutions are ordered and installed toward the end of Greenfield project construction. Our backlog at March 31, 2022 was $156.2 million as compared to $114.2 million at March 31, 2021. The timing of recognition of revenue out of backlog is not always certain, as it is subject to a variety of factors that may cause delays, many of which are beyond our control (such as, customers' delivery schedules and levels of capital and maintenance expenditures). When delays occur, the recognition of revenue associated with the delayed project is likewise deferred.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales includes primarily the cost of raw material items used in the manufacture of our products, cost of ancillary products that are sourced from external suppliers and construction labor cost. Additional costs of sales include contract engineering cost directly associated to projects, direct labor cost, shipping and handling costs, and other costs associated with our manufacturing/fabrication operations. The other costs associated with our manufacturing/fabrication operations are primarily indirect production costs, including depreciation, indirect labor costs, warranty-related costs and the costs of manufacturing support functions such as logistics and quality assurance. Key raw material costs include polymers, copper, stainless steel, insulating material, electronic components and other miscellaneous parts related to products manufactured or assembled. Raw material costs have been stable in the past; however, we are experiencing temporary shortages related to the global supply chain issues driven by the COVID-19 pandemic in certain raw materials as well as an increase in costs of these materials due to: use of alternate suppliers, higher freight costs, increased lead times, expedited shipping and other inflationary factors. Also, we have seen labor inefficiencies and increased overtime in certain of our facilities due to temporary shortages in raw materials required for production, as well as time and attendance issues and labor shortages in certain of our facilities. We cannot provide any assurance that we will continue to be able to mitigate temporary raw material shortages or be able to pass along such cost increases, including the potential impacts of tariffs, to our customers in the future, and if we are unable to do so, our results of operations may be adversely affected.
Operating expenses. Our selling, general, and administrative expenses are primarily comprised of compensation and related costs for sales, marketing, pre-sales engineering and administrative personnel, as well as other sales related expenses and other costs related to research and development, insurance, professional fees, the global integrated business information system, and provisions for bad debts.
Key drivers affecting our results of operations. Our results of operations and financial condition are affected by numerous factors, including those described above under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this annual report and those described below:
Timing of Greenfield projects. Our results of operations in recent years have been impacted by the various construction phases of large Greenfield projects. On large projects, we are typically designated as the heat tracing provider of choice by the project owner. We then engage with multiple contractors to address incorporating various heat tracing solutions throughout the overall project. Our largest Greenfield projects may generate revenue for more than one year. In the early stages of a Greenfield project, our revenues are typically realized from the provision of engineering services. In the middle stages, or the material requirements phase, we typically experience the greatest demand for our heat tracing cable, at which point our revenues tend to accelerate.
Revenues tend to decrease gradually in the final stages of a project and are generally derived from installation services and demand for electrical panels and other miscellaneous electronic components used in the final installation of heat tracing cable, which we frequently outsource from third-party manufacturers. Therefore, we typically provide a mix of products and services during each phase of a Greenfield project, and our margins fluctuate accordingly.
Cyclicality of end-users' markets. Demand for our products and services depends in large part upon the level of capital and maintenance expenditures of our customers and end-users, in particular those in the energy, chemical processing and power generation industries, and firms that design and construct facilities for these industries. These customers' expenditures historically have been cyclical in nature and vulnerable to economic downturns. Greenfield projects, and especially large Greenfield projects (i.e., new facility construction projects generating in excess of $5 million in annual sales), historically have been a substantial source of revenue growth, and Greenfield revenues tend to be more cyclical than MRO/UE revenues. A sustained decrease in capital and maintenance spending or in new facility construction by our customers could have a material adverse effect on the demand for our products and services and our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Acquisition strategy. In recent years, we have begun executing on a strategy to grow the Company through the acquisition of businesses that are either in the process heating solutions industry or that provide complementary products and solutions for the markets and customers we serve. We actively pursue both organic and inorganic growth initiatives that serve to advance our corporate strategy.
Impact of product mix. Typically, both Greenfield and MRO/UE customers require our products as well as our engineering and construction services. The level of service and construction needs will affect the profit margin for each type of revenue. We tend to experience lower margins from our design optimization, engineering, installation and maintenance services than we do from sales of our heating units, heating cable, tubing bundle and control system products. We also tend to experience lower margins from our outsourced products, such as electrical switch gears and transformers, than we do from our manufactured products. Accordingly, our results of operations are impacted by our mix of products and services.
We estimate that Greenfield and MRO/UE have each made the following contribution as a percentage of revenue in the periods listed:
*THS has been excluded from the table above. Most of THS's revenue would be classified as MRO/UE under the current definitions.
Greenfield revenue is an indicator of both our ability to successfully compete for new contracts as well as the economic health of the industries we serve. Furthermore, Greenfield revenue is an indicator of potential MRO/UE revenue in future years.
For MRO/UE orders, the sale of our manufactured products typically represents a higher proportion of the overall revenue associated with such order than the provision of our services. Greenfield projects, on the other hand, require a higher level of our services than MRO/UE orders, and often require us to purchase materials from third party vendors. Therefore, we typically realize higher margins from MRO/UE revenues than Greenfield revenues.
Large and growing installed base. Customers typically use the incumbent heat tracing provider for MRO/UE projects to avoid complications and compatibility problems associated with switching providers. Therefore, with the significant Greenfield activity we have experienced in recent years, our installed base has continued to grow, and we expect that such installed base will continue to generate ongoing high margin MRO/UE revenue. For fiscal 2022, MRO/UE sales comprised approximately 62% of our consolidated revenues (excluding THS).
Seasonality of MRO/UE revenues. MRO/UE revenues for the heat tracing business are typically highest during the second and third fiscal quarters, as most of our customers perform preventative maintenance prior to the winter season. However, revenues from Greenfield projects are not seasonal and depend on the capital spending environment and project timing.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth data from our statements of operations for the periods indicated.
Year Ended March 31, 2022 ("fiscal 2022") Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021")
Revenue. Revenues for fiscal 2022 were $355.7 million compared to $276.2 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in revenue is due to strong demand in our US-LAM and Canada segments, which led the first stages of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. In fiscal 2022, we recognized revenue from several large, one-time projects that contributed significantly to our growth. Revenue increased $58.7 million, or 61.6%, in our US-LAM segment, $24.6 million, or 27.1%, in our Canada segment, and $0.5 million, or 1.0%, in our EMEA segment. We experienced a slower recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including lockdowns and other restrictions, in our APAC segment, which led to a $4.4 million, or 12.2%, decrease.
Sales related to our products ("point-in-time") grew $53.0 million and sales of projects ("over time") grew $26.5 million compared to fiscal 2021. Our sales mix (excluding THS) in fiscal 2022 was 38% Greenfield and 62% MRO/UE compared to 35% Greenfield and 65% MRO/UE in fiscal 2021.
Gross profit. Gross profit in fiscal 2022 totaled $140.1 million compared to $116.9 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in gross profit was driven by higher revenue for the year. Gross margins were 39.4% in fiscal 2022 compared to 42.3% in fiscal 2021. The lower gross margin in fiscal 2022 is primarily attributable to higher project costs, including the impacts of a large, one-time project, as well as additional warranty costs associated with the operational execution of a large project, both of which are reported in our US-LAM segment.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") were $93.1 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $89.8 million in fiscal 2021. The primary drivers in the increase in SG&A is attributable to higher incentive compensation for our employees and higher sales commissions commensurate with the increase in revenue and profitability. SG&A as a percentage of sales has decreased significantly to 26.2% in fiscal 2022 from 32.5% in fiscal 2021. The
decrease is due to the fixed nature of SG&A in a year with higher sales, but also due to the Company’s efforts to reduce its cost structure in light of the global pandemic.
Amortization of intangible assets. Amortization of intangible assets was $8.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $9.4 million fiscal 2021. The decrease of amortization is due to certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized in fiscal 2021, partially offset by foreign exchange impacts.
Deferred compensation plan expense/(income). Deferred compensation plan expense/(income) was $0.3 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $1.6 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease is primarily attributable to market fluctuations in the underlying balances owed to employees. This compensation plan expense/(income) is materially offset in other income/(expense) where the Company records market gains/(losses) on related investment assets.
Restructuring and other charges/(income). Restructuring and other charges/(income) was $(0.4) million in fiscal 2022 compared to $8.6 million in fiscal 2021. The Company implemented certain restructuring activities in fiscal 2021 not present in fiscal 2022. Refer to Note 14, "Restructuring and other charges/(income)" for additional details.
Interest expense, net. The decrease in interest expense is due to a lower average interest rate during fiscal 2022 than fiscal 2021 as well as a lower average outstanding balance. Our average outstanding principal balance during fiscal 2022 was lower at $138.8 million versus $162.3 million during fiscal 2021. See Note11, "Long-Term Debt," for additional information on our long-term debt.
Other income/(expense). Other income/(expense) was $(4.2) million and $2.1 million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. The increase primarily relates to our debt extinguishment charges of $2.6 million in fiscal 2022, as we completed refinancing of our senior secured credit facility, as well as an increase in foreign exchange losses of $2.2 million. See Note 11, "Long-Term Debt," for additional information on our long-term debt and the refinancing of our senior secured credit facility. The remaining variance is attributable to relatively lower gains on the Company's non-qualified deferred compensation plan in fiscal 2022 than in the prior year due to market fluctuations. These gains are offset by deferred compensation plan expense as noted above.
Income taxes. Income tax expense/(benefit) was $8.3 million or 29.3% on pretax income of $28.4 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to an income tax benefit of $(1.5) million on a pretax loss of $(0.6) million in fiscal 2021. Our fiscal 2022 effective tax rate of 29.3% was within our expected range of combined tax expense for the United States and foreign subsidiaries in which we operate. The benefit in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a pre-tax loss and the impact from the Global Intangible Low-Taxes Income (or “GILTI Tax”) in the U.S. During fiscal 2021, tax law changes provided a $1.9 million recovery of previously incurred GILTI Tax expense.
See Note 18, “Income Taxes,” to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for further detail on income taxes.
Net income/(loss). Net income/(loss) was $20.1 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $0.9 million in fiscal 2021. The change in net income/(loss) is explained by the changes noted in the sections above.
Year Ended March 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021") Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2020 ("fiscal 2020")
See Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 filed with the SEC on May 27, 2021 for a discussion of the results of operations in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Contingencies
We are involved in various legal and administrative proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of doing business. Some of these proceedings may result in fines, penalties or judgments being assessed against us, which may adversely affect our financial results. In addition, from time to time, we are involved in various disputes, which may or may not be settled prior to legal proceedings being instituted and which may result in losses in excess of accrued liabilities, if any, relating to such unresolved disputes. As of March 31, 2022, management believes that adequate reserves have been established for any probable and reasonably estimable losses. Expenses related to litigation reduce operating income. We do not believe that the outcome of any of these proceedings or disputes would have a significant adverse effect on our financial position, long-term results of operations, or cash flows. It is possible, however, that charges related to these matters could be significant to our results of operations or cash flows in any one accounting period.
For information on legal proceedings, see Note 15, "Commitments and Contingencies" to our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this annual report, which is hereby incorporated by reference into this Item 7.
To bid on or secure certain contracts, we are required at times to provide a performance guaranty to our customers in the form of a surety bond, standby letter of credit or foreign bank guaranty. On March 31, 2022, we had in place standby letters of credit, bank guarantees and performance bonds totaling $9.8 million to back our various customer contracts. In addition, our
Indian subsidiary also has $4.8 million in customs bonds outstanding. Refer to Note 15, "Commitments and Contingencies" for more information on our letters of credit and bank guarantees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations and funds available under our revolving credit facility. Our primary liquidity needs are to finance our working capital, capital expenditures, debt service needs and potential future acquisitions.
Cash and cash equivalents. At March 31, 2022, we had $41.4 million in cash and cash equivalents. We manage our global cash requirements by maintaining cash and cash equivalents at various financial institutions throughout the world where we operate. Approximately $15.3 million, or 37%, of these amounts were held in domestic accounts with various institutions and approximately $26.1 million, or 63%, of these amounts were held in accounts outside of the United States with various financial institutions. Of the non-U.S. cash noted above, $3.1 million of cash was held by our Russian affiliate. While we have cash needs at our various foreign operations, excess cash is available for distribution to the United States through intercompany dividends or debt reduction in Canada.
Generally, we seek to maintain a cash and cash equivalents balance between $30.0 and $40.0 million. We will encounter periods where we may be above or below this range, due to, for example, inventory buildup for anticipated seasonal demand in fall and winter months, related cash receipts from credit sales in months that follow, debt maturities, restructuring activities, larger capital investments, severe and/or protracted economic downturns, acquisitions, or some combination of the above activities. The Company continues to manage its working capital requirements effectively through optimizing inventory levels, doing business with credit-worthy customers, and extending payments terms with its supplier base.
Senior secured credit facility
On September 29, 2021, Thermon Group Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”), as a credit party and a guarantor, Thermon Holding Corp. (“THC” or the “U.S. Borrower”) and Thermon Canada Inc. (the “Canadian Borrower” and together with THC, the “Borrowers”), as borrowers, entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with several banks and other financial institutions or entities from time to time (the “Lenders”) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent (the “Agent”).
The Credit Agreement is an amendment and restatement of that certain Credit Agreement dated October 30, 2017 by and among Borrowers, the lenders time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as administrative agent (the “Prior Credit Agreement”), and provides for the credit facilities.
See Note 11, “Long-Term Debt-Senior Secured Credit Facility” to our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included in Item 8 of this annual report for additional information on our senior secured term loan and revolving credit facilities, which is hereby incorporated by reference into this Item 7. At March 31, 2022, we had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility and $97.1 million of available capacity thereunder, after taking into account the borrowing base and letters of credit outstanding, which totaled $2.9 million. From time to time, we may choose to utilize our revolving credit facility to fund operations, acquisitions or other investments, despite having cash available within our consolidated group in light of the cost, timing and other business considerations.
As of March 31, 2022, we had $129.0 million of outstanding principal on our term loan A facility. Commencing January 1, 2022, each of the Term Loans will amortize as set forth in the table below, with payments on the first day of each January, April, July and October, with the balance of each Term Loan Facility due at maturity.
Future capital requirements
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors as noted throughout this report. We believe that, based on our current level of operations and related cash flows, plus cash on hand and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility, we will be able to meet our liquidity needs for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
For fiscal 2023, we expect our capital expenditures to approximate 3.0% to 3.5% of revenue. Additionally, we will be required to pay $7.9 million in principal payments and approximately $2.8 million in interest payments on our long-term debt in the next 12 months. Our estimate of interest expense above was derived from our variable interest rates at March 31, 2022, and
is subject to change. See further details Note 11, "Long-Term Debt." We also have payment commitments of $3.7 million, mostly related to long-term information technology contracts, of which $2.1 million are due within the next 12 months.
Strategic Investments
Our long-term plan includes investments in three key areas as we look to profitably grow the Company beyond its existing installed base.
First, we expect to diversify our revenues into adjacent markets like commercial, food & beverage, transportation and other non-oil and gas industries where we can continue to differentiate our offerings through quality, safety and customer service, while also aligning Thermon’s strategy around the energy transition toward a more sustainable global economy.
Second, we expect higher levels of investment in the emerging markets over the coming decades to meet the needs of a larger middle class and will be investing in resources to more quickly respond to the unique needs of those local markets.
Finally, we will continue expanding our technology enabled maintenance solutions, like our recently launched Genesis Network, which helps our customers more efficiently and safely monitor and maintain their heating systems by utilizing our software, analytics, hardware and process heating maintenance expert services.
These three initiatives will require incremental investments, both organic and inorganic, over a multi-year period, but we expect will result in a more diversified, sustainable and profitable company over time.
Year Ended March 31, 2022 ("fiscal 2022") Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021")
Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $1.5 million in fiscal 2022. The decrease is mostly attributable to the use of cash to fund net working capital accounts of $21.0 million, partially offset by a change in non-cash items and increase in net income totaling $19.5 million. Our net working capital position changed as a result of an overall increase in sales activity in fiscal 2022, which drove an increase in accounts receivable versus a large decline in accounts receivable in fiscal 2021, when sales were not trending positively.
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $(4.5) million in fiscal 2022 and $(7.8) million in fiscal 2021 and relates to the purchase of capital assets, primarily to maintain the existing operations of the business and includes purchases and sales of equipment in our rental business.
Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities totaled $(22.7) million and $(28.2) million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively, a comparative decrease in the use of cash in financing activities of $5.5 million, mostly attributable to higher principal and revolver payments in fiscal 2021.
Free Cash Flow (Non-GAAP)
In addition to evaluating our cash flow generation based upon operating, investing, and financing activities, the Company believes that the non-GAAP measure used in this section may provide investors and key stakeholders with another important perspective regarding our performance. The Company does not intend for this non-GAAP metric to be a substitute for the related GAAP measure, nor should it be viewed in isolation and without considering all relevant GAAP measurements. Moreover, our calculation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Refer to the reconciliation of cash provided by/(used in) operating activities to Free Cash Flow under "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below.
We define “Free Cash Flow” as net cash provided by operating activities less cash used for the purchase of property, plant, and equipment, net of sales of rental equipment as well as proceeds from sales of land and buildings. This metric should not be interpreted to mean the remaining cash that is available for discretionary spending, dividends, share repurchases, acquisitions, or other purposes, as it excludes significant, mandatory obligations, such as principal payments on the Company’s long-term debt facility. Free cash flow is one measure that the Company uses internally to assess liquidity.
Free Cash Flow totaled $24.2 million for fiscal 2022 as compared to $22.5 million for fiscal 2021, an increase comparatively, primarily due to higher cash flows from operations as well as reduced purchases on property, plant and
equipment. Free Cash Flow for fiscal 2020 was $60.7 million driven primarily by strong cash flows from operating activities, which occurred prior to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended March 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021") Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2020 ("fiscal 2020")
See Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 filed with the SEC on May 27, 2021 for a discussion of net cash provided by operating activities, net cash used in investing activities and net cash provided by (used in) financing activities in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements. In addition, we do not have any interest in entities referred to as variable interest entities, which include special purpose entities and other structured finance entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our financial statements and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Our most significant financial statement estimates include revenue recognition, estimating allowances, specifically the allowance for doubtful accounts and the adjustment for excess and obsolete inventories, valuation of long-lived assets, goodwill, and other intangible assets, accounting for income taxes, loss contingencies, and stock-based compensation expense.
Although these estimates are based on management's best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact the company in the future, actual results may be materially different from the estimates.
Revenue recognition. Please refer to Note 4. "Revenue from Contracts with Customers" of our consolidated financial statements included below in Item 8 of this annual report for further discussion.
Estimating allowances, specifically the allowance for doubtful accounts and the adjustment for excess and obsolete inventories. The Company's receivables are recorded at cost when earned and represent claims against third parties that will be settled in cash. The carrying value of the Company's receivables, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, represents their estimated net realizable value. If events or changes in circumstances indicate specific receivable balances may be impaired, further consideration is given to the Company's ability to collect those balances and the allowance is adjusted accordingly. The Company has established an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon an analysis of aged receivables. Past-due receivable balances are written-off when the Company's internal collection efforts have been unsuccessful in collecting the amounts due.
The major end markets that drive demand for process heating include chemical and petrochemical, up-, mid- and downstream oil, gas, power generation, commercial, and rail and transit. From time to time, the Company has experienced significant credit losses with respect to individual customers; however, historically, these credit losses have been isolated to specific customers rather than across an industry and have been infrequent. The Company's foreign receivables are not concentrated within any one geographic segment nor are they subject to any current economic conditions that would subject the Company to unusual risk. The Company does not generally require collateral or other security from customers.
We perform credit evaluations of new customers and sometimes require deposits, prepayments or use of trade letters of credit to mitigate our credit risk. Allowance for doubtful account balances were $2.2 million and $2.1 million as of March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Although we have fully provided for these balances, we continue to pursue collection of these receivables.
We write down our inventory for estimated excess or obsolete inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and estimated net realizable value based on assumptions of future demand and market conditions. Net realizable value is determined quarterly by comparing inventory levels of individual products and components to historical usage rates, current backlog and estimated future sales and by analyzing the age and potential applications of inventory, in order to identify specific products and components of inventory that are judged unlikely to be sold. Our finished goods inventory consists primarily of completed electrical cable that has been manufactured for various heat tracing solutions. Most of our manufactured product offerings are built to industry standard specifications that have general purpose applications and therefore are sold to a variety of customers in various industries. Some of our products, such as custom orders and ancillary components outsourced from third-party manufacturers, have more specific applications and therefore may be at a higher risk of inventory obsolescence. Inventory is written-off in the period in which the disposal occurs. Actual future write-offs of inventory for salability and obsolescence reasons may differ from estimates and calculations used to determine valuation allowances due to changes in customer demand, customer negotiations, product application, technology shifts and other factors. Our allowance for excess and obsolete inventories was $1.8 million and $1.8 million at March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Historically,
inventory obsolescence and potential excess cost adjustments have been within our expectations, and management does not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in future estimates or assumptions used to calculate the inventory valuation reserves.
Significant judgments and estimates must be made and used in connection with establishing these allowances. If our assumptions used to calculate these allowances do not agree with our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, or the actual demand for our inventory, additional provisions may be needed and our future results of operations could be adversely affected.
Valuation of long-lived, goodwill and other intangible assets. Refer to Note 1, "Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of our consolidated financial statements included below in Item 8 of this annual report for further discussion. We determined that there was no impairment related to our goodwill, intangible assets, or long-lived assets during fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020.
Accounting for income taxes. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. Variations in the actual outcome of these future tax consequences could materially impact our financial position, results of operations or effective tax rate.
Significant judgment is required in determining our worldwide income tax provision. In the ordinary course of a global business, there are many transactions and calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Some of these uncertainties arise as a consequence of revenue sharing and cost reimbursement arrangements among related entities, the process of identifying items of revenue and expense that qualify for preferential tax treatment, and segregation of foreign and domestic earnings and expenses to avoid double taxation. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable, the final tax outcome of these matters could be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. Such differences could have a material effect on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
In estimating future tax consequences, all expected future events are considered other than enactments of changes in tax laws or rates. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to amounts which are more likely than not to be realized. We consider future growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate, historical earnings, taxable income in prior years, if carryback is permitted under the law, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period in which we make such a determination, or goodwill would be adjusted at our final determination of the valuation allowance related to an acquisition within the measurement period. If we later determine that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets would be realized, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance as an adjustment to earnings at such time. The amount of income tax we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Our estimate of the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue is highly judgmental. We account for these uncertain tax issues pursuant to ASC 740, Income Taxes, which contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. Although we believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given with respect to the final outcome of these matters. We adjust reserves for our uncertain tax positions due to changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit, judicial rulings, refinement of estimates or realization of earnings or deductions that differ from our estimates. To the extent that the final outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences generally will impact our provision for income taxes in the period in which such a determination is made. Our provisions for income taxes include the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate and also include the related interest and penalties.
We expect to repatriate certain foreign earnings from jurisdictions that are subject to withholding taxes. These additional withholding taxes are being recorded as an additional deferred tax liability associated with the basis difference in such jurisdictions.
Loss contingencies. We accrue for probable losses from contingencies on an undiscounted basis, when such costs are considered probable of being incurred and are reasonably estimable. We periodically evaluate available information, both internal and external, relative to such contingencies and adjust this accrual as necessary. Disclosure of a contingency is required if there is at least a reasonable possibility that a loss has been incurred. In determining whether a loss should be accrued we
evaluate, among other factors, the degree of probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss.
Stock-based compensation expense. We account for share-based payments to employees in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires that share-based payments (to the extent they are compensatory) be recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income/(loss) based on their fair values.
As required by ASC 718, we recognize stock-based compensation expense for share-based payments that are expected to vest. In determining whether an award is expected to vest, we account for forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimate expected forfeitures.
We are also required to determine the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date. For option awards that are subject to service conditions and/or performance conditions, we estimate the fair values of employee stock options using a Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. Some of our option grants and awards included a market condition for which we used a Monte Carlo pricing model to establish grant date fair value. These determinations require judgment, including estimating expected volatility. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense and our results of operations could be impacted.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Disclosure in this annual report of "Adjusted EPS," "Adjusted EBITDA," "Adjusted Net Income," and "Free Cash Flow," which are "non-GAAP financial measures" as defined under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC"), are intended as supplemental measures of our financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). "Adjusted Net Income" and "Adjusted fully diluted earnings per share" ("Adjusted EPS") represents net income attributable to Thermon before costs related to acceleration of unamortized debt costs, the tax benefit from income tax rate reductions in certain foreign jurisdictions, amortization of intangible assets, the income tax effect on any non-tax adjustments, costs associated with our restructuring and other income/(charges), and income related to the Canadian Emergency Wage Subsidy, per fully-diluted common share in the case of Adjusted EPS. "Adjusted EBITDA" represents net income attributable to Thermon before interest expense (net of interest income), income tax expense, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, income attributable to non-controlling interests, costs associated with our restructuring and other income/(charges), and income related to the Canadian Emergency Wage Subsidy. "Free cash flow" represents cash provided by operating activities less cash used for the purchase of property, plant and equipment, net of sales of rental equipment and proceeds from sales of land and buildings.
We believe these non-GAAP financial measures are meaningful to our investors to enhance their understanding of our financial performance and are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to compare our performance with the performance of other companies that report Adjusted EPS, Adjusted EBITDA, or Adjusted Net Income. Adjusted EPS, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted Net Income should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, income from operations, net income, net income per share, and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. We provide Free Cash Flow as a measure of our liquidity. Note that our calculation of Adjusted EPS, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, and Free Cash Flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS for the periods presented:
The following table reconciles cash provided by/(used in) operating activities to Free Cash Flow: