ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on improving the lives of cancer patients through the discovery, development and commercialization of transformative targeted therapies. Our development programs are designed to address drug resistance mutations in key driver oncogenes, which are mutated genes that cause cancer. Resistance mutations limit the efficacy of existing targeted therapies by rendering tumor cells unresponsive to drugs, and therefore present a critical challenge in cancer treatment today. Our initial focus is on developing the next generation of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, or TKIs, and is rooted in the critical role that tyrosine kinases play in the development of cancer. Despite the commercial success of approved TKIs, the development of drug resistance is a persistent limitation, narrowing the number of effective treatment options available to patients as they progress through subsequent lines of therapy.
Our goal is to develop “pan-variant” kinase inhibitors-inhibitors that target all major cancer causing and drug resistance mutations in clinically significant protein kinases. We believe that truly pan-variant inhibitors are required to effectively inhibit the heterogeneous mix of resistance mutations found in patients, and may also suppress the emergence of new mutations when used in earlier lines of therapy. To develop such inhibitors, we deploy our novel predictive resistance assay, or PRA, a highly differentiated cell-based method for testing TKIs that we believe is predictive for “pan-ness.”
Our lead product candidate, THE-630, is a pan-variant inhibitor of all major classes of activating and resistance mutations of the KIT kinase, or a pan-KIT inhibitor, for the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, or GIST, a type of cancer most often characterized by oncogenic activation of KIT. THE-630 is derived from intellectual property exclusively licensed to us by ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or ARIAD. In January 2022, we announced that we had commenced dosing patients in a phase 1/2 dose escalation and dose expansion clinical trial for the evaluation of THE-630 in patients with advanced GIST whose disease has developed resistance to prior KIT-targeting therapies. We expect to present initial data from the Phase 1 portion of the clinical trial in the first half of 2023. The FDA has granted orphan drug designation to THE-630 for the treatment of GIST.
Our second program is focused on next-generation inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor, or EGFR, that are active against C797S, the most common EGFR mutation that causes resistance to first- or later-line osimertinib treatment in patients with non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC. We have developed a series of fourth-generation EGFR inhibitors designed to inhibit the full range of single-, double- and triple-mutant variants found in the tumors of patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC that have developed resistance to osimertinib in first- or later-line therapy, including the C797S mutation. We intend to nominate a development candidate from our EGFR inhibitor program in the third quarter of 2022, and thereafter initiate IND-enabling studies.
In addition, we are evaluating several potential targets and intend to select one or more as our next program(s) in 2022.
Since our inception in December 2017, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and performing research and development activities, including with respect to our pan-KIT inhibitor and our epidermal growth factor receptor, or EGFR, inhibitor development programs. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of approximately $282.1 million of our Preferred Stock and common stock, including the net proceeds from the underwriters’ partial exercise of their option to purchase additional shares in our IPO. Upon the closing of the IPO, each outstanding share of our Preferred Stock automatically converted into one share of common stock.
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more product candidates. Our net losses for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $27.3 million and $12.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $61.6 million. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
● advance the clinical development of THE-630;
● advance our fourth-generation EGFR inhibitor program and other compounds we may develop in the future from discovery through preclinical development and clinical trials;
● seek marketing approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● obtain, expand, maintain, defend and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, regulatory and scientific personnel;
● ultimately establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● establish agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs; and
● add operational, legal, compliance, financial and management information systems and personnel to support our research, product development and future commercialization efforts, as well as to support our operations as a public company.
Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of expenditures related to our research and development activities.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for a product candidate and do not enter into a third-party commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution activities.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect
to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, which could include collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed, on favorable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition, including requiring us to have to delay, reduce or eliminate product development or future commercialization efforts.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with development of targeted oncology therapies, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $244.7 million. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital expenses into the second half of 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See section titled “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, and we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and development timelines and plans remains uncertain, and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and its impact on our CMOs, CROs, and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. To the extent possible, we are conducting business as usual. We will continue to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. At this point, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and development timelines and plans, including the resulting impact on our expenditures and capital needs, remains uncertain and is subject to change.
Initial Public Offering
On October 6, 2021, our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-259549) relating to our IPO was declared effective by the SEC, and we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-1 MEF (File No. 333-260102) pursuant to Rule 462(b) of the Securities Act. Pursuant to the Registration Statements and in connection with the IPO, we issued and sold an aggregate of 11,172,190 shares of common stock (inclusive of 1,171,990 shares pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $16.00 per share for aggregate cash proceeds of $162.5 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs payable by us. Upon closing the IPO, all outstanding shares of our Preferred Stock automatically converted into an aggregate of 25,475,905 shares of common stock.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products or from other sources in the near future, if at all. If our development efforts for our current product candidate, THE-630, or additional product candidates that we may develop in the future are successful and result in marketing approval or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third
parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from such collaboration or license agreements.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses and consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the discovery and preclinical development of our potential development candidates, and include:
● salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related costs for individuals involved in research and development activities;
● external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and consultants that conduct our preclinical studies and other scientific development services;
● costs incurred under agreements with CMOs for manufacturing material for our preclinical studies and planned clinical trials; and
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors or our estimate of the level of service that has been performed at each reporting date. Payments for these external development activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized, even when there is no alternative future use for the research and development. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external costs, which we track after a clinical product candidate has been identified. We utilize third party contractors for our research and development activities and CMOs for our manufacturing activities and we do not have our own laboratory or manufacturing facilities. Therefore, we have no material facilities expenses attributed to research and development. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs and other indirect costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we advance a clinical trial for our product candidate, THE-630, and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates, expand our headcount and maintain, expand and enforce our intellectual property portfolio. If any product candidates enter into later stages of clinical development, they will generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. There are numerous factors associated with the successful development and commercialization of any product candidates we may develop in the future, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development program and plans.
The successful development of our current product candidate, THE-630, or any product candidates we may develop in the future is highly uncertain. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development and commercialization
of THE-630 and any other product candidates we may develop. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from the sale of any current or future product candidate, if approved. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, including the uncertainty of:
● the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and to establish new programs;
● successful patient enrollment in, and the initiation and completion of, clinical trials;
● the successful completion of clinical trials with safety, tolerability and efficacy profiles that are satisfactory to the FDA or any comparable foreign regulatory authority;
● the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements;
● the performance of our future collaborators, if any;
● our ability to establish arrangements with third-party manufacturers for the commercial supply of products that receive marketing approval, if any;
● development and timely delivery of commercial-grade drug formulations that can be used in our planned clinical trials and for commercialization;
● obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● commercializing product candidates, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the product candidates following approval.
Any changes in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of THE-630 or any future product candidates in preclinical and clinical development could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of these product candidates. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to delay our planned start of clinical trials or require us to conduct clinical trials or other testing beyond those that we currently expect, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any clinical trials following the FDA’s acceptance and clearance of an IND application, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time to complete clinical development than we currently expect. We may never obtain regulatory approval for any product candidates that we develop.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expenses for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, human resources and other administrative functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include legal fees relating to patent, intellectual property and corporate matters, and fees paid for accounting, consulting and other professional services, and expenses for rent, insurance and other operating costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as our business expands to support our continued research and development activities, including any future clinical trials. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, among other expenses. We also anticipate increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs for audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, listing standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for our current product candidate or any product candidates we may develop in the future and do not enter into a third-party commercialization collaboration, we expect to incur significant expenses related to building a sales and marketing team to support product sales, marketing and distribution activities.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Change in Fair Value of Preferred Stock Tranche Rights and Anti-dilution Right
Total other income (expense), net includes fluctuations in the fair value of our Preferred Stock tranche rights and our anti-dilution right. The Preferred Stock tranche rights, or the Tranche Rights, relate to our obligation to issue, and investors’ obligation to purchase in three subsequent tranches, additional shares of our Series A Preferred Stock following the initial closing of our Series A Preferred Stock financing in June 2018. We issued shares of our Series A Preferred Stock in January 2020 and July 2020 pursuant to these rights. The final tranche was cancelled in December 2020 upon termination of the purchase agreement entered into in connection with the purchase and sale of the Series A Preferred Stock (as amended and restated), or the Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement. The Tranche Rights were classified as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet and initially recorded at fair value. The Tranche Rights were subsequently revalued until the tranches were settled, with changes in fair value for each reporting period recognized in other income (expense), net. Upon the purchase of the Tranche Right shares, the fair value of the related Tranche Right was recognized as Series A Preferred Stock. This obligation was fully satisfied in December 2020 when the Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement was terminated.
The anti-dilution right, or Anti-dilution Right, relates to our obligation to issue additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock to ARIAD for no consideration upon the achievement of certain milestones set forth in the Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement. In accordance with the Anti-dilution Right, we issued ARIAD additional shares of Series A Preferred Stock in January 2020 and July 2020. We determined that the Anti-dilution Right was a freestanding financial instrument, and it was classified as an asset or liability on our consolidated balance sheets and initially recorded at fair value. The Anti-dilution Right was subsequently revalued until anti-dilution shares were issued or the Anti-dilution Right was terminated, with changes in fair value for each reporting period recognized in other income (expense), net. Upon issuance of the Anti-dilution shares, the fair value of the Anti-dilution Right was recognized as Series A Preferred Stock. This Anti-dilution Right was fully satisfied as of the termination of the Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement in December 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income, which is earned on cash equivalents that generate interest on a monthly basis, and state and franchise taxes.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to the following:
● a $7.2 million increase in costs related to the clinical and preclinical development of THE-630 as it progressed into the GLP toxicology phase; and
● a $5.1 million increase in salaries and other unallocated expenses, including an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.4 million and an increase in salary and benefit related expense of $2.3 million, primarily due to an increase in headcount. The remaining increase of $1.4 million in unallocated expenses is primarily due to advancement of our ongoing discovery efforts, facilities, and other variable costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses were $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to the following:
● a $4.3 million increase in personnel costs, including an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.9 million, an increase in salary and benefit related expense of $1.7 million, and an increase in recruiting expense of $0.9 million, primarily due to an increase in headcount;
● a $2.1 million increase in professional fees, including legal and audit expenses, primarily attributable to operating as a public company; and
● a $1.6 million increase in other expenses, including insurance and other variable costs related to operating as a public company.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Total other income (expense), net was $28,000 as of December 31, 2021, which consisted primarily of interest income. As of December 31, 2020, we recognized total other income (expense), net of $5.2 million. The decrease was almost entirely due to the remeasurement of the Tranche Rights and the Anti-dilution Right during the year ended December 31, 2020, prior to the settlement of the rights through the issuance of the related Series A Preferred Stock and the termination of the Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have incurred significant losses in each period and on an aggregate basis. We have not yet commercialized any product candidates, and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates or from other sources for several years, if at all. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $245.0 million.
We have funded our operations primarily with aggregate net proceeds of approximately $282.1 million from sales of our Preferred Stock and common stock, including the net proceeds received from the underwriters’ partial exercise of their over-allotment option.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $27.2 million, primarily due to our net loss of $27.3 million and uses of cash for prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.2 million and other assets of $2.5 million, partially offset by $4.4 million of stock-based compensation expense, and a $1.6 million change in accrued expenses and other current liabilities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $4.9 million, primarily due to our net loss of $12.0 million, partially offset by the $4.0 million increase in the fair value of the Tranche Rights, the $1.2 million increase in fair value of the Anti-dilution Right and stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing was $263.8 million, resulting from proceeds of $99.9 million received from the issuance and sale of shares of our Series B Preferred Stock, net of issuance costs, $1.4 million in proceeds from the early exercise of stock options, and net proceeds of $162.5 million received in connection with the IPO.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing was $12.0 million, resulting entirely from proceeds received from the issuance and sale of shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, net of issuance costs.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing research and development activities, particularly as we continue research and development and advance THE 630 into a clinical trial and advance the preclinical development of our other programs. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company including increased costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs and investor and public relations costs. As a result, we expect to incur substantial operating losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $244.7 million as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital expenses into the second half of 2024. However, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital
requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on, and could increase significantly as a result of, many factors, including:
● the scope, rate of progress, success and costs of our drug discovery, preclinical development activities, laboratory testing and clinical trials for product candidates;
● the number and scope of clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● the scope and costs of manufacturing development and commercial manufacturing activities for product candidates, if approved;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● the timing and amount of any payments required to be made under the agreements governing acquired or in-licensed product candidates or technologies;
● the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of product candidates;
● the cost and timing of establishing sales and marketing capabilities, if any product candidate receives marketing approval;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or other external disruptions on our business, results of operations and financial position;
● our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of product candidates;
● the costs associated with being a public company; and
● the cost associated with commercializing product candidates, if they receive marketing approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of our pan-KIT or EGFR inhibitor programs or any product or development candidate we may develop in the future could significantly change the costs and timing associated with our development plans. Further, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, which could include collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our existing stockholders may be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that could adversely affect the rights of such stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research
program or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Contractual Obligations
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any material contractual obligations, other than as described below. Refer to Note 8 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further details.
License Agreement
We may incur contingent royalty payments that we are required to make under our license agreement with ARIAD, pursuant to which we have in-licensed certain intellectual property used to develop THE-630. Due to the uncertainty of the achievement and timing of the events requiring payment under our license agreement with ARIAD, the amounts to be paid by us are not fixed or determinable at this time. We are required to pay ARIAD royalties on all sales of licensed products, with such royalty percentages in the low- to mid-single digits of sales. We have not paid any royalties to date as we have no products commercially approved for sale.
Lease
On September 16, 2021, we entered into an agreement to lease 7,351 square feet of office space in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which is expected to serve as our headquarters. The lease term is seven years, with a one-time option right to extend the term five additional years. The lease is expected to commence in the first half of 2022, after construction is complete and we obtain control of the leased premises. At lease commencement, the classification and measurement of the lease will be determined and recognized on the balance sheet. The annual base rent under the lease is approximately $0.8 million for the first lease year, expected to begin in the first half of 2022, and is subject to annual increases of 3% thereafter. We provided a security deposit in the form of a letter of credit in the amount of approximately $0.4 million upon signing, pursuant to the terms of the lease.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reported periods. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued third-party research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid balance accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts incurred.
Tranche Rights and Anti-dilution Rights
The initial fair value of the Tranche Rights recognized in connection with our issuance of our Series A Preferred Stock in June 2018 and the Anti-dilution Rights issued to ARIAD in June 2018 were determined based on significant inputs not observable in the market, which represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. The initial fair values of the obligations were estimated based on the results of valuations performed in connection with the initial issuance of our Series A Preferred Stock. These obligations were remeasured prior to the issuance of subsequent tranches and anti-dilution shares and at each subsequent reporting period. See Note 9 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our issuances of Preferred Stock.
Each Tranche Right and Anti-dilution Right was valued as a forward contract. The values were determined using a probability-weighted present value calculation. In determining the fair values, estimates and assumptions impacting fair value included the future value of our Series A Preferred Stock, risk free interest rates, estimated years to liquidity and probability of each milestone being achieved. We determined the per share future value of the shares of Series A Preferred Stock by back-solving to the initial proceeds of the Series A Preferred Stock financing. We remeasured each Tranche Right and Anti-dilution Right at each reporting period and prior to settlement. The purchase price of the Series A Preferred Stock at initial issuance, and all subsequent issuances, was higher than the fair value of our common stock.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation expense based on the grant date fair value of employee, officer, director, and non-employee grants, estimated in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, and the
expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The expected term of our stock options granted to employees and non-employees has been determined utilizing the “simplified” method for awards that qualify as “plain-vanilla” options. On January 1, 2018, we adopted, using the modified retroactive approach, the guidance of Accounting Standard Update, or ASU, 2018 07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718) - Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting, and account for awards to non-employees using the grant date fair value without subsequent periodic remeasurement. The adoption of ASU 2018-07 did not have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
We classify stock-based compensation expense in our statements of operations in the same manner in which the award recipient’s salary and related costs are classified or in which the award recipient’s service payments are classified. In future periods, we expect stock-based compensation expense to increase, due in part to our existing unrecognized stock-based compensation expense and as we grant additional stock-based awards to continue to attract and retain our employees.
Prior to our IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our Board as of the date of each option grant or restricted common stock award grant, with input from management, considering the most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our Board’s assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These independent third-party valuations of equity instruments were performed contemporaneously with identified value inflection points.
These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “Practice Aid”). The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating the enterprise value across classes of series of capital stock in determining the fair value of our common stock at each valuation date.
In addition to considering the results of the valuations, management considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, which may be a date later than the most recent third-party valuation date, including:
● the prices of our preferred securities sold to or exchanged between outside investors in arm’s length transactions, if any, and the rights, preferences and privileges of our preferred securities as compared to those of our common stock, including the liquidation preferences of our preferred securities;
● the progress of our research and development efforts, including the status of preclinical studies;
● the lack of liquidity of our equity as a private company;
● our stage of development and business strategy and the material risks related to our business and industry;
● the achievement of enterprise milestones;
● the valuation of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and biotechnology sectors, as well as recently completed mergers and acquisitions of peer companies;
● any external market conditions affecting the biotechnology industry, and trends within the biotechnology industry;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our preferred shares and common stock, such as an IPO, or a sale of our company, given prevailing market conditions; and
● the analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in the biopharmaceutical industry.
There are significant judgments and estimates inherent in these valuations. The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. Following our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market as reported on the date of grant.
Following our IPO, in connection with the accounting for granted stock options and other awards we may grant, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. Management also considered whether adjustments to the quoted market price or the expected volatility of the price of the underlying share for the expected term of an award when it is in possession of material non-public information for purposes of determining the fair value of the Company’s stock.
Emerging Growth Company Status
In April 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company”, or an EGC, may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company; however, we may adopt certain new or revised accounting standards early.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) December 31, 2026, the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our IPO.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies until the fiscal year following the determination that our common stock held by non-affiliates is more than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenues are more than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our common stock held by non-affiliates is more than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.