Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
We manage and report our operating results through two divisions, which are our reportable segments: Meal Preparation and Snacking & Beverages.
The following discussion and analysis presents the factors that had a material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to those Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report. Discussions of the periods prior to the year ended December 31, 2020 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the discussion therein for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is incorporated by reference into this Annual Report.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. See Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks, and assumptions associated with these statements.
Recent Developments
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
We evaluate property, plant, and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets, and finite lived intangible assets for impairment when circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable. Indicators of impairment include deteriorations in operating cash flows, the anticipated sale or disposal of an asset group, and other significant changes in business conditions.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, as a result of rising input costs coupled with lower than expected new business wins, we revised our forecast expectations for the Bars asset group and performed a recoverability assessment. Our assessment indicated that the Bars asset group was not recoverable, and we were required to determine the fair value of the business. Our fair value assessment indicated that the carrying value was in excess of the fair value, and an impairment of $9.2 million of property, plant, and equipment was recognized in our Bars asset group, within the Snacking & Beverages segment. The impairment charge is included in Asset impairment in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Refer to Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Plan to Explore Strategic Alternatives to Maximize Value
On November 8, 2021, the Company announced that its Board of Directors has approved a plan to explore strategic alternatives, including a possible sale of the Company or a transaction to allow the Company to focus on its higher growth Snacking & Beverages business segment by divesting a significant portion of its Meal Preparation business segment. The determination follows the Company’s ongoing, Board-led strategic review which began earlier this year.
There can be no assurance that the exploration of strategic alternatives will result in a transaction or other strategic changes or outcomes. Consequently, the Company may incur restructuring, impairment, disposal or other related charges in future periods as a result of the strategic plan. The Company has not set a timetable for the conclusion of its review.
RTE Cereal Divestiture
On June 1, 2021, the Company simultaneously entered into a definitive agreement and completed the sale of its RTE Cereal business to Post. A pre-tax gain was recognized on the transaction upon closing of $18.4 million as a component of Net income (loss) from discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The sale of this business is part of the Company's portfolio optimization strategy. RTE Cereal operated as two manufacturing plants located in Lancaster, Ohio and Sparks, Nevada. The RTE Cereal business had been classified as a discontinued operation through the date of the sale. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Debt Refinancing
On March 26, 2021, the Company amended its Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of December 1, 2017 (the "Credit Agreement") which extended the maturity date of the Revolving Credit Facility and Tranche A-1 Term Loans until March 26, 2026 and the maturity date of the Term A Loans until March 26, 2028, and the amendment refinanced the existing Term A Loans and increased the Tranche A-1 Term Loan amounts to $930.0 million. The net proceeds from Term Loan A-1, Term Loan A, and a draw from the Revolving Credit Facility as well as available cash on hand were used to fund the redemption of all of the $602.9 million outstanding principal amount of the 2024 Notes. Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Executive Summary
The following table summarizes our consolidated financial results (in millions, except per share data and percentages):
(1)Adjusted net income from continuing operations and adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations are Non-GAAP financial measures. Refer to the "Non-GAAP Measures" section for additional information.
2021 Financial Highlights
The following are highlights in our net sales and earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to the "Results of Operations" section for further discussion and analysis.
•Net sales decreased primarily due to the lap of significant COVID-19 related grocery volume in 2020, particularly in March and April 2020. Additionally, industry-wide supply chain disruption, including a constrained manufacturing labor market, impacted our network and ability to accept and service all the customers' orders received which adversely affected our net sales volume. Our net sales volume decrease was partially offset by our pricing actions to recover commodity and freight cost inflation, as we continue to manage through the current inflationary macro environment, as well as net sales from the pasta acquisition.
•Earnings were adversely impacted by commodity and freight cost inflation, as our pricing actions to recover inflation inherently lag the rise in costs. Additionally, industry-wide supply chain disruption caused increased costs to service the customer and constrained our ability to fulfill demand.
Known Trends or Uncertainties
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted consumer behavior positively for the Company by resulting in a surge of at-home food consumption primarily within our retail grocery sales channel, which comprises approximately 80% of total net sales, and negatively impacted food-away-from-home consumption in the related sales channel in 2020, particularly in March and April 2020. After the initial surge, at-home food consumption remained elevated in comparison to pre-pandemic levels. This was a result of the general public's continued emphasis on personal safety given COVID-19 variants. However, in the first half of 2021, macroeconomic factors and more disposable income, such as increased unemployment benefits and government stimulus, temporarily shifted consumer demand from at-home private label food and beverages to non-private label competitors which adversely affected our retail grocery business. During the second half of 2021, demand signals improved within private label retail grocery as the Company's net sales rebounded from the first half of 2021. However, we faced further headwinds due to supply chain disruption and labor shortages in our ability to accept and service all the customers' orders received which adversely affected our net sales volume. Additionally, in 2021, we saw recovery in food-away-from-home consumption due to more consumers dining out at restaurants and other public venues given increased vaccination rollout and easing of government restrictions in public venues.
We continue to incur incremental costs related to COVID-19 to address the safety and welfare of our employees. These incremental costs are subject to change depending on factors including, but not limited to, COVID-19 infection rates, regulatory requirements, or new variants. During 2021, our incremental costs related to COVID-19 have declined compared to 2020.
Supply Chain Disruption and Labor Shortages
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our supply chain network. During the second half of 2021, we have experienced significant and increasing disruptions in the global supply chain network when compared to 2020 and the first half of 2021. These disruptions include, but are not limited to, items such as freight transportation availability, labor challenges, and raw materials and packaging availability challenges, which have negatively impacted our margins and service levels during 2021. In response to labor shortages, we have increased hourly labor rates and awarded bonuses to our hourly employees in order to attract and retain talent. Additionally, in the fourth quarter of 2021, we announced one-time employee recognition payments to drive retention for all incentive-eligible participants. We will continue to actively monitor and develop responses to these disruptions, but depending on duration and severity, these trends could continue to negatively impact our margins and service levels.
Commodity Inflation
The costs of raw materials, ingredients, packaging materials, fuel, and energy have been volatile in 2021 when compared to 2020, and future changes in such costs may cause our results of operations and our operating margins to fluctuate significantly. The overall food and beverage industry is facing significant inflation in packaging materials, fuel, energy, and across several agricultural commodities, including but not limited to, edible oils (soybean, coconut, canola, and palm), wheat, durum, coffee, oats, and cucumbers. We manage the impact of cost increases, wherever possible, on commercially reasonable terms, by locking in prices on the quantities we expect are required to meet our production requirements. In addition, we offset the effect of increased costs by raising prices to our customers. However, for market conditions or competitive reasons, our pricing actions may also lag commodity cost changes temporarily, or we may not be able to pass along the full effect of increases in raw materials and other input costs as we incur them.
Results of Operations
The following table presents certain information concerning our financial results, including information presented as a percentage of consolidated net sales:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Continuing Operations
Net Sales - Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $4,327.6 million compared to $4,349.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $22.1 million, or 0.5%. The change in net sales from 2020 to 2021 was due to the following:
(1)Organic net sales is a Non-GAAP financial measure. Refer to the "Non-GAAP Measures" section for additional information.
The net sales decrease of 0.5% was primarily driven by unfavorable volume/mix excluding acquisitions and divestitures due to lower COVID-19 related retail grocery demand in 2021 compared to 2020, supply chain disruption, which challenged our ability to meet demand, lower volume/mix due to the divestiture of the two In-Store Bakery facilities, and distribution losses, which outpaced distribution gains. The decrease in net sales was partially offset by the impact of the pasta acquisition, favorable pricing to partially recover commodity and freight cost inflation, increased demand in the food-away-from home sales channel, new product sales, and favorable Canadian foreign exchange.
Gross Profit - Gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 16.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 2.3 percentage points. The decrease is primarily due to commodity inflation, supply chain disruption causing increased labor costs and supply shortages, which combined with reduced COVID-19 related retail grocery demand, resulted in unfavorable fixed cost overhead due to lower volume, unfavorable channel mix from increased food-away-from-home demand, and increased operational costs as a result of severe winter weather in certain regions of the U.S during the first quarter of 2021. This was partially offset by favorable pricing actions to recover commodity and freight cost inflation, favorable volume/mix from the inclusion of the business from the higher margin pasta acquisition, and lower costs necessary to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as increased production shifts, supplemental pay, protective equipment for employees, and additional sanitation measures.
Total Operating Expenses - Total operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was 15.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 14.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 0.7 percentage points. The increase is primarily attributable to higher freight costs of $19.9 million due to freight cost inflation, a non-cash impairment charge of $9.2 million related to the Bars asset group, the execution of strategic growth initiatives, integration costs associated with the recent pasta acquisition, and one-time employee recognition payments to drive retention. This was offset by lower employee incentive compensation expense.
Total Other Expense - Total other expense decreased by $79.2 million to $52.8 million in 2021 compared to $132.0 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily related to favorable non-cash mark-to-market impacts from hedging activities of $67.0 million, driven by interest rate swaps and partially offset by commodity contracts. Additionally, the Company incurred lower interest expense as a result of debt refinancing completed in the first quarter of 2021 and third quarter of 2020. This was partially offset by a higher loss on extinguishment of debt in 2021 compared to 2020.
Income Taxes - Income taxes were recognized at an effective rate of 14.0% in 2021 compared to (187.7)% in 2020. The change in the Company's effective tax rate is primarily the result of changes in the amount recognized associated with the net operating loss carryback of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act"), the amount of valuation allowance recorded against certain deferred tax assets, and the amount of income tax benefit from the release of tax reserves.
Our effective tax rate may change from period to period based on recurring and non-recurring factors including the jurisdictional mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state income taxes, settlement of tax audits, and the expiration of the statute of limitations in relation to unrecognized tax benefits.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued Operations - Net income (loss) from discontinued operations increased $50.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase is primarily due to a greater non-recurring impairment charge related to the expected loss on disposal of the RTE Cereal business recognized in 2020 of $51.2 million compared to that recognized in 2021 of $0.3 million. Other increases were due to the completion of the sale of the RTE Cereal business on June 1, 2021 resulting in the recognition of a pre-tax gain of $18.4 million and lower RTE Cereal operating expenses due to the partial period from its sale. These increases were partially offset by lower RTE Cereal volume and gross profit and higher tax expense as a result of having pre-tax discontinued operations net income in 2021 versus a pre-tax discontinued operations net loss in 2020. Refer to Note 7 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020 - Results by Segment
The change in net sales by segment from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the following:
Meal Preparation
Net sales in the Meal Preparation segment increased $36.3 million, or 1.4%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily driven by the impact of the pasta acquisition, favorable pricing to partially recover commodity and freight cost inflation, and increased demand in the food-away-from home sales channel. Volume/mix excluding acquisitions was unfavorable primarily due to lower COVID-19 related retail grocery demand in 2021 compared to 2020, supply chain disruption, which challenged our ability to meet demand, and distribution losses outpacing distribution gains in the retail sales channel.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased 4.2 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to commodity and freight cost inflation, supply chain disruption causing increased labor costs and supply shortages, which combined with reduced COVID-19 related retail grocery demand, resulted in unfavorable fixed cost overhead due to lower volume, unfavorable channel mix from increased food-away-from-home demand, and increased operational costs as a result of severe winter weather in certain regions of the U.S during the first quarter of 2021. This was partially offset by favorable pricing actions to recover commodity and freight cost inflation and favorable volume/mix from the inclusion of the business from the higher margin pasta acquisition.
Snacking & Beverages
Net sales in the Snacking & Beverages segment decreased $59.5 million, or 3.7%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net sales was primarily driven by unfavorable volume/mix excluding divestitures due to lower COVID-19 related retail grocery demand in 2021 compared to 2020, supply chain disruption, which challenged our ability to meet demand, and lower volume/mix due to the divestiture of the two In-Store Bakery facilities. These net sales decreases were partially offset by new product sales, particularly within our Liquid Beverages category, favorable pricing driven by pricing actions which partially recovered commodity and freight cost inflation, and distribution gains, which outpaced distribution losses.
Direct operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased 4.2 percentage points in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to commodity and freight cost inflation, supply chain disruption causing increased labor costs and supply shortages, which combined with reduced COVID-19 related retail grocery demand, resulted in unfavorable fixed cost overhead due to lower volume. Favorable pricing was driven by pricing actions which partially recovered commodity and freight cost inflation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow
Management assesses the Company's liquidity in terms of its ability to generate cash to fund its operating, investing, and financing activities. The Company remains in a strong financial position, with resources available for reinvesting in existing businesses, including our strategic growth initiatives, performing acquisitions, and managing its capital structure on a short and long-term basis. The Company has the ability to strategically manage customer payment terms and counterparty risk by selling receivables in a cost-effective manner through its Receivables Sales Program. Approximately $142.7 million was available under the Receivables Sales Program as of December 31, 2021. See Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our Receivables Sales Program. Our Receivables Sales Program provides us lower cost access to liquidity when compared to the Revolving Credit Facility. If additional borrowings are needed, approximately $730.1 million was available under the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our Revolving Credit Facility. We are in compliance with the terms of the Revolving Credit Facility and expect to meet foreseeable financial requirements.
COVID-19
Our cash earnings and liquidity have been impacted by global macroeconomic challenges with commodity inflation and supply chain disruption which in part have been a result of COVID-19, but we anticipate our current cash balances, cash flows from operations, and our available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements. Under the CARES Act, we deferred the payment of $22.8 million in payroll taxes in 2020, with $1.3 million paid in the fourth quarter of 2021, $11.0 million paid in the first quarter of 2022, and the remaining $10.5 million to be paid in the first quarter of 2023. We filed refund claims from the Internal Revenue Service of $73.5 million and $8.3 million related to the net operating loss carryback provisions of the CARES Act for the 2019 and 2020 federal tax losses, respectively. We received $71.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to the 2019 refund claim and $8.3 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 related to the 2020 refund claim. Given the dynamic nature of COVID-19, we will continue to assess our liquidity needs while additionally managing our discretionary spending and investment strategies.
The following table is derived from our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows:
Operating Activities From Continuing Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $332.1 million in 2021 compared to $403.6 million in 2020, a decrease in cash provided of $71.5 million. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower cash earnings, which included the non-recurrence of cash benefits from the CARES Act received in 2020 and higher incentive compensation paid in the first quarter of 2021 compared to the first quarter of 2020 based on prior year performance. This was partially offset by an increase in cash flows from the Receivables Sales Program (refer to Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information) and an increase in cash flow from accounts payable due to improved working capital management. The Company's working capital management emphasis continues to be focused on improving inventory turnover, driving faster collection of receivables, and extending vendor terms.
Investing Activities From Continuing Operations
Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $102.1 million in 2021 compared to $330.4 million in 2020, a decrease in cash used of $228.3 million. This was primarily driven by the non-recurrence of prior year acquisitions of the pasta and refrigerated dough businesses and the proceeds received from the sale of our investments during 2021 as the Company entered into a total return swap contract to hedge the market risk associated with the unfunded portion of the Company's deferred compensation liability (refer to Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). This was partially offset by the non-recurrence of proceeds received from the prior year sale of the In-Store Bakery and Minneapolis, Minnesota facilities, higher capital expenditures for manufacturing plant improvements, and the additional purchase consideration transferred to acquire machinery and equipment utilized in the Riviana Foods Fresno, California facility. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Financing Activities From Continuing Operations
Net cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $362.3 million in 2021 compared to cash provided by financing activities of $74.0 million in 2020, an increase in cash used of $436.3 million. The increase in cash used is primarily attributable to the redemption of the 2024 Notes and the non-recurrence of proceeds received from the issuance of the Company's 2028 Notes in the prior year. This was partially offset by the Amendment to the Credit Agreement, which resulted in an increase in Term Loan balances used to fund the redemption of the 2024 Notes during 2021, and the non-recurrence of cash used for the prior year redemption of the 2022 Notes during 2020. Repurchases of common stock were $25.0 million in both 2021 and 2020.
Cash Flows From Discontinued Operations
Net cash provided by discontinued operations was $78.1 million in 2021 compared to cash used in discontinued operations of $11.1 million in 2020, an increase in cash provided of $67.0 million. The increase in cash provided by discontinued operations is primarily attributable to proceeds received from the completion of the sale of the RTE Cereal business in 2021 and the non-recurring payment of a working capital adjustment from the 2019 sale of the Snacks division that occurred during 2020. This was partially offset by a decrease in cash flow provided by operating activities from the RTE Cereal business. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Free Cash Flow From Continuing Operations
In addition to measuring our cash flow generation and usage based upon the operating, investing, and financing classifications included in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, we also measure free cash flow from continuing operations (a Non-GAAP measure) which represents net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations less capital expenditures. We believe free cash flow is an important measure of operating performance because it provides management and investors a measure of cash generated from operations that is available for mandatory payment obligations and investment opportunities such as funding acquisitions, repaying debt, repurchasing public debt, and repurchasing our common stock.
The following table reconciles cash flow provided by operating activities from continuing operations (a GAAP measure) to our free cash flow from continuing operations (a Non-GAAP measure):
Debt Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, $730.1 million of the aggregate commitment of $750.0 million of the Revolving Credit Facility was available. Under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement"), the Revolving Credit Facility matures on February 1, 2023. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, there were $19.9 million in letters of credit under the Revolving Credit Facility that were issued but undrawn, which have been included as a reduction to the calculation of available credit.
The Company’s average interest rate on debt outstanding under its Credit Agreement for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 1.68%. Including the impact of interest rate swap agreements in effect as of December 31, 2021, the average rate is 3.44%
Our long-term debt outstanding, including the current portion, was $1,922.4 million at December 31, 2021 and $2,233.0 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $310.6 million. This decrease was primarily due to the redemption of all of the $602.9 million outstanding principal amount of our 2024 Notes. In order to complete the redemption of our 2024 Notes, we amended our Credit Agreement, which increased the Term Loan A-1 amount to $930.0 million, an increase of $257.4 million from our balance on December 31, 2020. Additionally, this amendment refinanced the existing Term Loan A amount to $500.0 million, an increase of $46.6 million from our balance on December 31, 2020. The net proceeds from Term Loan A-1, Term Loan A, and a draw from the Revolving Credit Facility as well as available cash on hand were used to fund the redemption of our 2024 Notes. Total principal payments on the amended term loans were $10.7 million, and finance lease obligations decreased by $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, we had $496.3 million outstanding under Term Loan A, $923.0 million outstanding under Term Loan A-1, $500.0 million of the 2028 Notes outstanding, and $3.1 million of finance lease obligations.
The Credit Agreement contains various financial and restrictive covenants and requires that the Company maintain a consolidated net leverage ratio of no greater than 4.50 to 1.0, and our debt obligations contain customary representations and events of default. We are in compliance with all applicable debt covenants as of December 31, 2021. On February 14, 2022, the Company entered into Amendment No. 4 (the “Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. This Amendment temporarily increases the leverage covenant threshold from 4.50x to 5.50x through June 30, 2022, then 5.25x through September 30, 2022 and thereafter reverts to 4.50x. The material terms and conditions under the Credit Agreement are otherwise substantially consistent with those contained in the Credit Agreement prior to the Amendment.
See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our debt obligations.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
The 2028 Notes issued by TreeHouse Foods, Inc. are fully and unconditionally, as well as jointly and severally, guaranteed by our directly and indirectly owned domestic subsidiaries, which are collectively known as the "Guarantor Subsidiaries." The guarantees of the Guarantor Subsidiaries are subject to release in limited circumstances, only upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions. There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the parent company or any guarantor to obtain funds from its subsidiaries by dividend or loan.
The following tables present summarized financial information of TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis. The combined summarized financial information eliminates intercompany balances and transactions among TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and equity in earnings and investments in any Guarantor Subsidiaries or Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The summarized financial information is provided in accordance with the reporting requirements of Rule 13-01 under SEC Regulation S-X for the issuer and Guarantor Subsidiaries.
(1)During the year ended December 31, 2021, TreeHouse Foods, Inc. and Guarantor Subsidiaries recorded $68.8 million of net sales to the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries and $265.0 million of purchases from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
(2)Includes an amount due to Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries of $0.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements within the next twelve months include working capital requirements, current portion of long-term debt, interest payments, and capital expenditures. We believe our current cash balances, cash flows from operations, and our available sources of liquidity and capital as well as possible future sources of liquidity and capital will be sufficient to meet these twelve month and long-term cash requirements and capital expenditures.
Our cash requirements under our various contractual obligations and commitments include:
•Debt obligations and interest payments - See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our debt obligations and the timing of future principal. Estimated future interest payments on the Company’s debt are expected to be $254.3 million (with $43.6 million expected in 2022) based on the interest rates at December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company has entered into interest rate swap agreements to lock into a fixed LIBOR interest rate base. See Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our interest rate swap agreements and the future obligations.
•Operating and finance lease obligations - See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our operating and finance lease obligations and the amount and timing of future payments.
•Purchase obligations - Purchase obligations primarily represent commitments to purchase minimum quantities of raw materials used in our production processes. We enter into these contracts from time to time in an effort to ensure a sufficient supply of raw ingredients. In addition, we have contractual obligations to purchase various services that are a part of our production process. Minimum amounts committed to as of December 31, 2021 were $871.1 million (with $777.2 million due in 2022).
•Pension and other postretirement benefit obligations - Future payments related to pension and postretirement benefits are estimated by an actuarial valuation. See Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our pension and postretirement benefit obligations and the amount and timing of future payments.
•Exit or disposal cost obligations - See Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our exit or disposal cost obligations and the amount and timing of future payments. Our exit or disposal cost obligations primarily consist of severance and retention obligations.
•Deferred compensation - Deferred compensation is a plan established for the exclusive benefit of a select group of management and highly compensated employees of the Company and its affiliates to provide an additional means by which such employees may defer funds for their retirement. Deferred compensation obligations have been allocated to payment periods based on existing payment plans for terminated employees and the estimated timing of distributions to current employees based on age. Estimated future deferred compensation payments as of December 31, 2021 were $10.3 million (with $2.2 million due in 2022).
•Tax Payments - As discussed in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company or its subsidiaries files income tax returns in the U.S., Canada, Italy, the Netherlands, and various U.S. states and may be required to make payments to a taxing authority. Certain tax positions are expected to be challenged by the Canadian Revenue Agency ("CRA") in 2022. Management intends to appeal any such assessment but would be required to provide a cash payment or letter of credit of approximately $15.0 million to proceed. The Company believes these positions are more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon final adjudication of these matters.
•Unrecognized tax benefits - See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our unrecognized tax benefits and the amount and timing of future payments.
•Other liabilities - Other liabilities include obligations associated with certain employee benefit programs, employee health care, workers' compensation claims, other casualty losses, in addition to contingent liabilities related to the ordinary course of litigation and investigation, and various other long-term liabilities, all of which have some inherent uncertainty as to the amount and timing of payments and were reflected on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021. See Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about the Company’s commitments and contingent obligations.
Capital Expenditures
We continue to make investments in property, plant, and equipment and software for our business offices, manufacturing, and distribution facilities, which includes investment in climate-related projects in order to achieve our broader environmental goals. Our preliminary estimate of capital expenditures for 2022 is approximately $135.0 million, and our climate-related projects and other environmental projects are not expected to be material individually or in the aggregate.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are defined as those most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results, and require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP with no need for the application of our judgment. In certain circumstances, however, the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to use our judgment to make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting period. We have identified the estimates described below as our critical accounting estimates. See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of significant accounting policies.
Trade Allowances - We maintain an allowance for customer promotional programs, marketing co-op programs, and other sales and marketing expenses. These customer promotional programs are generally more significant for branded products compared to the majority of our private label products. This allowance is based on a combination of historical average program activity and specific customer program accruals, and can fluctuate due to the level of sales and marketing programs, and timing of deductions. The recognition of these costs therefore requires management judgment regarding the volume of promotional offers that will be redeemed by the customer. These estimates are made using various techniques including historical data on performance of similar promotional programs. Differences between estimated expense and actual redemptions are immaterial and recognized as a change in management estimate in a subsequent period. This allowance was $41.1 million and $39.6 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Long-Lived Assets - We evaluate property, plant, and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets, and finite lived intangible assets for impairment when circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable (a "triggering event"). Indicators of impairment include deteriorations in operating cash flows, the anticipated sale or disposal of an asset group, and other significant changes in business conditions. Undiscounted cash flow analyses are used to determine if impairment exists. We utilize current cash flow information and expected growth rates related to the asset group from our internal projections and operating plans. If the carrying values of asset groups are determined not to be recoverable, the impairment loss is calculated based on estimated fair value. Impairment charges are measured by comparing the carrying values of the asset groups to their estimated fair values. The fair value of these assets are based on expected future discounted cash flows using Level 3 inputs. Long-lived assets held for sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less the cost to sell.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, as a result of rising input costs coupled with lower than expected new business wins, we revised our forecast expectations for the Bars asset group and performed a recoverability assessment. Our assessment indicated that the Bars asset group was not recoverable, and we were required to determine the fair value of the business. Our fair value assessment indicated that the carrying value was in excess of the fair value, and an impairment of $9.2 million of property, plant, and equipment was recognized in our Bars asset group, within the Snacking & Beverages segment. The impairment charge is included in Asset impairment in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Prior to the sale of the RTE Cereal business on June 1, 2021, there were expected disposal loss adjustments of $0.3 million and $51.2 million recognized as asset impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, within Net income (loss) from discontinued operations as the business was held for sale. At the date of the sale, a pre-tax gain of $18.4 million was recognized as a result of the sale proceeds received being at the high end of the range of management's previous estimate of the disposal group's fair value. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets - Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets totaled $2,203.8 million and $2,201.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting primarily from acquisitions. Upon acquisition, the purchase price is first allocated to identifiable assets and liabilities, including but not limited to inventory, accounts payable, trademarks, and customer-related intangible assets, with any remaining purchase price recorded as goodwill. Goodwill and indefinite lived trademarks are not amortized.
The Company has three reporting units within its two reportable and operating segments. The Company completed its annual goodwill and intangible asset impairment analysis as of December 31, 2021. Our assessment did not result in an impairment. Our analysis employed the use of an income approach, corroborated by the market approach. The Company believes the income approach is the most reliable indicator of the fair value of the reporting units. Significant assumptions used in the income approach include growth and discount rates, margins, and the Company’s weighted average cost of capital. We used historical performance and management estimates of future performance to determine margins and growth rates. The income approach utilizes projected cash flow estimates developed by the Company to determine fair value, which are unobservable, Level 3 inputs. Unobservable inputs are used to measure fair value to the extent that relevant observable inputs are not available. The Company developed our estimates using the best information available at the time. Discount rates selected for each reporting unit approximated the total Company discount rate. Our weighted average cost of capital included a review and assessment of market and capital structure assumptions. The Company's three reporting units all have fair values that the Company considers to be substantially in excess of their carrying values (between 69% and 139% as of December 31, 2021 and between 68% and 122% as of December 31, 2020). Therefore, we believe that only significant changes in the assumptions would result in an impairment of goodwill. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. Assumptions used, such as forecasted growth rates and our cost of capital, are consistent with our internal projections and operating plans. Changes in our estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion.
We reviewed our indefinite lived intangible assets, which consist of trademarks totaling $22.4 million as of December 31, 2021, using the relief from royalty method. Significant assumptions include the royalty rates, growth, margins, and discount rates. Our assumptions were based on historical performance and management estimates of future performance, as well as available data on licenses of similar products. The Company’s policy is that indefinite lived assets must have a history of strong sales and cash flow performance that we expect to continue for the foreseeable future. When these criteria are no longer met, the Company changes the classification. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating changes and to estimate future cash flows. The fair value of one of our trademarks with a book value of $16.4 million as of December 31, 2021 exceeds its book value by 30%. This was an increase of 18% from December 31, 2020. Based on our plans for this product line, we do not anticipate impairment of this trademark in the foreseeable future. However, if our revenue and profit expectations are not met or certain factors outside of our control, such as discount rates, change, then this trademark could become impaired. Changes in our estimates or any of our other assumptions used in our analysis could result in a different conclusion. Our testing of all other trademarks indicated that the implied fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying values. The fair values of the other trademarks exceed book value by a minimum of 130%. This was an increase to the minimum of 45% from December 31, 2020. Therefore, we believe that only significant changes in the assumptions would result in an impairment of any other trademark.
Purchase Price Allocation - We record acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting. All of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The application of the purchase method of accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, in order to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are depreciated and amortized from goodwill. The fair value assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on management’s estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including valuations that utilize customary valuation procedures and techniques. Significant assumptions and estimates include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used in these estimates, the amounts recorded in the financial statements may be exposed to potential impairment of the intangible assets and goodwill, as discussed in the Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets critical accounting estimates section.
Income Taxes - Deferred taxes are recognized for future tax effects of temporary differences between financial and income tax reporting using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. We periodically estimate our probable tax obligations using historical experience in tax jurisdictions and informed judgments. There are inherent uncertainties related to the interpretations of tax regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate. These judgments and estimates made at a point in time may change based on the outcome of tax audits and changes to, or further interpretations of, regulations. If such changes take place, there is a risk that our tax rate may increase or decrease in any period, which would impact our earnings. Future business results may affect deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time.
Employee Benefit Plan Costs - We provide a range of benefits to our employees, including pension and postretirement benefits to our eligible employees and retirees. We record annual amounts relating to these plans based on calculations specified by GAAP, which include various actuarial assumptions, such as discount rates, assumed investment rates of return, compensation increases, employee turnover rates, and health care cost trend rates. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current rates and trends when appropriate. As required by GAAP, the effect of such modifications is generally deferred and subsequently amortized over future periods. Different assumptions that we make could result in the recognition of different amounts of expense over different periods.
While a number of the key assumptions related to our qualified pension plans are long-term in nature, including assumed investment rates of return, compensation increases, employee turnover rates, and mortality rates, GAAP requires that our discount rate assumption be more heavily weighted to current market conditions. As such, our discount rates will likely change frequently. We used a discount rate for each plan to determine our estimated future benefit obligations, and our weighted average discount rate was 2.86% at December 31, 2021. If the discount rate of each plan were one percent higher, the pension plan liability would have been approximately 10.3%, or $33.5 million, lower as of December 31, 2021. If the discount rate of each plan were one percent lower, the pension plan liability would have been approximately 12.4%, or $40.5 million, higher as of December 31, 2021. The projected benefit obligation was $330.9 million and $355.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for our pension benefit plans. The projected benefit obligation was $23.3 million and $26.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for our postretirement benefit plans.
See Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding our employee pension and retirement benefit plans.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is provided in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
We have included in this report measures of financial performance that are not defined by GAAP ("Non-GAAP”). A Non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe these measures provide useful information to the users of the financial statements as we also have included these measures in other communications and publications.
For each of these Non-GAAP financial measures, we provide a reconciliation between the Non-GAAP measure and the most directly comparable GAAP measure, an explanation of why management believes the Non-GAAP measure provides useful information to financial statement users, and any additional purposes for which management uses the Non-GAAP measure. This Non-GAAP financial information is provided as additional information for the financial statement users and is not in accordance with, or an alternative to, GAAP. These Non-GAAP measures may be different from similar measures used by other companies.
Organic Net Sales
Organic net sales is defined as net sales excluding the impacts of the net sales associated with the pasta acquisition from Riviana Foods that occurred in 2021 through the twelve month anniversary of the acquisition date on December 11, 2020, foreign currency, and the net sales associated with the divestiture of the In-Store Bakery facilities, which closed on April 17, 2020. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company's sales between periods and to view the Company's business from the same perspective as Company management.
Adjusted Earnings Per Diluted Share From Continuing Operations, Adjusting for Certain Items Affecting Comparability
Adjusted earnings per diluted share from continuing operations ("adjusted diluted EPS") reflects adjustments to GAAP (loss) earnings per diluted share from continuing operations to identify items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company’s earnings performance between periods and to view the Company’s business from the same perspective as Company management. As the Company cannot predict the timing and amount of charges that include, but are not limited to, items such as acquisition, integration, divestiture, and related costs, mark-to-market adjustments on derivative contracts, foreign currency exchange impact on the re-measurement of intercompany notes, growth, reinvestment, and restructuring programs, impairment of assets, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and other items that may arise from time to time that would impact comparability, management does not consider these costs when evaluating the Company’s performance, when making decisions regarding the allocation of resources, in determining incentive compensation, or in determining earnings estimates.
The reconciliation of adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations, excluding certain items affecting comparability, to the relevant GAAP measure of diluted EPS from continuing operations as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, is as follows:
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company entered into transactions that affected the year-over-year comparison of its financial results from continuing operations as follows:
(1) The Company’s growth, reinvestment, and restructuring activities are part of an enterprise-wide transformation to improve long-term growth and profitability for the Company. During 2021, the Company incurred approximately $87.1 million in growth, reinvestment, and restructuring program costs versus $73.2 million in 2020 and $105.4 million in 2019. Additionally, during 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized other items affecting comparability including recovery of insurance proceeds related to a prior period product recall and related costs. During 2020, the Company recorded a $(0.4) million product recall reimbursement versus $0.3 million expense in 2019.
Refer to Note 3 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2) Acquisition, integration, divestiture, and related costs represents costs associated with completed and potential divestitures, completed and potential acquisitions, the related integration of the acquisitions, and gains or losses on the divestiture of a business.
Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(3) During 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred incremental expenses directly attributable to our response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which included supplemental pay to our front-line personnel, additional protective equipment for employees, and additional sanitation measures. These costs were approximately $15.5 million and $53.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, the Company recorded income tax expense due to the enactment of the CARES Act of approximately $1.9 million and an income tax benefit with interest income of approximately $(30.5) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(4) During 2021, the Company incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt totaling $14.4 million, which included a premium of $9.0 million and a write off of deferred financing costs of $5.4 million in connection with the 2024 Notes Redemption and Credit Agreement refinancing. During 2020, the Company incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt totaling $1.2 million representing the write-off of deferred financing costs in connection with the redemption of its 2022 Notes.
Refer to Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(5) During 2021, the Company incurred $9.2 million of non-cash impairment charges related property, plant, and equipment impairment losses in the Bars asset group. During 2019, the Company incurred $129.1 million of non-cash impairment charges related to the Cookies and Dry Dinners asset groups and to the expected disposal loss related to two In-Store Bakery facilities. The impairment charges related to the Cookies and Dry Dinners asset groups is comprised of non-cash impairment charges of $45.2 million of finite lived intangible asset impairment losses and $42.8 million of property, plant, and equipment impairment losses. The impairment related to the expected disposal loss on the In-Store Bakery facilities is $41.1 million.
Refer to Note 7, Note 8, and Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(6) The Company incurred fees related to shareholder activism which include directly applicable third-party advisory and
professional service fees.
(7) Tax indemnification represents the non-cash write off of indemnification assets that were recorded in connection with acquisitions from prior years. These write-offs arose as a result of the related uncertain tax position being released due to the statute of limitation lapse or settlement with taxing authorities.
(8) During 2020, the Company recognized a $9.0 million accrual related to a litigation matter challenging wage and hour practices at three former manufacturing facilities in California. During 2019, the Company recognized a $25.0 million accrual for a litigation matter related to allegations of certain purported label misrepresentations as to the nature of its Grove Square coffee products. This matter was settled on April 21, 2020.
Refer to Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(9) The Company incurred regulatory compliance costs related to changes in nutrition labeling requirements. These costs included both consulting services and inventory write-downs.
(10) Executive management transition includes costs associated with the 2019 CFO transition. The CFO transition costs primarily relate to severance and consulting fees.
(11) During 2019, the Company executed a complete withdrawal from the Retail, Wholesale, and Department Store International Union and Industry Pension Fund. The Company settled the withdrawal in the fourth quarter of 2019 for $4.3 million.
Refer to Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(12) The Company has Canadian dollar denominated intercompany loans and incurred foreign currency gains to re-measure the loans at the respective period ends. These charges are non-cash and the loans are eliminated in consolidation.
(13) The Company's derivative contracts are marked-to-market each period. The non-cash unrealized changes in fair value recognized in Other (income) expense, net within the Consolidated Statements of Operations are treated as Non-GAAP adjustments. As the contracts are settled, realized gains and losses are recognized, and only the mark-to-market impacts are treated as Non-GAAP adjustments.
Refer to Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The tax impact on adjusting items is calculated based upon the tax laws and statutory tax rates applicable in the tax jurisdiction of the underlying Non-GAAP adjustments.
Adjusted Net Income from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBIT from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBITDA from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBITDAS from Continuing Operations, Adjusted Net Income Margin from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBIT Margin from Continuing Operations, Adjusted EBITDA Margin from Continuing Operations, and Adjusted EBITDAS Margin from Continuing Operations, Adjusting for Certain Items Affecting Comparability
Adjusted net income from continuing operations represents GAAP net income (loss) from continuing operations as reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations adjusted for items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods as outlined in the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations section above. This information is provided in order to allow investors to make meaningful comparisons of the Company’s earnings performance between periods and to view the Company’s business from the same perspective as Company management. This measure is also used as a component of the Board of Directors' measurement of the Company’s performance for incentive compensation purposes and is the basis of calculating the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations metric outlined above.
Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations represents adjusted net income from continuing operations before interest expense, interest income, and income tax expense. Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations represents adjusted net income from continuing operations before interest expense, interest income, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization expense. Adjusted EBITDAS from continuing operations represents adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations before non-cash stock-based compensation expense. Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations, adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations, and adjusted EBITDAS from continuing operations are performance measures commonly used by management to assess operating performance, and the Company believes they are commonly reported and widely used by investors and other interested parties as a measure of a company’s operating performance between periods and as a component of our debt covenant calculations.
Adjusted net income margin from continuing operations, adjusted EBIT margin from continuing operations, adjusted EBITDA margin from continuing operations, and adjusted EBITDAS margin from continuing operations are calculated as the respective metric defined above as a percentage of net sales as reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations adjusted for items that, in management’s judgment, significantly affect the assessment of earnings results between periods as outlined in the adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations section above.
The following table reconciles the Company’s net (loss) income from continuing operations as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, the relevant GAAP measure, to Adjusted net income from continuing operations, Adjusted EBIT from continuing operations, Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations, and Adjusted EBITDAS from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019: