Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The objective of management's discussion and analysis is to provide material information relevant to the assessment of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company including an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources. This discussion and analysis focuses specifically on material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information not to be necessarily indicative of future operating results or of future financial condition. This includes descriptions and amounts of matters that have had a material impact on reported operations, as well as matters that are reasonably likely based on management’s assessment to have a material impact on future operations. This discussion and analysis covers the financial statements and other statistical data that the Company believes will enhance the understanding of the Company’s financial condition, cash flows and other changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion and analysis will provide a view of the Company from management’s perspective.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 is qualified by reference to and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated and combined financial statements and the related notes included herein. The discussion and analysis below are based on comparisons between our historical financial data for different periods and include certain forward-looking statements about our business, operations and financial performance. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors described in the section "Item 1A - Risk Factors." Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, those forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statements."
All references to "we", "us", "our", "the Company", "Trean", or similar terms refer to (i) Trean, BIC and their subsidiaries before the consummation of the reorganization transactions;, and (ii) to Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries after such reorganization transactions, unless the context otherwise requires.
The Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Overview
We are a provider of products and services to the specialty insurance market. We underwrite specialty casualty insurance products both through our Program Partners and also through our Owned MGAs. We also provide our Program Partners with a variety of services, including issuing carrier services, claims administration and reinsurance brokerage, from which we generate recurring fee-based revenues.
We have one reportable segment. We provide our insurance products and services to our Program Partners and Owned MGAs focused on specialty lines. We target a diversified portfolio of small to medium programs, typically with less than $30 million of premiums, that focus on niche segments of the specialty casualty insurance market and that we believe have strong underwriting track records.
Initial Public Offering and Reorganization
On July 20, 2020, Trean Insurance Group, Inc. closed the sale of 10,714,286 shares of its common stock in its IPO, comprised of 7,142,857 shares issued and sold by Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and 3,571,429 shares sold by selling stockholders. On July 22, 2020, Trean Insurance Group, Inc. closed the sale of an additional 1,207,142 shares by certain selling stockholders in the IPO pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares to cover over-allotments. The aggregate proceeds to the Company from all shares sold by the Company in the IPO were approximately $107,142 and the aggregate IPO proceeds from all shares sold by the selling stockholders in the IPO were approximately $71,678. The shares began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on July 16, 2020 under the symbol "TIG".
Prior to the completion of the above IPO, the Company effected the following reorganization transactions: (i) each of Trean and BIC contributed all of their respective assets and liabilities to Trean Insurance Group, Inc., a newly formed direct subsidiary of BIC, in exchange for shares of common stock in Trean Insurance Group, Inc. and (ii) upon the completion of the transfers by Trean and BIC, Trean and BIC were dissolved and distributed in-kind common shares to the pre-IPO unitholders.
In conjunction with the IPO and corporate restructuring, the Company made a payment to Altaris Capital Partners, LLC in connection with the termination of the Company's consulting and advisory agreements as well as paid bonuses to employees and pre-IPO unitholders for the successful completion of the IPO. The aggregate amount of these payments totaled $11,054 and is included in other expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
Secondary Offering of Common Stock
On May 19, 2021, we closed the sale of 5,000,000 shares of its common stock, comprised entirely of shares sold by selling stockholders. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock by the selling stockholders in this offering. As a result of this offering, the Altaris Funds no longer beneficially own more than 50% of the outstanding common stock of the Company, and we are no longer a "controlled company" within the meaning of the Nasdaq listing rules.
Embedded Derivatives
During the second quarter of 2021, the Company determined that its funds held agreements with reinsurers contain embedded derivatives relating to a total return swap on the underlying investments. As a result, the Company has revised the presentation of its financial results to report the change in fair value of the embedded derivatives in gains (losses) on embedded derivatives in the consolidated statements of operations. In addition, the effect of investment earnings and realized gains (losses) related to funds held accounts will also be reported in gains (losses) on embedded derivatives in the consolidated statements of operations, whereas previously these were reported as an offset to net investment income and net realized gains (losses), respectively. While the prior period amounts have been corrected for comparability, the correction was not material to the previously reported consolidated and combined financial statements.
Acquisition of Western Integrated Care
Effective July 6, 2021, Trean Corp acquired 100% ownership of WIC for a total purchase price of $5,500. WIC is a managed care organization that offers services to workers' compensation insurers to enable employees who are injured on the job to access qualified medical treatment.
Acquisition of Compstar
Effective July 15, 2020, Trean Compstar Holdings LLC purchased the remaining 55% ownership interest in Compstar, a holding company, along with its wholly owned subsidiary Compstar Insurance Services, a managing general agent, by issuing 6,613,606 shares of the Company’s common stock with a market price of $15 per share on the date of acquisition. Prior to the acquisition date, the Company held a 45% ownership interest in Compstar and accounted for its investment under the equity method. As of the acquisition date, the fair value attributable to the Company’s previous equity interest was $81,167 and the carrying value was $11,321. As a result, the Company recorded a gain of $69,846 from the remeasurement of its previous equity interest, which is included in gain on revaluation of Compstar investment on the consolidated statement of operations. The fair value of the Company’s previous equity interest was revalued on the acquisition date using the market price of the shares issued as consideration for the acquisition.
Acquisition of 7710
Effective October 1, 2020, Benchmark Holding Company acquired 100% ownership of 7710 Insurance Company as well as its associated program manager and agency, 7710 Service Company, LLC and Creekwood Insurance Agency, LLC for a purchase price of $12,140. 7710 Insurance Company underwrites workers' compensation primarily for emergency services, including firefighters and emergency medical services (EMS). 7710 Insurance Company focuses on reducing costs and claims through the implementation of a propriety safety preparedness and loss control program, created and staffed by experienced firefighters and EMS professionals.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impact
We continue to monitor the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including how it may impact our premium revenue, loss experience and loss expense, liquidity, and our regulatory capital and surplus.
Workforce Operations
Following the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, we took a number of actions to protect the health of the public and our employees and to comply with directives and advice of governmental authorities and public health experts. We responded by developing a Preparedness Plan that outlined both corporate-wide and location-specific modifications to working conditions and operations in our offices. This multi-faceted plan included elements such as restricting business travel and transitioning from an office-based company to primarily a remote working culture. As most of our employees already had secure remote working connections, we took additional measures to ensure all employees who wanted or needed to work remotely were able to do so securely with limited connectivity disruption. We also provided our employees education and training with respect to cybersecurity issues that may arise relating to COVID-19 and working remotely in conjunction with the goal of serving the operational needs of a remote workforce and continuing to serve our customers. We implemented safeguards for employees who play critical roles to ensure operational reliability and established protocols for employees who interact directly with the public. As state, city, and county guidelines progress, we have implemented new health and safety in-office procedures where necessary while continuing to monitor the progression of new COVID-19 variants and related developments that could impact us in the future.
Premium Revenue, Claims and Losses
We have not experienced a material impact to our premium revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross written premiums increased by 31.0% and 17.7% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and gross earned premiums have increased by 32.5% and 8.6%, respectively, compared to the previous years. This was primarily driven by both significant growth in our existing Program Partner business as well as the addition of new Program Partners. Because a majority of our gross written premiums are related to workers’ compensation insurance, revenue trends could be impacted in future periods if the COVID-19 pandemic were to continue or significantly get worse. However, a significant portion of our workers’ compensation premiums are pay-as-you-go programs, which reduces our downside risk from future premium audits or refunds.
We also have not experienced a material impact in our reported claims or incurred losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a specific result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our loss ratio increased to 65.8% during the year ended December 31, 2021 from 46.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in our loss ratio is primarily attributable to a number of unusually large losses experienced during the first half of 2021 and December 2021 which came primarily from three of our well established programs that have consistently produced positive results prior to 2021.
Investment Portfolio
With respect to our investment portfolio, we seek to hold a high-quality, diversified portfolio of investments, which are primarily in fixed maturity and available-for-sale investments and as such, our investment portfolio has limited exposure to equity market volatility. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced a net decrease of $11,386 in the fair value of our investment portfolio due to a reduction in unrealized gains on the value of our fixed maturity investments. The decline in the fair value of our fixed maturity investments is primarily attributable to rising interest rates following 2020 COVID-19 driven lower rates as opposed to underlying credit risk within our investment portfolio. If there were to be continued equity and debt financial market volatility, which in turn could create mark-to-market investment valuation decreases, we expect there could be additional or increased unrealized losses recorded or realized losses, if sold, in future reporting periods. However, given the conservative nature of our investment portfolio, we expect that any adverse impact on the value of our investment portfolio, as it relates to COVID-19, will be temporary, and we do not expect a long-term negative impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Other Concerns
Adverse events such as changes in the overall public health environment, changing infection patterns and new variants of COVID-19, health-related concerns about working in our offices, restrictions on travel, the potential impact on our business partners and customers, and other matters affecting our general work and business environment could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy. We cannot anticipate all the ways in which the current global health crisis and financial market conditions could adversely impact our business in the future.
Significant Components of Results of Operations
Gross written premiums: Gross written premiums are the amounts received or to be received for insurance policies written or assumed by us during a specific period of time without reduction for general and administrative expenses (including policy acquisition costs), reinsurance costs or other deductions. The volume of our gross written premiums in any given period is generally influenced by:
•addition and retention of Program Partners;
•new business submissions to our Program Partners;
•binding of new business submissions into policies;
•renewals of existing policies; and
•average size and premium rate of bound policies.
Gross earned premiums: Gross earned premiums are the earned portion of gross written premiums. We earn insurance premiums on a pro rata basis over the term of the policy. Our insurance policies generally have a term of one year.
Ceded earned premiums: Ceded earned premiums are the amount of gross earned premiums ceded to reinsurers. We enter into reinsurance contracts to limit our maximum losses and diversify our exposure and provide statutory surplus relief. The volume of our ceded earned premiums is affected by the level of our gross earned premiums and any decision we make to increase or decrease limits, retention levels, and co-participations.
Net earned premiums: Net earned premiums represent the earned portion of our gross written premiums, less that portion of our gross written premiums that is earned and ceded to third-party reinsurers, including our Program Partners and professional reinsurers, under our reinsurance agreements.
Net investment income: We earn investment income on our portfolio of cash and invested assets. Our cash and invested assets are primarily comprised of fixed maturities, including other investments and short-term investments. Our net investment income includes interest income on our invested assets, income on funds held investments as well as unrealized gains and losses on our equity portfolio.
Net realized gains/losses: Net realized gains/losses are a function of the difference between the amount received by us on the sale of a security and the security’s recorded value as well as any "other-than-temporary impairments" relating to fixed maturity investments recognized in earnings.
Other revenue: Other revenue includes brokerage, third-party administrative, management and consulting and other fee-based revenues, which are commonly based on written premiums.
Loss and loss adjustment expenses (LAE): Losses and LAE are net of reinsurance and include claims paid, estimates of future claim payments, changes in those estimates from prior reporting periods and costs associated with investigating, defending, and servicing claims. In general, our losses and LAE are affected by:
•frequency of claims associated with the particular types of insurance contacts that we write;
•trends in the average size of losses incurred on a particular type of business;
•mix of business written by us;
•changes in the legal or regulatory environment related to the business we write;
•trends in legal defense costs;
•wage inflation; and
•inflation in medical costs.
Losses and LAE are based on an actuarial analysis of the estimated losses, including losses incurred during the period and changes in estimates from prior periods. Losses and LAE may be paid out over a period of years.
General and administrative expenses: General and administrative expenses include net commissions, insurance-related expenses and general and administrative operating expenses. Net commissions consist of policy acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses, net of ceding commissions. Policy acquisition costs are principally comprised of the commissions we pay our brokers and program managers. Policy acquisition costs that are directly related to the successful acquisition or reinsurance of those policies are deferred. All policy acquisition costs are charged to expense in proportion to premium earned over the policy life. We receive ceding commissions on business ceded under our reinsurance contracts. Insurance-related expenses largely consist of state premium taxes. General and administrative operating expenses include employee salaries and benefits, corporate business insurance costs, technology costs, office rent and professional services fees such as legal, accounting, audit, tax and actuarial services.
Intangible asset amortization: Intangible asset amortization consists of expenses incurred related to the amortization of intangible assets recorded as a result of business acquisitions and consists of trade names, customer lists and relationships and non-compete agreements.
Noncash stock compensation: Noncash stock compensation includes expenses related to the fair value and issuance of restricted stock units (time, market and performance-based) and stock options.
Gains (losses) on embedded derivatives: Gains (losses) on embedded derivatives consist of the change in fair value of derivatives, the effect of net investment income on funds held investments, and the effect of realized gains and loss on funds held investments.
Interest expense: Interest expense consists primarily of interest paid on (i) our term loan facility and (ii) the preferred capital securities issued by Trean Capital Trust I (the "Trust") (See "Financial Condition, Liquidity and capital resources - Debt and Credit Agreements").
Other income: Other income consists primarily of sublease revenue and other miscellaneous income items.
Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax: Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax includes the Company's share of earnings from equity method investments.
Key Metrics
We discuss certain key financial and operating metrics, described below, which provide useful information about our business and the operational factors underlying our financial performance.
Underwriting income is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as income before taxes excluding net investment income, investment revaluation gains, net realized gains or losses, intangible asset amortization, noncash stock compensation, gains and losses on embedded derivatives, interest expense, other revenue and other income and expenses. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of underwriting income to income before taxes in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net income excluding the impact of certain items, including the consummation of the reorganization transactions in connection with our IPO, noncash intangible asset amortization and stock compensation, noncash unrealized gains and losses on embedded derivatives, other expenses and gains or losses that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance, which items may have a disproportionate effect in a given period, affecting comparability of our results across periods. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted net income to net income in accordance with GAAP.
Loss ratio, expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of losses and LAE to net earned premiums.
Expense ratio, expressed as a percentage, is the ratio of general and administrative expenses to net earned premiums.
Combined ratio is the sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio. A combined ratio under 100% generally indicates an underwriting profit. A combined ratio over 100% generally indicates an underwriting loss.
Return on equity is net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period.
Adjusted return on equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted return on equity to return on equity in accordance with GAAP.
Tangible stockholders' equity is defined as stockholders' equity less goodwill and other intangible assets.
Return on tangible equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of return on tangible equity to return on equity in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted return on tangible equity is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a reconciliation of adjusted return on tangible equity to return on tangible equity in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations
This section of Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal year 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of fiscal year 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Item 7 of Part II of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on March 26, 2021 and which is available free of charge on the SEC's website at https://www.sed.gov and our website at https://www.trean.com, on the Investor Relations’ page under “Financial Info-Annual Reports.”
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
(1) Adjusted net income, adjusted return on equity, return on tangible equity, adjusted return on tangible equity and underwriting income are non-GAAP financial measures. See “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a reconciliation to the applicable GAAP measure..
The table below shows the total premiums earned on a gross and net basis for the respective annual periods:
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Gross written premiums: Gross written premiums increased $149,915, or 31.0%, to $634,164 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $484,249 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was largely driven by the full year effect of nine new program partners added in the prior year and growth from existing program partners. Gross written premium included the following:
Workers' compensation gross written premiums increased $7,870, or 2.1%, to $376,819 compared with $368,949 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Worker's compensation represented 59.4% of total gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 76.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The moderation in growth and shift in mix reflects our ongoing strategic effort to diversify our lines of business and a decrease in the California workers' compensation business that resulted from the Company's measures undertaken to exit certain unfavorable workers' compensation risks.
All other non-workers' compensation liability gross written premiums increased $142,045, or 123.2%, to $257,345 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $115,300 for the year ended December 31, 2020. All other non-workers' compensation liability represented 40.6% of our gross written premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 23.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to growth in our other liability, accident & health, commercial auto, commercial and homeowners lines of business, which is in line with our diversification strategy.
Gross earned premiums: Gross earned premiums increased $140,219, or 32.5%, to $572,253 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $432,034 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflects the increase in gross written premiums of $149,915 net of an increase in gross unearned premiums of $9,696. Gross earned premiums as a
percentage of gross written premiums was 90.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 89.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Ceded earned premiums: Ceded earned premiums increased $50,006, or 15.5%, to $373,573 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $323,567 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in ceded earned premiums is primarily driven by the full year effect of nine new programs added in the prior year which are largely ceded, partially offset by an increase in retention of existing business as part of our commitment to profitable growth. This resulted in total ceded earned premiums as a percentage of gross earned premiums of 65.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 74.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net earned premiums: Net earned premiums increased $90,213, or 83.2%, to $198,680 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $108,467 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due primarily due to the increase in gross written and earned premiums described above, partially offset by the increase in ceded earned premiums for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net investment income: Net investment income decreased $2,948, or 25.3%, to $8,721 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11,669 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to the fair value re-measurement and common stock investment reclassification of the Company's investment in TRI, which was previously classified as an equity method investment, which resulted in an unrealized gain of $2,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease also reflects the reinvestment of funds from higher yielding maturities into lower yielding investments due to lower interest rates, partially offset by an increase in our invested balance.
Net realized gains: Net realized gains were $49 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3,365 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a $3,115 realized gain on the sale of a portion of the Company's investment in TRI during the first quarter of 2020, partially offset by a loss of $112 realized in the third quarter of 2021 on the Company's sale of its remaining investment in TRI.
Other revenue: Other revenue decreased $1,864, or 15.4%, to $10,240 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $12,104 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily driven by a decrease in brokerage revenue of $1,958, due to lower placement rates reflecting the Company's increase in retention during the year.
Losses and loss adjustment expenses: Losses and LAE increased $79,998, or 157.6%, to $130,772 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $50,774 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to the growth in earned premiums and the increased retention experienced during 2021. The Company's retention rate increased to 34.7% in 2021 compared to 25.1% in 2020. The Company's loss ratio was 65.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 46.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is attributable to an unusual number of large losses experienced during the first half and fourth quarter of 2021, resulting in a much higher overall loss ratio pick related to the 2021 accident year as compared to 2020. The 2021 large losses came primarily from three of our well established programs that have consistently produced positive results prior to 2021. The Company reviewed the operations of each of these programs to assess if any significant changes in rate levels, the claims environment, or underwriting practices were the root cause for the elevated losses experienced in 2021. Based on that review, the Company concluded that these programs are good programs and the Company expects these programs to contribute profitably in the future, despite the losses these programs experienced in 2021.
General and administrative expenses: General and administrative expenses increased $16,038, or 41.5%, to $54,706 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $38,668 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This resulted in an expense ratio of 27.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 35.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The table below shows the components of general and administrative expenses for:
Direct commissions increased $15,709 primarily due to an increase in gross earned premiums. Ceding commissions increased $15,188 due to an increase in ceded earned premiums which reflected the increase in gross earned premiums, partially offset by an increase in retention. Insurance-related expenses increased $4,657 primarily as a result of the increase in gross earned premiums. General and administrative operating expenses increased $16,038, primarily as a result of (i) an increase in salaries and benefits of $7,857, of which $3,423 directly resulted from acquisitions made in the second half of 2020 and a general increase in workforce; (ii) additional rent and office-related expenses totaling 2,268 due to an increase in business insurance expense as well as the addition of new office locations; and (iii) additional IT software and systems costs totaling $1,288 related to new software implementation and automation initiatives; partially offset by a decrease in professional fees of $1,365 as a result of the Company's IPO readiness effort in 2020.
Other expenses: Other expenses were $845 for the year ended December 31, 2021 which primarily relates to secondary offering costs of $555 and executive transition costs totaling $290. Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13,427, which includes (i) a payment to Altaris Capital Partners, LLC in connection with the termination of the Company's consulting and advisory agreement totaling $7,639; (ii) IPO bonuses paid to employees and pre-IPO unitholders of $3,415; (iii) an arbitration settlement, including associated legal fees, totaling $1,572; and (iv) an executive severance accrual of $801.
Intangible asset amortization: Intangible asset amortization increased $3,253 to $5,826 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,573 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is driven by the addition of intangible assets acquired as a result of the purchase of the remaining equity interest of Compstar in the third quarter of 2020, the acquisition of 7710 Insurance Company in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the acquisition of WIC in the third quarter of 2021.
Noncash stock compensation: Noncash stock compensation was $1,522 and $506 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Expenses incurred during both periods relates to the fair value of restricted stock units and stock options granted under the Company's 2020 Omnibus Plan amortized over appropriate and applicable vesting periods. The increase of $1,016 in noncash stock compensation was driven by our 2021 annual grant and a full year of expense for our 2020 grant at the time of our July 2020 IPO grant.
Gains (losses) on embedded derivatives:
Gains (losses) on embedded derivatives consists of the following for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Gains on embedded derivatives were $2,226 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to losses of $6,155 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increased gain of $8,381 reflected the change in the fair value of the embedded derivatives of $7,476 and the effect of investment income on funds held investments of $1,007, partially offset by the effect of realized gains on funds held investments of $102.
Income tax expense: Income tax expense was $5,449 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 22.0%, compared to $6,235 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 6.7%. The increase in the effective tax rate from the statutory rate of 21% for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to the impact of recording our 2020 tax return accrual to return true up in the third quarter. The decrease in the effective tax rate of 21% for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the non-tax impact of the gain recorded on the revaluation of the Company's original 45% investment in Compstar, offset by certain IPO-related expenses not deductible for tax purposes and the impact of state taxes.
Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax: Equity earnings in affiliates, net of tax decreased $2,333 to zero for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,333 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is due to the reduction in the Company's share of earnings in Compstar of $2,333 as a result of the acquisition of the remaining ownership interest during the third quarter of 2020.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Underwriting income
We define underwriting income as income before taxes excluding net investment income, investment revaluation gains, net realized gains or losses, IPO-related expenses, intangible asset amortization, noncash stock compensation, noncash unrealized gains and losses on embedded derivatives, interest expense other revenue and other income and expenses. Underwriting income represents the pre-tax profitability of our underwriting operations and allows us to evaluate our underwriting performance without regard to the above listed items. We use this metric because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our underwriting business performance by adjusting for these expenses and sources of income. Underwriting income should not be viewed as a substitute for net income calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define underwriting income differently.
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Adjusted net income
We define adjusted net income as net income excluding the impact of certain items, including the consummation of the reorganization transactions in connection with our IPO, noncash intangible asset amortization and stock compensation, noncash unrealized gains and losses on embedded derivatives, other expenses and gains or losses that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance, which items may have a disproportionate effect in a given period, affecting comparability of our results across periods. We calculate the tax impact only on adjustments that would be included in calculating our income tax expense using the effective tax rate at the end of each period. We use adjusted net income as an internal performance measure in the management of our operations because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by eliminating the effects of these items. Adjusted net income should not be viewed as a substitute for net income calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted net income differently.
(1) the Company defines increases or decreases greater than 200% as "NM" or not meaningful.
Adjusted return on equity
We define adjusted return on equity as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders' equity during the period. We use adjusted return on equity as an internal performance measure in the management of our operations because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by adjusting for items that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance and that may diminish comparability across periods. Adjusted return on equity should not be viewed as a substitute for return on equity calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted return on equity differently.
Return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity
We define tangible stockholders' equity as stockholders' equity less goodwill and other intangible assets. We define return on tangible equity as net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. We define adjusted return on tangible equity as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending tangible stockholders' equity during the period. We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities and have historically made acquisitions that affect stockholders' equity. We use return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity as internal performance measures in the management of our operations because we believe they give our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance by adjusting for the effects of acquisitions on our stockholders' equity and, in the case of adjusted return on tangible equity, by adjusting for the items that we believe do not reflect our core operating performance and that may diminish comparability across periods. Return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity should not be viewed as a substitute for return on equity or return on tangible equity, respectively, calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define return on tangible equity and adjusted return on tangible equity differently.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
We are organized as a holding company with our operations conducted through our subsidiaries, including our wholly owned insurance subsidiaries: Benchmark, which is domiciled in Kansas and commercially domiciled in California; ALIC, which is domiciled in Utah; 7710, which is domiciled in South Carolina; and BSIC, which is domiciled in Arkansas. Accordingly, the holding company may receive cash through (i) loans from banks; (ii) draws on a revolving loan agreement; (iii) issuance of equity and debt securities, (iv) corporate service fees from our operating subsidiaries; (v) payments from our subsidiaries pursuant to our consolidated tax allocation agreement and other transactions; and (vi) dividends from our non-insurance subsidiaries and, subject to certain limitations discussed below, dividends from our insurance subsidiaries. We also may use the proceeds from these sources to contribute funds to the insurance subsidiaries in order to support premium growth, reduce our reliance on reinsurance, pay taxes and for other general business purposes.
State insurance laws restrict the ability of insurance companies to declare stockholder dividends without prior regulatory approval. State insurance regulators require insurance companies to maintain specified levels of statutory capital and surplus.
Under Kansas and California law, dividends payable from Benchmark without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner must not exceed the greater of: (i) 10% of Benchmark’s surplus as shown on the last statutory financial statement on file with the Kansas Insurance Department and the California Department of Insurance, respectively; or (ii) 100% of net income during the applicable twelve-month period (not including realized gains). Dividends shall not include pro rata distributions of any class of Benchmark's own securities.
Under Utah law, dividends payable from ALIC without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner must not exceed the lesser of (i) 10% of ALIC’s surplus as shown on the last statutory financial statement on file with the Utah Insurance Department; or (ii) 100% of net income during the applicable twelve- month period (not including realized gains). Dividends shall not include pro rata distributions of any class of ALIC's own securities.
Under South Carolina law, dividends payable from 7710 without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner are limited to the following during the preceding twelve months: (a) when paid from other than earned surplus must not exceed the lesser of: (i) 10% of 7710's surplus as regards policyholders as shown in 7710’s most recent annual statement; or (ii) the net income, not including net realized gains or losses as shown in the 7710's most recent annual statement; or (b) when paid from earned surplus must not exceed the greater of: (i) 10% of 7710's surplus as regards policyholders as shown in 7710’s most recent annual statement; or (ii) the net income, not including net realized gains or losses as shown in the 7710's most recent annual statement. Dividends shall not include pro rata distributions of any class of 7710's own securities.
Under Arkansas law, dividends payable from BSIC without the prior approval of the applicable insurance commissioner must not exceed the lesser of (i) 10% of BSIC’s surplus as shown on the last statutory financial statement on file with the Arkansas Insurance Department; or (ii) 100% of net income during the applicable twelve- month period (not including realized gains). Dividends shall not include pro rata distributions of any class of BSIC's own securities.
The maximum amount of dividends the insurance subsidiaries can pay us during 2021 without regulatory approval is $21.0 million. Insurance regulators have broad powers to ensure that statutory surplus remains at adequate levels, and there is no assurance that dividends of the maximum amount calculated under any applicable formula would be permitted. In the future, state insurance regulatory authorities that have jurisdiction over the payment of dividends by the insurance subsidiaries may adopt statutory provisions more restrictive than those currently in effect.
Our insurance subsidiaries are also required by state law to maintain a minimum level of policyholder's surplus. Kansas, Utah, Arkansas and South Carolina utilize a risk-based capital requirement as promulgated by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Such requirements are designed to identify the various business risks (e.g., investment risk, underwriting profitability risk, etc.) of insurance companies and their subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the total adjusted capital of our insurance subsidiaries was in excess of their respective prescribed risk-based capital requirements.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $129,577 in cash and cash equivalents, compared to $153,149 as of December 31, 2020.
Management believes that we have sufficient liquidity available to meet our operating cash needs and obligations and committed capital expenditures for the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
Our most significant source of cash is from premiums received from insureds, net of the related commission amount for the policies. Our most significant cash outflow is for claims that arise when a policyholder incurs an insured loss. Because the payment of claims occurs after the receipt of the premium, often years later, we invest the cash in various investment securities that generally earn interest and dividends. The table below summarizes our net cash flows.
Operating Activities: Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $94,359 compared to $50,012 for the same period in 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities includes net income as adjusted for depreciation and amortization, stock compensation, unrealized and realized gains and losses, bond amortization and accretion, the change in deferred income taxes, gain on revaluation of Compstar investment, issuance of member units as compensation, equity earnings in affiliates, distributions from equity method investments, and amortization of deferred financing costs. Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects increases in unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses of $86,503, unearned premiums of $61,953, and funds held under reinsurance agreements of $43,062; partially offset by increases in premiums and other receivable of $31,921, reinsurance recoverables of $34,028, prepaid reinsurance premiums of $21,441, other assets of $13,776 and decreases in reinsurance premiums payable of $11,939, and accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7,951. The increases in premiums and other receivables and reinsurance recoverables were primarily a result of an increase in gross written premiums during the period. Other assets increased as a result of increases in our deferred acquisition costs and contract asset balances. The decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was the result of a non-cash transfer of funds that were being held while control of the funds were being arbitrated. Upon the conclusion of arbitration with a counterparty in 2021, the funds were remitted back to the counterparty, resulting in a non-cash reduction in investments held as collateral and corresponding decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $26,211 and funds held under reinsurance agreements of $13,562. Excluding non-cash transfers, funds held under reinsurance agreement increased as a result of an increase in gross written premiums. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects distributions received from equity method investments and incremental cash received for operating assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities: Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $120,156 compared to $20,246 for the same period in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $116,247 net cash used in the purchase and sale of investments, $3,795 in cash used in the acquisition of a subsidiary, net of cash received, and $346 in capital expenditures, partially offset by $232 received for the return of capital on equity method investments. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $23,911 net cash used in the purchase and sale of investments, $10,534 in cash used in the acquisition of a subsidiary, net of cash received, and $807 in capital expenditures, partially offset by $11,891 cash received in the acquisition of Compstar, $3,000 in cash received for the sale of equity method investments, and $115 received for the return of capital on equity method investments.
Financing Activities: Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,453 compared to net cash provided by of $51,400 for the same period in 2020. The cash used in financing activities in the current year was primarily driven by principal payment on debt of $1,444. Cash provided by financing activities in the prior year was primarily driven by proceeds from our initial public offering of $99,643 and proceeds from our credit agreement of $32,453. This was partially offset by principal payment on our debt of $49,728, distribution to members prior to the our initial public offering of $19,819, buy back of preferred shares of $5,100 and deferred offering costs of $5,839.
Debt and Credit Agreements
First Horizon Credit Agreement
In April 2018, the Company entered into a credit agreement with First Horizon Bank (formerly, First Tennessee Bank National Association) that includes a term loan facility totaling $27.5 million and a revolving credit facility of $3.0 million. Borrowings are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and its subsidiaries.
On July 16, 2020, the Company entered into a new Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with First Horizon Bank that, among other things, extended the Company's credit facility for a period of five years through May 26, 2025 and increased its term loan facility by $11,707 resulting in a total term loan debt amount of $33,000 and a revolving credit facility of $2,000. The loan has a variable interest rate of LIBOR plus 4.50%, 4.50% and 3.00%, which was 4.64%, 4.72% and 6.33% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The outstanding principal balance of the loan is to be repaid in quarterly installments that escalate from approximately $206 to $825 until March 2025. All equity securities of the Company's subsidiaries (other than Benchmark Holding Company and its subsidiaries) have been pledged as collateral.
In addition, and in conjunction with, the execution of the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company made dividend distribution payments to Trean members totaling $18,154 in May 2020.
Junior Subordinated Debt
In June 2006, the Trust issued 7,500 shares of preferred capital securities to Bear Stearns Securities Corp. and 232 common securities to Trean Corporation. The proceeds of such issuances were invested by the Trust in $7,732 aggregate principal amount of the Subordinated Notes. The Subordinated Notes represents the sole assets of the Trust. On October 7, 2020, Trean Corp redeemed all of the Subordinated Notes for a total payoff amounts of $7,807. The interest rate was a fixed rate of 9.167% until July 7, 2011, at which time a variable interest rate of 3-month LIBOR (1.99% as of December 31, 2020, respectively) plus 3.50% is in effect. The interest rate totaled 5.49% as of December 31, 2020, respectively.
Oak Street Loan
In conjunction with the acquisition of Compstar, the Company acquired a loan from Oak Street Funding with a total principle of $19,740. In July 2020, upon completion of the acquisition, the Company paid this loan off in full.
PPP Loans
In conjunction with the acquisition of WIC, the Company acquired two Federal Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP Loans") with a principal balance of $243. As of December 31, 2021, both loans had been fully forgiven.
Reinsurance
We cede a portion of the risk we accept on our balance sheet to third-party reinsurers through a variety of reinsurance arrangements. We manage these arrangements to align risks with our Program Partners, optimize our net retention relative to our financial objectives, balance sheet size and ratings requirements, as well as to limit our maximum loss resulting from a single program or a single event. We utilize both quota share and excess of loss ("XOL") reinsurance as tools in our overall risk management strategy to achieve these goals, usually in conjunction with each other. Quota share reinsurance involves the proportional sharing of premiums and losses of each defined program. We utilize quota share reinsurance for several purposes, including (i) to cede risk to Program Partners, which allows us to share economics and align incentives and (ii) to cede risk to third-party reinsurers in order to manage our net written premiums appropriately based on our financial objectives, capital base, A.M. Best financial strength rating and risk appetite. It is a core pillar of our underwriting philosophy that Program Partners retain a portion of the underwriting risk of their program. We believe this best aligns interests, attracts higher quality programs, and leads to better underwriting results. Under XOL reinsurance, losses in excess of a retention level are paid by the reinsurer, subject to a limit, and are customized per program or across multiple programs. We utilize XOL reinsurance to protect against catastrophic or other unforeseen extreme loss activity that could otherwise negatively impact our profitability and capital base. The majority of our exposure to catastrophe risk stems from the workers’ compensation premium we retain. Potential catastrophic events include an earthquake, terrorism, or another event that could cause more than one covered employee working at the same location to be injured in the event. We believe we mitigate this risk by our focus on small- to mid-sized accounts, which means that we generally do not have concentrated employee counts at single locations that could be exposed to a catastrophic loss. The cost and limits of the reinsurance coverage we purchase vary from year to year based on the availability of quality reinsurance at an acceptable price and our desired level of retention.
Ratings
We have a financial strength rating of "A" (Excellent) from A.M. Best. A.M. Best assigns 16 ratings to insurance companies, which currently range from "A++" (Superior) to "S" (Rating Suspended). "A" (Excellent) is the third highest rating issued by A.M. Best. The "A" (Excellent) rating is assigned to insurers that have, in A.M. Best’s opinion, an excellent ability to meet their ongoing obligations to policyholders. This rating is intended to provide an independent opinion of an insurer’s ability to meet its obligation to policyholders and is not an evaluation directed at investors. See also "Risk factors - Risks related to our business and industry - A downgrade in the A.M. Best financial strength ratings of our insurance company subsidiaries may negatively affect our business."
The financial strength ratings assigned by A.M. Best have an impact on the ability of the insurance companies to attract and retain agents and brokers and on the risk profiles of the submissions for insurance that the insurance companies receive. The "A" (Excellent) rating obtained by us is consistent with our business plan and allows us to actively pursue relationships with the agents and brokers identified in our marketing plan.
Contractual obligations and commitments
Reserves for losses and loss adjustment expenses
The Company estimates the liability for the expected ultimate cost of unpaid loss and LAE as of the balance sheet date. Our reserves for unpaid loss and LAE represent the cost of all reported loss and LAE expenses as well as those that have been incurred but not yet reported. The estimated losses and LAE are regularly reviewed and adjusted as necessary based on historical experience and as the Company obtains new information. Actual losses and settlement expenses paid may deviate from the reserve estimates. Similarly, the timing for payment of our estimated losses is not fixed and is not determinable on an individual or aggregate basis due to the uncertainty inherent in the process of estimating such payments.
See Note 15 of notes to the consolidated financial statements and "Critical Accounting Estimates" for a discussion of estimates and assumptions related to the reserves for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses.
Credit facility
As of December 31, 2021, we had $30,938 principal outstanding on our term loan under the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement with First Horizon Bank. The loan has a variable interest rate of LIBOR plus 4.50%, 4.50% and 3.00%, which was 4.64%, 4.72% and 6.33% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The outstanding principal balance of the loan is to be repaid in quarterly installments that escalate from approximately $206 to $825 until March 2025. See Note 12 of notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details regarding our credit facility.
Operating lease obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we leased office space and equipment in 12 states. Our leases have remaining terms ranging from one month to 42 months and some of our leases include options to extend the lease for up to 5 years. Future expected cash obligations include $2,428, $1,846, $971, $102 and $7 during the years ended December 31, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025 and 2026, respectively. See Note 17 of notes to the consolidated financial statements for further details regarding our leases.
Financial condition
Stockholders' Equity
As of December 31, 2021, total stockholders' equity was $421,909, compared to $410,107 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $11,802. The increase in stockholders' equity over the period was driven primarily by $10,288 of comprehensive income. We had $3,563 of unrecognized stock compensation as of December 31, 2021 related to non-vested stock compensation granted. The Company recognized $1,522 of stock compensation during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Investment Portfolio
Our invested asset portfolio consists of fixed maturities, equity securities, other investments and short-term investments. The majority of the investment portfolio was comprised of fixed maturity securities of $471,061 at December 31, 2021, that were classified as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale investments are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses on these securities, net of applicable taxes, reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income.
Our investment portfolio objectives are to maintain liquidity, facilitating financial strength and stability and ensuring regulatory and legal compliance. Our investment portfolio consists of available-for-sale fixed maturities and other equity investments, all of which are carried at fair value. We seek to hold a high-quality portfolio of investments that is managed by a professional investment advisory management firm in accordance with the Company's investment policy and routinely reviewed by our management team. Our investments, however, are subject to general economic conditions and market risks as well as risks inherent to particular securities. The Company's investment portfolio has the following objectives:
•meet insurance regulatory requirements with respect to investments under the applicable insurance laws;
•maintain an appropriate level of liquidity to satisfy the cash requirements of current operations and long-term obligations;
•adjust investment risk to offset or complement insurance risk based on our total corporate risk tolerance; and
•realize the highest possible levels of investment income and after-tax total rates of return.
The composition of our investment portfolio is shown in the following table as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the percentage of the total estimated fair value of our fixed maturity securities as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 by credit rating category, using the lower of ratings assigned by Moody's Investor Service or S&P.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The consolidated financial statements included in this annual report include amounts based on the use of estimates and judgments of management. The Company's accounting policies are described in the Notes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. We identified the accounting estimates that are critical to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations. Critical accounting estimates are defined as those estimates made in accordance with GAAP that are both reasonably likely to have or have had a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations and require us to exercise significant judgment. We use significant judgment concerning future results and developments in applying these critical accounting estimates and in preparing our consolidated financial statements. These judgments and estimates affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of our material contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ materially from the estimates and assumptions used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. We evaluate our estimates regularly using information that we believe to be relevant.
Unpaid loss and loss adjustment expenses
The Company estimates the liability for the expected ultimate cost of unpaid loss and LAE as of the balance sheet date. Our reserves for unpaid loss and LAE represent the cost of all reported loss and LAE expenses as well as those that have been incurred but not yet reported. The estimated losses and LAE are regularly reviewed and adjusted as necessary based on historical experience and as the Company obtains new information.
We categorize our reserves for unpaid loss and LAE into two types: case reserves and incurred but not yet reported (IBNR). We establish our case reserves based on claims information reported to us through our claims administrator. Our case reserves include an estimate of the ultimate losses from the claims including administrative costs associated with the settlement of the claim. Our claims department uses their knowledge of the specific claim along with internal and external experts, including underwriters and independent actuaries, to estimate the expected ultimate losses.
In addition to case reserves, we establish a reserve for IBNR. With the assistance of an independent actuarial firm, we estimate the total loss and LAE related to IBNR which is comprised of: (a) future payments on claims that existed as of the balance sheet date but had not yet been reported to us; (b) a reserve for the additional development on claims that have been
reported to us; and (c) a provision for additional payments on closed claims that may reopen. These estimates are based on historical information, industry information and estimates of trends that may impact the ultimate frequency and severity of IBNR claims.
In order to limit the Company's maximum losses and diversify its exposure, we cede a portion of our obligations for losses and LAE through reinsurance treaties with third party reinsurers. The amount of reinsurance that will be recoverable on our losses and LAE includes both the reinsurance recoverables on our excess of loss reinsurance contracts as well as reinsurance recoverables under our quota share contracts.
Our loss reserves, including the main components of such reserves, were as follows:
The process of estimating the reserves for unpaid loss and LAE expenses requires a high degree of judgment. Estimates are prepared using several generally accepted actuarial methodologies for estimating loss reserves including, but not limited to, the incurred development method, paid development method, incurred Bornhuetter-Ferguson method, hindsight IBNR/case reserve ratios, and loss ratio method. The methods used vary based on the line of business and the Partner Program or general agency that generated the business. Considering each of the alternative ultimate estimates, we determine the appropriate estimate of ultimate loss for each line of business and Program Partner.
Reinsurance recoverables
Reinsurance recoverables represent the portion of our unpaid loss and LAE that are ceded to third party reinsurers. The ceding of insurance does not relieve the Company of its primary liability to policyholders. We are required to pay claims even if a reinsurer fails to pay the Company under the terms of a reinsurance contract. We calculate the amounts recoverable from reinsurers based on our estimates of the underlying loss and LAE expenses as well as the terms and conditions of the reinsurance contracts.
Investment fair value measurements
Our investments in fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported as a component of other comprehensive income, net of deferred taxes. Our investments in equity securities are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported as net investment income in the Consolidated and Combined Statement of Operations. In determining the fair value of investments, we utilize a hierarchy based on the quality of inputs used to measure the fair value. The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1: Fair values primarily based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access at the measurement date.
Level 2: Fair values primarily based on observable inputs, other than quoted prices included in Level 1, or based on prices for similar assets and liabilities.
Level 3: Fair values primarily based on valuations derived when one or more of the significant inputs are unobservable. With little or no observable market, the determination of fair value uses considerable judgment and represents the Company’s best estimate of an amount that could be realized in a market exchange for the asset or liability.
We utilize a third-party pricing service to assist us with the valuation of our investments. The fair value of our available-for-sale fixed maturity and equity securities are based on quoted market prices, where available. These fair values are obtained primarily from our third-party pricing service, which generally include Level 1 or Level 2 inputs. Inputs often used in the
valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, transaction data, yield, quality, coupon rate, maturity, issue type, trading characteristics and market activity.
The Company regularly reviews its investment portfolio to determine if other-than-temporary impairment exists for any fixed maturity securities. An investment is impaired when the fair value of the investment declines to an amount less than the cost or amortized cost of that investment. If a security is impaired, the Company bifurcates the impairment into (a) the amount of impairment related to credit loss and (b) the amount of impairment related to other factors. The amount of impairment related to credit loss is recorded as an impairment loss and is included in net income. The impairment related to all other factors is recorded as a reduction in the fair value of the security and is included in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Goodwill and intangible asset valuation
We prepare an impairment analysis for goodwill and other intangible assets. In evaluating for impairment, we identify whether events or circumstances have occurred that may impact the carrying value of these assets and make assumptions regarding future events such as cash flows and profitability. If the carrying amount of the assets are deemed to be not recoverable, the Company records an impairment loss. Differences in the assumptions of recoverability and actual results could materially impact the carrying amount of these assets and our operating results.
Business combinations
The Company strategically identifies opportunities to grow through acquisition. Such business combinations include the identification and valuation of certain assets acquired and liabilities assumed including the valuation of goodwill and intangible assets. Valuations are determined using a market participant assumption and generally include the following valuation approaches:
The Cost Approach is based on replacement value using the acquired company's balance sheet as the basis for valuing the business or individual assets. Under this approach, the appraiser must determine the potential value that is attainable from the sale of all assets or individual assets less the repayment of any associated debt. Separate valuations are performed for each item on the balance sheet and all tangible and intangible assets and liabilities are adjusted to their respective values.
The Income Approach measures the value of an ownership interest in a company or asset as the present value of the future economic benefits of ownership. The future ownership benefits may be represented by the expected earnings or cash flow of a company or asset over an investment period. The expected earnings or cash flow are then converted to their net present value using a rate of return suitable for the risks associated with realizing those future benefits.
The Market Approach asserts that the value of property of any kind is equal to the cost of obtaining an equally desired substitute. Under this approach, the appraisal is based on transactions of assets similar to the subject asset. Value multiples from these transactions are applied to the subject asset's data to arrive at the asset's value.