Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This 10-K was also incorporated in our registration statement filed under Form 10. Moving forward we will file with the SEC annual and quarterly information and other reports that are specified in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and SEC regulations. Thus, we will need to ensure that we will have the ability to prepare, on a timely basis, financial statements that comply with SEC reporting requirements following the effectiveness of our registration statement. We will also become subject to other reporting and corporate governance requirements, including the listing standards of any securities exchange upon which we may list our Common Stock, and the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”), and the regulations promulgated hereunder, which impose significant compliance obligations upon us. As a public company, we will be required, among other things, to:
· Prepare and distribute reports and other stockholder communications in compliance with our obligations under the federal securities laws and the applicable national securities exchange listing rules;
· Define and expand the roles and the duties of our Board of Directors and its committees;
· Institute more comprehensive compliance, investor relations and internal audit functions;
· Involve and retain outside legal counsel and accountants in connection with the activities listed above.
Management for each year commencing with the year ending December 31, 2021, must assess the adequacy of our internal control over financial reporting. Our internal control over financial reporting will be required to meet the standards required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will incur additional costs in order to improve our internal control over financial reporting and comply with Section 404, including increased auditing and legal fees and costs associated with hiring additional accounting and administrative staff. Ultimately, our efforts may not be adequate to comply with the requirements of Section 404. If we are unable to implement and maintain adequate internal control over financial reporting or otherwise to comply with Section 404, we may be unable to report financial information on a timely basis, may suffer adverse regulatory consequences, may have violations of the applicable national securities exchange listing rules, and may breach covenants under our credit facilities.
The significant obligations related to being a public company will continue to require a significant commitment of additional resources and management oversight that will increase our costs and might place a strain on our systems and resources. As a result, our management’s attention might be diverted from other business concerns. In addition, we might not be successful in implementing and maintaining controls and procedures that comply with these requirements. If we fail to maintain an effective internal control environment or to comply with the numerous legal and regulatory requirements imposed on public companies, we could make material errors in, and be required to restate, our financial statements. Any such restatement could result in a loss of public confidence in the reliability of our financial statements and sanctions imposed on us by the SEC.
NuOncology Labs, Inc. is a blank check company and has no operations. Our business plan includes acquisitions of operating companies. In summary, NLAB is focused on raising capital for its business plan. As of this filing, we have not raised any capital and our business is not yet operational.
Results of Operations for NuOncology Labs, Inc. -Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
We had no revenues from operations during either 2021 or 2020.
General and Administrative Expense
General and Administrative Expenses were $29,219 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to Nil for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $29,219.
Stock compensation expense
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $29,219 on non-cash stock compensation expense from the issuance of common stock for payment of debt on behalf of the company. There was no stock issued for services or debt payment in the prior year.
Net Loss
We had a net loss of $29,219 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to Nil for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $0 of cash, no liabilities, and an accumulated deficit of $10,847,754. We used zero of cash in operations for the year ended December 31, 20201and received net proceeds from financing of $0.
The financial statements accompanying this Report have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of our business. As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, we have not yet generated any revenue, had a net loss of $29,219 and have an accumulated stockholders’ deficit of $10,847,754 as of December 31, 2021. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise additional funds and implement our business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.