Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should carefully read “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Forward-Looking Statements
The information in this discussion contains forward-looking statements and information within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, which are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections. These forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements concerning our strategy, future operations, future financial position, future revenues, projected costs, prospects and plans and objectives of management. The words “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “plans,” “projects,” “will,” “would” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. We may not actually achieve the plans, intentions, or expectations disclosed in our forward-looking statements and you should not place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward-looking statements that we make. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, the risks set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The forward-looking statements are applicable only as of the date on which they are made, and we do not assume any obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing an innovative cell therapy pipeline of autologous tumor infiltrating lymphocyte, or TIL, therapies for the treatment of patients with cancer. We have assembled an accomplished team with a successful track record in the development, manufacture, regulatory approval and commercialization of multiple cell therapies. Using our optimized and scalable manufacturing process, we are advancing our lead TIL product candidate, ITIL-168, for the treatment of advanced melanoma. Based on the clinical results from a compassionate use program with a TIL product that was manufactured using a prior version of the ITIL-168 manufacturing process, we submitted an investigational new drug application, or IND, to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, and were authorized to initiate a Phase 2 trial in late 2021 with expected topline safety and efficacy data in 2023, which we believe could support a biologics license application, or BLA submission. We plan to initiate a Phase 1 trial of ITIL-168 in additional indications with unmet medical need, including cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, non-small cell lung cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and cervical cancer, in 2022. ITIL-168 will be manufactured in our company-operated in-house manufacturing facilities for both our clinical trials and commercial sales, if approved.
We are also developing a novel class of genetically engineered TIL therapies using our Co-Stimulatory Antigen Receptor, or CoStAR, platform. These modified TILs still rely on their native, patient-specific T cell receptors, or TCRs, to bind to tumor neoantigens, but have been enhanced to express novel CoStAR molecules, which bind to shared tumor-associated antigens and provide potent costimulation to T cells within the tumor microenvironment. We believe that the ability of CoStAR to augment the activation of TILs upon native TCR-mediated recognition of tumor neoantigens has the potential to bring TIL therapy to patients with cancer types that have been historically resistant to immunotherapy. We anticipate filing an investigational new drug, or IND, application for our lead CoStAR-TIL product candidate, ITIL-306, in 2022.
We were founded in August 2018. In February 2019, we entered into a license agreement with Immetacyte Ltd., or Immetacyte, pursuant to which we obtained a worldwide license to Immetacyte’s proprietary technology,
know-how and intellectual property for the research, development, manufacture and commercialization of TIL therapies. Immetacyte had been manufacturing a TIL product under a compassionate use program since 2011.
In March 2020, we acquired 100% of the share capital of Immetacyte for $0.8 million in cash consideration and 5.6 million shares of common stock valued at $0.58 per share. Pursuant to the purchase agreement, we are obligated to pay up to an aggregate of $14.8 million upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and commercial sales milestones. In connection with the acquisition, we terminated the Immetacyte license agreement and associated payment obligations. The transaction was accounted for as a business combination and we recognized a $10.1 million intangible asset for the acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D. We acquired Immetacyte primarily for this IPR&D, which is critical to achieve our objective of developing an innovative cell therapy pipeline of autologous TIL therapies for the treatment of patients with cancer, as well as the dedicated workforce of Immetacyte. Utilizing this IPR&D, we have optimized and scaled the manufacturing process and are advancing our lead TIL product candidate, ITIL-168, for the treatment of advanced melanoma. Based on the clinical results from a compassionate use program performed by Immetacyte at the Christie Hospital in Manchester, United Kingdom, with a TIL product that was manufactured using a prior version of the ITIL-168 manufacturing process, we initiated a Phase 2 trial.
Since inception, we have had significant operating losses. Our net loss was $156.8 million and $38 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $201.7 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and marketable securities of $454.6 million, which consists of $37.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, $0.5 million in restricted cash, and $416.5 million in marketable securities. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase.
Recent Developments
In September 2021, following clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, we initiated a global Phase 2 clinical trial of ITIL-168 in patients with advanced melanoma whose disease has relapsed after a PD-1 inhibitor and, if positive for a BRAF-activating mutation, a BRAF inhibitor. The Phase 2 trial was expanded during the IND review process, in consultation with FDA, to include additional populations of patients with advanced melanoma. Cohorts 2 and 3 will enroll patients who discontinued PD-1 inhibitor therapy due to intolerable toxicity and patients who had an unsatisfactory response to prior PD-1 inhibitor but have not yet experienced disease progression, respectively. On September 13, 2021, we reported clearance of our IND application by the FDA to initiate DELTA-1, a global Phase 2 clinical trial of ITIL-168 with registrational intent in patients with advanced melanoma. Topline safety and efficacy results are expected in 2023 and, if positive, we believe could support the submission of a BLA to the FDA.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. Since then, extraordinary actions have been taken by international, federal, state, and local public health and governmental authorities to contain and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19 in regions throughout the world, including the United Kingdom and California, where most of our operations are conducted. These actions include travel bans, quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic as it continues to progress and its potential impact on our business. As a result of COVID-19, we have taken precautionary measures in order to minimize the risk of the virus to our employees. In addition, a significant portion of our workforce now works remotely. To date, we have been able to continue our key business activities and advance our clinical programs. However, in the future, it is possible that it will become more difficult to enroll participants in our clinical trials, which could delay our clinical development timelines. While the broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, including any implications from the spread of the new Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19, the COVID-19 pandemic has, to date, not had a
material adverse impact on our results of operations or our ability to raise funds to sustain operations. The economic effects of the pandemic and resulting societal changes are currently not predictable, and the future financial impacts could vary from those foreseen.
See “Risk Factors” for a further discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. Research and development expenses consist primarily of research and development, manufacturing, monitoring and other services payments and in-license payments to Immetacyte and, to a lesser extent, salaries, benefits, and other personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, professional service fees and facility and other related costs. In-licensing payments to Immetacyte were treated as IPR&D and expensed when incurred because the product candidates using the licensed TIL technology were determined to have no alternative future use. In addition, research and development expense is presented net of reimbursements from reimbursable tax and expenditure credits and grants from the U.K. government. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not allocate our research and development expenses by program.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to ramp up our clinical development activities and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. Our expenditures on future nonclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties in timing and cost to completion. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress and expenses of clinical trials and other research and development activities;
•potential safety monitoring and other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•significant and changing government regulation; and
•the timing and receipt of regulatory approvals, if any.
The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain FDA and other regulatory approval is costly and time consuming and the successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain. The risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects are discussed more fully in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.” As a result of these risks and uncertainties, we are unable to determine with any degree of certainty the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, finance and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, legal, tax and consulting services, insurance costs, recruiting costs, travel expenses, amortization and depreciation, and other general and administrative costs.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to increase our headcount to support our research and development activities and operations generally, the growth of our business and, if any of our product candidates receive marketing approval, commercialization
activities. We also expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, additional director and officer insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of taxes, foreign exchange remeasurement gains and other expenses.
Income Tax Provision
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and the foreign jurisdiction where we operate, the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom has statutory tax rates that differ from those in the United States. Accordingly, our effective tax rates will vary depending on the relative proportion of United Kingdom to United States income, the availability of research and development tax credits, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax laws.
In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Due to the uncertainty of the business in which we operate, projections of future profitability are difficult and past profitability is not necessarily indicative of future profitability. At December 31, 2021, we maintained a full valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets for the U.S. entity. The valuation allowance has been provided based on the positive and negative evidence relative to our company, including the existence of cumulative net operating losses, or NOLs since the Company’s inception, and the inability to carryback these NOLs to prior periods. Furthermore, the Company determined that it is more likely than not that the benefit of these assets would not be realized in the foreseeable future. The timing and the reversal of the Company's valuation allowance will continue to be monitored. For United Kingdom purposes, the losses are being reported as a deferred tax asset to offset the net deferred tax liability by approximately $0.2 million.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $107.3 million and $19.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses during this period of $87.9 million was primarily due to:
•$54.1 million in costs from an increase in headcount and related costs for our research and development personnel, including increased stock-based compensation expense of $12.5 million, to support increased clinical trial activities, including clinical manufacturing;
•$18.7 million in costs related to research and clinical development activities, including from our clinical trials and expanded clinical manufacturing activities; and
•$15.0 million of expenses related to facilities and overhead, depreciation and amortization, and other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $48.3 million and $14.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net increase of $33.9 million was primarily due to:
•$23.6 million in costs resulting from increased headcount and personnel related costs, including increased stock-based compensation expense of $12.0 million, to support our growing business and for preparation of clinical trials;
•$7.5 million in costs resulting from usage of consultants during the Company's initial public offering, mainly consisting of expenses for accounting consulting services of $1.6 million, executive and legal consultants of $2.8 million. Additionally, the increase was due to information technology consultants of $2.8 million in connection with our growing business; and
•$2.9 million in costs resulting from increased insurance expenses of $3.5 million offset by a decrease in facilities, office and administrative costs of $0.6 million.
Other (Expense), Net
Other expense, net was expense of $1.2 million and expense of $3.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $2.7 million was due to a $4.4 million loss on the issuance of Series A preferred stock during the year ended December 31, 2020 offset by an increase gain on foreign currency transactions of $1.4 million, and an increase loss of $0.3 million in other expenses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense, decreased from $0.2 million expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $39 thousand expense for the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, income tax expense mostly consisted of deferred foreign income taxes from our operations in the United Kingdom.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and we have incurred significant operating losses. We do not have any products that have achieved regulatory marketing approval and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and marketable securities of $454.6 million, which consists of $37.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, $0.5 million in restricted cash, and $416.5 million in marketable securities. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation.
In the first quarter of 2021, we raised aggregate net cash proceeds of $52.5 million from the issuance and sale of our Series C convertible preferred stock.
In March 2021, we raised net proceeds of $339.0 million in our IPO, pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 18,400,000 shares of common stock.
Prior to our IPO, we funded our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock. From our inception through December 31, 2020, we raised net cash proceeds of $327.6 million from the issuance and sale of our convertible preferred stock. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $241.7 million and an accumulated deficit of $44.9 million.
Future Funding Requirements
Based on our current operating plan, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We expect to continue to expend significant resources for the foreseeable future.
We use our cash to fund operations, primarily to fund our research and development expenditures and related personnel costs. We expect our expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities, particularly as we advance our product candidates into later stages of development and conduct larger clinical trials, seek regulatory approvals for and commercialize any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, hire additional personnel and invest in and grow our business, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio, and operate as a public company. Because of the numerous
risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact timing and amount of our funding requirements. Our future operating expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, costs and results of our clinical and preclinical development activities;
•the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for ITIL-168, ITIL-306 or any future product candidates, and the number of trials required for regulatory approval;
•the cost of manufacturing ITIL-168, ITIL-306 or any future product candidates as well as any products we successfully commercialize;
•costs related to our manufacturing and other facilities;
•the cost of commercialization activities of our product candidates, if approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of ITIL-168, ITIL-306 or any future product candidates, if approved;
•the costs associated with constructing our new clinical and commercial manufacturing facility and building out lab space;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other companies’ product candidates and technologies;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such arrangements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty or other payments due under any such agreement;
•any product liability or other lawsuits;
•the expenses needed to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
•our investments in our operational, financial and management information systems;
•the costs associated with operating as a public company;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio; and
•any delays or issues resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
In March 2020, we acquired 100% of the share capital of Immetacyte for total cash and non-cash consideration, including contingent consideration, of $15.4 million. In connection with the acquisition, we terminated the Immetacyte license agreement and associated payment obligations. The maximum consideration that remained unpaid at December 31, 2021, which payment is contingent on future events, was $14.5 million.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, which may include strategic collaborations or other arrangements with third parties. Additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders will suffer dilution and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common shareholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants limiting our flexibility in conducting future business activities, and, in the event of insolvency, debt holders would be repaid before holders of our equity securities receive any distribution of our corporate assets. If we raise funds through collaborations or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to technologies, future revenue streams, product candidates or research programs or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common shares. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. If we fail to obtain necessary capital when needed on acceptable terms, or at all, it could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs, commercialization efforts or other operations.
We lease various operating spaces in the United States and the United Kingdom under non-cancelable operating lease arrangements that expire on various dates through 2026. These arrangements require us to pay certain operating expenses, such as taxes, repairs, and insurance and contain landlord or tenant incentives or allowances, renewal and escalation clauses. As of December 31, 2021, our future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable lease agreements were $10.2 million, as discussed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our contractual obligations and commitments primarily consist of amounts we will pay to the general contractor constructing and developing land and buildings in Tarzana, California which we acquired in October 2020 for $37.6 million. We are in the process of developing this land for our United States operations and our contractual commitments for this development project are limited to unreimbursed spend by the general contractor. As of December 31, 2021, $63.2 million was contractually committed to the development of this project.
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts with Clinical Research Organizations, or CROs, and other third parties for preclinical studies and clinical trials, research and development supplies and other testing and manufacturing services. We are contractually obligated for approximately $34.6 million in future services related to clinical trials, depending on whether certain milestones are met, as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $122.1 million, which consisted of the net loss of $156.8 million partially offset by $30.3 million in non-cash charges and other adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities and a $4.4 million net change to our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation of $26.2 million, and depreciation and amortization expense of $2.8 million. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $3.9 million in accounts payable, an increase of $12.0 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by an increase in $5.0 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase in $6.5 million in other long-term assets.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.6 million, which consisted of the net loss of $37.7 million, partially offset by $6.6 million in non-cash charges and other adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used in operating activities and a $1.5 million net change to our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of a loss on issuance of Series A convertible preferred stock of $4.4 million, loss on change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.9 million, and stock-based compensation of $1.7 million. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease of $1.1 million in accounts payable, and an increase of $4.6 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $474.4 million, of which $57.8 million was related to purchases of property, plant and equipment, and $416.6 million was related to marketable securities.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.1 million, which was related to purchases of property, plant and equipment of $50.8 million and $0.3 million related to the acquisition of Immetacyte.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $393.2 million, which was primarily related to net cash proceeds from our IPO of $339.0 million, net cash proceeds from the issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock of $52.5 million and cash proceeds from exercise of stock options of $1.8 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $313.0 million, which was primarily related to net cash proceeds from the issuance of Series A, Series B, and Series C convertible preferred stock of $312.6 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company's contractual obligations and commitments primarily consist of amounts we will pay to the general contractor constructing and developing our land and buildings in Tarzana, California. As of December 31, 2021, $63.2 million was contractually committed to the development of this project. Additionally, future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases as of December 31, 2021 totaled $10.2 million, as discussed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain a stock-based compensation plan as a long-term incentive for employees, directors and consultants. The plan allows for the issuance of stock options, stock appreciation rights and restricted stock units.
For stock-based awards with only service conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock-based awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period and account for forfeitures as they occur. For stock-based awards with performance conditions, stock-based compensation expense is not recognized until the performance condition is probable to occur. Our stock-based compensation costs are based upon the grant date fair
value estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This model utilizes inputs that are highly subjective assumptions and generally require significant judgment. These assumptions include:
• Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to our IPO in March 2021, the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying stock options had historically been determined by the board of directors. Because there has been no public market for the our common stock, the board of directors has determined fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including important developments in our operations, contemporaneous valuations performed by an independent third party firm, sales of our convertible preferred stock, our operating results and financial performance, the conditions in the biotechnology industry and the economy in general, the stock price volatility of similar public companies and the lack of marketability of our common stock, among other factors. After our IPO in March 2021, the fair value of common stock is determined using the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market
• Expected Term - The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the awards.
• Expected Volatility - Since we are privately held and do not have any trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
• Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of awards.
• Expected Dividend Yield -We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Acquisitions
We evaluate acquisitions of assets and related liabilities and other similar transactions to assess whether or not the transaction should be accounted for as a business combination or asset acquisition by first applying a screen to determine if substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets. If the screen is met, the transaction is accounted for as an asset acquisition. If the screen is not met, further determination is required as to whether or not we have acquired inputs and processes that have the ability to create outputs which would meet the requirements of a business.
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets and contingent consideration liabilities. We use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately assign fair value to the intangible assets acquired at the acquisition date. Liabilities arising from the acquisition may include contingent consideration and require judgment in ascertaining the related fair value. Independent appraisals may be used to assist in the determination of these fair values. Such appraisals are based on significant estimates provided by us, such as projected revenues, earnings, cash flows, assembled workforce and schedule, with estimated probabilities of development milestone achievements utilized in determining the fair value of contract-related acquired intangible assets or contingent consideration. Adjustments to the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in earnings. Additional information related to the acquisition date fair value of acquired net assets obtained during the allocation period, not to exceed one year, may result in changes to the recorded values of acquired assets and liabilities, resulting in an offsetting adjustment to the goodwill associated with the business acquired.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements applicable to us is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. For so long as we remain an emerging growth company, we are permitted and intend to rely on certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including not being required to have our internal control over financial reporting audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments not previously approved. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies in which you hold stock.
In addition, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2026, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if (a) we have been reporting under the Exchange Act for at least twelve calendar months, (b) we have filed at least one Annual Report on Form 10-K and (c) the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
In accordance with Section 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, we are no longer a smaller reporting company as of December 31, 2021. However, under Item 10(f)(2)(i) of Regulation S-K, we are permitted to avail ourselves of the scaled disclosure requirements available to smaller reporting companies in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Having ceased to be a smaller reporting company, we will no longer be able to avail ourselves of such scaled disclosure beginning with our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ending March 31, 2022.