Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is presented in this section as follows:
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
OVERVIEW
Tiptree allocates capital to select small and middle market companies with the mission of building long-term value. Established in 2007, we have a significant track record investing in the insurance sector and across a variety of other industries, including mortgage origination, specialty finance and shipping. Our largest operating subsidiary, Fortegra, is a leading provider of specialty insurance products and related services. We also generate earnings from a diverse group of select investments that we refer to as Tiptree Capital, which includes our Mortgage segment and other, non-insurance businesses and assets. We evaluate performance primarily by the comparison of shareholders’ long-term total return on capital, as measured by growth in stock price plus dividends paid, in addition to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EBITDA.
Our 2021 highlights include:
Overall:
•Net income of $38.1 million increased from a net loss of $29.2 million in 2020, driven by growth in insurance and shipping operations, in addition to realized and unrealized gains on investments as compared to losses in 2020.
•Adjusted net income of $63.9 million increased 24.2% from $51.4 million in 2020, driven by improvement in insurance and shipping operations. Adjusted return on average equity was 16.5%, as compared to 13.1% in 2020.
•On October 12, 2021, Tiptree announced a $200 million strategic investment in its insurance subsidiary, Fortegra, by Warburg Pincus, a leading global growth investor. The investment will give Warburg Pincus an approximate 24% ownership in Fortegra on an as converted basis and is expected to close in the second quarter 2022, subject to regulatory approvals.
Insurance:
•Gross written premiums and premium equivalents were $2,194.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1,666.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, up 31.6% as a result of growth in admitted and E&S insurance lines as well as growth in fee-based service contract offerings.
•Total revenues increased 42.4% to $984.1 million, from $691.1 million in 2020, driven by increases in earned premiums, net, service and administrative fees, and net investment income.
•The combined ratio improved to 90.6%, as compared to 91.5% in 2020, driven by the continued scalability of Fortegra’s technology and shared service platform, which improved the expense ratio, while the underwriting ratio remained stable.
•Income before taxes of $69.9 million increased by $42.9 million as compared to $26.9 million in 2020. Return on average equity was 17.1% in 2021 as compared to 8.1% in 2020. The increase in both metrics was driven by revenue growth and an improved combined ratio, in addition to improved returns on investments as compared to the prior year.
•Adjusted net income increased 53.8% to $66.8 million, as compared to $43.4 million in 2020. Adjusted return on average equity was 22.2%, as compared to 15.2% in 2020. The increase in both metrics was driven by revenue growth and an improved combined ratio.
Tiptree Capital:
•Mortgage income before taxes was $28.4 million in 2021, as compared to $31.1 million in 2020, with the decrease driven by a decline in gain on sale margins, partially offset by higher servicing fees and positive fair value adjustments on the mortgage servicing portfolio. Return on average equity was 38.9% in 2021.
•Maritime transportation income before taxes was $11.6 million in 2021, as compared to $1.5 million in 2020, with the increase driven by a rise in dry-bulk charter rates.
Key Trends:
Our results of operations are affected by a variety of factors including, but not limited to, general economic conditions and GDP growth, market liquidity and volatility, consumer confidence, U.S. demographics, employment and wage growth, business confidence and investment, inflation, interest rates and spreads, the impact of the regulatory environment, and the other factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A in this Form 10-K. Generally, our businesses are positively affected by a healthy U.S. consumer, stable to gradually rising interest rates, stable markets and business conditions, and global growth and trade flows. Conversely, rising unemployment, volatile markets, rapidly rising interest rates, changing regulatory requirements and slowing business conditions can have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
Fortegra generally offers products which have low severity but high frequency loss experiences and are short duration. As a result, the business has historically generated significant fee-based revenues. In general, the types of products Fortegra offers tend to have limited aggregation risk and, thus, limited exposure to catastrophic and residual risk. Underwriting risk is mitigated through a combination of reinsurance and retrospective commission structures with agents, distribution partners and/or third-party reinsurers. To mitigate counterparty risk, Fortegra ensures its distribution partners’ captive reinsurance entities are over-collateralized with highly liquid investments, primarily cash and cash equivalents. Insurance results primarily depend on pricing, underwriting, risk retention and the accuracy of reserves, reinsurance arrangements, returns on invested assets, and policy and contract renewals and run-off. While Fortegra’s insurance operations have historically maintained a relatively stable combined ratio, initiatives to change the business mix along with economic factors could generate different results than the business has historically experienced. We believe there will continue to be growth opportunities to expand Fortegra’s specialty insurance offerings to other niche products and markets.
Fortegra’s investment portfolio includes fixed maturity securities, loans, credit investment funds, and equity securities. Many investments are held at fair value. Changes in fair value for loans, credit investment funds, and equity securities are reported quarterly as unrealized gains or losses in revenues and can be impacted by changes in interest rates, credit risk, or market risk, including specific company or industry factors. Our equity holdings are relatively concentrated. General equity market trends, along with company and industry specific factors, can impact the fair value which can result in unrealized gains and losses affecting our results.
The Federal Reserve has signaled that it intends to raise interest rates in the near term. Rising 10-year treasury yields, and the tapering of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of mortgage backed securities, has resulted in increases to mortgage interest rates as well, although those rates still remain at relative historic lows.
Our businesses can also be impacted in various ways by changes in interest rates, which can result in fluctuations in the fair value of investments, revenues associated with floating rate investments, volume and revenues in mortgage operations and interest expenses associated with floating rate debt used to fund operations. Rising interest rates could impact the value of certain fixed maturity securities, with any unrealized losses recorded in equity, and if realized, could impact our results of operations. Offsetting the impact of a rising interest rate environment, new investments in fixed rate instruments from both maturities and portfolio growth can result in higher interest income on investments over time. In declining interest rate environments, the opposite impacts could occur. In addition, certain investments are based on floating interest rates, which has resulted in lower investment income during the recent period of extended low rates. Rising interest rates can also impact the cost of floating interest rate debt obligations, while declining rates can decrease the cost of debt. Our secured revolving and term credit agreements, preferred trust securities and asset-based revolving financing are all floating rate obligations.
Low mortgage rates due to the Federal Reserve intervention in mortgage markets, and rising home prices in certain markets, has resulted in a combination of higher mortgage volumes and margins beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and continuing through 2021, which has been a benefit to our mortgage operations. The recent low interest rate environment also benefits interest cost on debt, although corporate debt remains above current LIBOR rates. There can be no assurance that these positive trends will continue, the reversal of which could have a materially negative impact on our results of operations, and which may only be partially mitigated by the benefit to LIBOR based investments.
Authorities that regulate LIBOR have announced plans to phase out LIBOR, such that LIBOR is expected to cease to exist as a benchmark for floating interest rates. The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, which identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) as its preferred alternative rate for USD-LIBOR. We are not able to predict when LIBOR will cease to be available or when there will be sufficient liquidity in the SOFR markets as a replacement reference rate. Such uncertainty may result in a sudden or prolonged increase or decrease in reported LIBOR and/or its replacement rate. To address the phase out of LIBOR, the agreements for our debt facilities include a mechanism to replace LIBOR with an alternative reference rate under specified circumstances, whether that replacement is SOFR or another benchmark. If future rates based upon the successor reference
rate are higher than LIBOR rates as currently determined due to illiquidity or other factors, our interest expense could increase.
Common shares of Invesque represent a significant asset on our consolidated balance sheet, both as part of insurance investments and separately in Tiptree Capital. Our investment in Invesque, which operates in the seniors housing, skilled nursing and medical office industries, is carried on our consolidated balance sheet at fair value. In April 2020, in response to the uncertainty in the industry, Invesque suspended its dividend to conserve liquidity. In combination with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on occupancy rates, Invesque’s stock declined significantly, which had a material impact on the carrying value of the investment and results of operations in 2020. While their stock price and the value of the investment increased modestly in 2021, any additional declines in the fair value of Invesque’s common stock could have a significant impact on our results of operations and the value of the investment.
The maritime transportation industry is highly competitive and fragmented. Demand for shipping capacity is a function of global economic conditions and the related demand for commodities, production and consumption patterns, and is affected by events which interrupt production, trade routes, and consumption. The shipping industry is cyclical with significant volatility in charter hire rates and profitability, which can change rapidly. General global economic conditions, along with company and industry specific factors, are expected to continue to impact the fair value of our vessels and associated operating results. While there is a current imbalance in supply and demand for shipping capacity, which led to a cyclical high in dry-bulk charter rates, a change in those factors and/or changes in global economic conditions could result in substantially lower charter rates, which could negatively impact our results of operations and the carrying value of our vessels.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a summary of our consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. In addition to GAAP results, management uses the Non-GAAP measures Adjusted net income, Adjusted return on average equity, Adjusted EBITDA and book value per share as measurements of operating performance. Management believes these measures provide supplemental information useful to investors as they are frequently used by the financial community to analyze financial performance and comparison among companies. Management uses Adjusted net income and adjusted return on average equity as part of its capital allocation process and to assess comparative returns on invested capital. Adjusted EBITDA is also used in determining incentive compensation for the Company’s executive officers. Adjusted net income represents income before taxes, less provision (benefit) for income taxes, and excluding the after-tax impact of various expenses that we consider to be unique and non-recurring in nature, stock-based compensation, net realized and unrealized gains (losses), and intangibles amortization associated with purchase accounting. The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net income of the Company plus corporate interest expense, plus income taxes, plus depreciation and amortization expense, less the effects of purchase accounting, plus non-cash fair value adjustments, plus significant non-recurring expenses, and plus unrealized gains (losses) on available for sale securities that are reported in other comprehensive income. Adjusted net income, Adjusted return on average equity and Adjusted EBITDA are not measurements of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative or substitute for GAAP net income. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of these measures to their GAAP equivalents.
Selected Key Metrics
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues were $1,200.5 million, which increased $390.2 million, or 48.2% compared to the prior year period, primarily driven by growth in earned premiums, net, and service and administrative fees in the insurance business, increased revenues from our dry-bulk vessels and mortgage servicing portfolio, and net realized and unrealized gains on Invesque and other investments in 2021 compared to losses in 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues were $810.3 million, which increased $37.6 million, or 4.9% compared to the prior year, primarily due to a combination of growth in commercial and service contract lines in our insurance business and revenues associated with our mortgage business. Offsetting these increases were net realized and unrealized losses of $83.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, on Invesque and other equity securities.
The table below provides a break down between net realized and unrealized gains and losses from Invesque and other securities which impacted our consolidated results on a pre-tax basis. Many investments are carried at fair value and marked to market through unrealized gains and losses. As a result, we expect earnings relating to these investments to be relatively volatile between periods. Fixed income securities are primarily marked to market through AOCI in stockholders’ equity and do not impact net realized and unrealized gains and losses until they are sold.
(1) Excludes Invesque and Mortgage realized and unrealized gains and losses. The year ended December 31, 2019 includes a $7.6 million gain on sale of our CLO business.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to common stockholders
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income attributable to common stockholders was $38.1 million, an increase of $67.3 million from a net loss of $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by net realized and unrealized gains on Invesque and other investments in 2021 compared to losses in 2020, in addition to growth in Fortegra’s underwriting and fee operations, increased revenues from our mortgage servicing portfolio and improvement in dry-bulk shipping rates.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss attributable to common stockholders was $29.2 million, a decrease of $47.5 million from net income of $18.4 million in 2019. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the same factors that impacted revenues in the respective periods.
Adjusted net income & Adjusted return on average equity - Non-GAAP
Adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $63.9 million, an increase of $12.4 million, or 24.2%, from the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted return on average equity was 16.5%, as compared to 13.1% at December 31, 2020, with the increase in both metrics driven by improved performance in our insurance and shipping operations.
Adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $51.4 million, an increase of $23.8 million from 2019. The 2020 Adjusted return on average equity was 13.1%, as compared to 6.8% in 2019, with the increase in both metrics driven by improved performance in our insurance and mortgage operations.
Adjusted EBITDA - Non-GAAP
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $100.8 million, an increase of $96.2 million from 2020, driven by realized and unrealized gains in 2021 compared to losses in 2020 (primarily Invesque), in addition to the improved operating performance noted above.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.5 million, a decrease of $63.5 million from 2019, which was substantially driven by unrealized losses on Invesque and other equity securities.
Book Value per share - Non-GAAP
Total stockholders’ equity was $400.2 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $373.5 million as of December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, Tiptree returned $8.2 million to stockholders through share repurchases and dividends paid. Book value per share for the period ended December 31, 2021 was $11.22, an increase from book value per
share of $10.90 as of December 31, 2020. The key drivers of the increase over the past four quarters were income per share and the purchase of 0.5 million shares at a discount to book value, partially offset by other comprehensive losses, dividends paid of $0.16 per share, and issuance of shares related to warrants and vested subsidiary equity awards.
Total stockholders’ equity was $373.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $411.4 million as of December 31, 2019. In 2020, Tiptree returned $19.3 million to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends paid. Book value per share for the period ended December 31, 2020 was $10.90, a decrease from book value per share of $11.52 as of December 31, 2019. The key drivers of the reduction from the prior year were losses per share and dividends paid of $0.160 per share. The decrease was partially offset by the purchase of 2.4 million shares.
Results by Segment
We classify our business into two reportable segments, Insurance and Mortgage, with the remainder of our operations aggregated into Tiptree Capital - Other. Corporate activities include holding company interest expense, corporate employee compensation and benefits, and other expenses, including, but not limited to, public company expenses. Mortgage has been broken out of Tiptree Capital as a reportable segment because for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 it met the quantitative threshold for disclosure. Segments for the year ended December 31, 2019 were conformed to this presentation as of December 31, 2020.
The following tables present the components of Revenue, Income (loss) before taxes and Adjusted net income for the following periods:
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Insurance
Our principal operating subsidiary, Fortegra, is a specialty insurance underwriter and service provider, which focuses on niche business mixes and fee-oriented services. Our combination of specialty insurance underwriting, service contract products, and related service solutions delivered through a vertically integrated business model creates a blend of traditional underwriting revenues, investment income and unregulated fee revenues. We are an agent-driven business model, distributing our products through independent insurance agents, consumer finance companies, online retailers, auto dealers, and regional big box retailers to deliver products that complement the consumer transaction.
The following tables present the Insurance segment results for the following periods:
Results of Operations - 2021 Compared to 2020
(1) Net income was $48,755 and $22,821 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Revenues
Earned Premiums, net
Earned premiums, net represent the earned portion of our gross written premiums, less the earned portion that is ceded to third-party reinsurers under our reinsurance agreements, as well as the earned portion of our assumed premiums. Our insurance policies generally have a term of six months to seven years depending on the underlying product and premiums are earned pro rata over the term of the policy. At the end of each reporting period, premiums written but not earned are classified as unearned premiums and are earned in subsequent periods over the remaining term of the policy.
Service and Administrative Fees
Service and administrative fees represent the earned portion of our gross written premiums and premium equivalents, which is generated from non-insurance products including auto and consumer goods service contracts, motor club contracts and other services offered as part of our vertically integrated product offerings. Such fees are typically positively correlated with transaction volume and are recognized as revenue when realized and earned. At the end of each reporting period, gross written premiums and premium equivalents written for service contracts not earned are classified as deferred revenue, which are earned in subsequent periods over the remaining term of the policy.
Ceding Commissions and Other Revenue
Ceding commissions and other revenue consists of commissions earned on policies written on behalf of third-party insurance companies with no exposure to the insured risk and certain fees earned in conjunction with underwriting policies. Other revenue also includes the interest income earned on our premium finance product offering.
Net Investment Income
We earn investment income on our portfolio of invested assets. Our invested assets are primarily comprised of fixed maturity securities, and may also include cash and cash equivalents and equity securities. The principal factors that influence net investment income are the size of our investment portfolio, the yield on that portfolio and expenses due to external investment managers.
Net Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses)
Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) on investments are a function of the difference between the amount received by us on the sale of a security and the security’s cost-basis, as well as any “other-than-temporary” impairments and allowances for credit losses which are recognized in earnings. In addition, we carry our equity securities at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in this line.
Revenues - 2021 compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues increased 42.4%, to $984.1 million, as compared to $691.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Earned premiums, net of $685.6 million increased $207.6 million, or 43.4%, driven by growth in commercial and personal lines, including E&S insurance offerings. Service and administrative fees of $260.5 million increased by 39.3%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contract revenues. Ceding commissions of $11.8 million decreased by $9.3 million, or 44.2%, driven by lower ceding fees as less business was ceded in our U.S. Insurance lines. Other revenues increased by $3.4 million, or 47.8%, driven by growth in our premium finance lines.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net investment income of $17.9 million increased $8.0 million from 2020, driven by increased interest income from growth in fixed income securities and higher dividends on equity securities. Net realized and unrealized losses were $2.0 million, a reduction in losses of $9.9 million, driven by realized and unrealized gains on equity securities in 2021, as compared to losses on equity securities and other investments in 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, 28.7% of our revenues were derived from fees that are not solely dependent upon the underwriting performance of our insurance products, resulting in more diversified and consistent earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 81.7% of our fee-based revenues were generated in non-regulated service companies, with the remainder in our regulated insurance companies.
The combination of unearned premiums and deferred revenues on Fortegra’s balance sheet grew to $1,658.8 million, representing an increase of $399.1 million, or 31.7%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 as a result of growth in gross written premiums and premium equivalents, primarily related to admitted and E&S insurance lines as well as auto and consumer goods service contracts.
Expenses
Underwriting and fee expenses under insurance and service contracts include losses and loss adjustment expenses, member benefit claims and commissions expense.
Net Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses
Net losses and loss adjustment expenses represent actual insurance claims paid, changes in unpaid claim reserves, net of amounts ceded and the costs of administering claims for insurance lines. Incurred claims are impacted by loss frequency, which is a measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity, which is based on the average size of claims. Loss occurrences in our insurance products are characterized by low severity and high frequency. Factors affecting loss frequency and loss severity include the volume of underwritten contracts, changes in claims reporting patterns, claims settlement patterns, judicial decisions, economic conditions, morbidity patterns and the attitudes of claimants towards settlements, and original pricing of the product for purposes of the loss ratio in relation to loss emergence over time. Losses and loss adjustment expenses are based on an actuarial analysis of the estimated losses, including losses incurred during the period and changes in estimates from prior periods.
Member Benefit Claims
Member benefit claims represent the costs of services and replacement devices incurred in auto, consumer goods and roadside service contracts. Member benefit claims represent claims paid on behalf of contract holders directly to third-party providers for roadside assistance and for the repair or replacement of covered products. Claims can also be paid directly to contract holders as a reimbursement payment, provided supporting documentation of loss is submitted to the Company. Claims are recognized as expense when incurred.
Commission Expense
Commission expenses reflect commissions we pay retail agents, program administrators and managing general underwriters, net of ceding commissions we receive on business ceded under certain reinsurance contracts. In addition, commission expenses include premium-related taxes. Commission expenses related to each policy we write are deferred and amortized to expense in proportion to the premium earned over the policy life. Commission expense is incurred on most product lines, the majority of which are retrospective commissions paid to agents, distributors and retailers selling our products, including credit insurance policies, auto and consumer goods service contracts and motor club memberships. When claims increase, in most cases our distribution partners bear the risk through a reduction in their retrospective commissions. Commission rates are, in many cases, set by state regulators, such as in credit and collateral protection programs and are also impacted by market conditions and the retention levels of our distribution partners.
Operating and Other Expenses
Operating and other expenses represent the general and administrative expenses of our insurance operations including employee compensation and benefits and other expenses, including, technology costs, office rent, and professional services fees, such as legal, accounting and actuarial services.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on our corporate revolving debt, our Notes, our preferred trust securities due June 15, 2037 (“Preferred Trust Securities”) and asset-based debt for our premium finance business, which is non-recourse to Fortegra.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation expense is primarily associated with furniture, fixtures and equipment. Amortization expense is primarily associated with purchase accounting amortization including values associated with acquired customer relationships, trade names and internally developed software and technology.
Expenses - 2021 compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net losses and loss adjustment expenses were $253.5 million, member benefit claims were $73.5 million and commission expense was $396.7 million, as compared to $178.2 million, $58.7 million and $280.2 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net losses and loss adjustment expenses of $75.2 million, or 42.2%, was driven by growth in U.S. Insurance lines and the impact of prior year development of $2.6 million as a result of higher-than-expected claim severity from business written by a small group of producers of our personal and commercial lines of business. The impact of the prior year development increased our ratio of net losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums, net by 0.4%. The increase in member benefit claims of $14.9 million, or 25.4%, was driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts. Commission expense increased by $116.5 million, or 41.6%, in line with growth in earned premiums, net and service and administrative fees.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, employee compensation and benefits were $76.6 million and other expenses were $79.2 million, as compared to $65.1 million and $55.6 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Employee compensation and benefits increased by $11.5 million, or 17.6%, driven by the acquisition of Sky Auto and investments in human capital associated with our growth objectives in E&S and service contract lines. Other expenses increased by $23.6 million, or 42.5%, driven by increased marketing costs aligned with revenue growth in Sky Auto, and increases in premium taxes, which grew in line with earned premiums. Included in other expenses were $2.2 million and $3.4
million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to non-recurring professional fees associated with preparation of the registration statement for the Fortegra initial public offering which was withdrawn in April 2021, and investment banking and legal expenses associated with the acquisition of Smart AutoCare and Sky Auto in January 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense was $17.6 million as compared to $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense of $2.1 million, or 13.5%, was driven by increased asset-based borrowings to support growth in our premium finance lines and higher usage of the revolving working capital facility and letters of credit to support net written premium growth.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation and amortization expense was $17.2 million, including $15.3 million of intangible amortization related to purchase accounting associated with the acquisitions of Sky Auto, Smart AutoCare and Fortegra. For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense was $10.8 million including $9.2 million of intangible amortization from purchase accounting related to Smart AutoCare and Fortegra.
The following tables present the Insurance segment results for the following periods:
Results of Operations - 2020 Compared to 2019
(1) Net income was $22,821 and $27,160 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Revenues - 2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total revenues increased 8.8%, to $691.1 million, as compared to $635.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Earned premiums, net of $478.0 million decreased $21.1 million, or 4.2%, driven by increased ceding of credit insurance and collateral protection premiums, and increased credit insurance cancellations driven by COVID-19 stimulus payments to consumers. This was partially offset by growth in commercial, service contract and niche personal lines programs. Service and administrative fees of $187.0 million increased by 76.0% driven by our acquisition of Smart AutoCare and growth in service contract revenues. Excluding Smart AutoCare, service and administrative fees increased by 11.7%, driven by growth in our consumer goods and roadside service contracts. Ceding commissions of $21.1 million increased by $11.5 million, or 119.6%, driven by growth in commercial lines and higher fees associated with the increase in ceded premiums in credit insurance and collateral protection programs. Other revenues increased by $2.5 million, or 53.8%, driven by growth in our premium finance lines.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, 31.1% of our revenues were derived from fees that are not solely dependent upon the underwriting performance of our insurance products, resulting in more diversified and consistent earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 79.3% of our fee-based revenues were generated in non-regulated service companies, with the remainder in our regulated insurance companies.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net investment income was $9.9 million driven by interest income on fixed income securities and dividends on equity securities. Net realized and unrealized losses were $11.9 million, a decline of $18.8
million, driven by realized and unrealized losses on equity securities in 2020, as compared to gains on equity securities and other investments in 2019.
Expenses - 2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net losses and loss adjustment expenses were $178.2 million, member benefit claims were $58.7 million and commission expense was $280.2 million, as compared to $151.0 million, $19.7 million and $303.1 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net losses and loss adjustment expenses of $27.2 million, or 18.0%, was driven by growth in our U.S. Insurance business and the impact of prior year development of $5.4 million related to higher than expected claims frequency in certain programs associated with a small group of producers. The impact of the prior year development increased our ratio of net losses and loss adjustment expenses to earned premiums, net by 1.1%. The increase in member benefit claims of $39.0 million, or 198.1%, was driven by the acquisition of Smart AutoCare. Commission expense declined by $22.8 million, or 7.5%, driven by a decline in retrospective commission payments, largely offsetting the increase in net losses and loss adjustment expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, employee compensation and benefits were $65.1 million and other expenses were $55.6 million, as compared to $49.8 million and $50.7 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Employee compensation and benefits increased by $15.3 million, or 30.7%, driven by the acquisition of Smart AutoCare and investments in human capital associated with our growth objectives in E&S and service contract lines. Other expenses increased by $4.9 million, or 9.7%, driven by increases in acquisition related expenses, and premium taxes, which grew in line with premiums. Included in other expenses were $3.4 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to non-recurring professional fees associated with investment banking and legal expenses for our acquisitions of Smart AutoCare and Sky Auto.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense was $15.5 million as compared to $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in interest expense of $0.7 million, or 4.9%, was driven by higher outstanding asset-based debt for our premium finance business, partially offset by decreases in LIBOR over 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense was $10.8 million, including $9.2 million of intangible amortization related to purchase accounting associated with the acquisitions of both Smart AutoCare and Fortegra, as compared to $9.1 million and $7.5 million of intangible amortization from purchase accounting related to Fortegra, respectively, for 2019.
Key Performance Metrics
We discuss certain key performance metrics, described below, which provide useful information about our business and the operational factors underlying our financial performance.
Gross Written Premiums and Premium Equivalents
Gross written premiums and premium equivalents represent total gross written premiums from insurance policies and service contracts issued, as well as premium finance volumes during a reporting period. They represent the volume of insurance policies written or assumed and service contracts issued during a specific period of time without reduction for policy acquisition costs, reinsurance costs or other deductions. Gross written premiums is a volume measure commonly used in the insurance industry to compare sales performance by period. Premium equivalents are used to compare sales performance of service and administrative contract volumes to gross written premiums. Investors also use these measures to compare sales growth among comparable companies, while management uses these measures to evaluate the relative performance of various sales channels.
The below table shows gross written premiums and premium equivalents by business mix for the following periods:
Total gross written premiums and premium equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.2 billion as compared to $1.7 billion in 2020. The growth of $527.1 million, or 31.6%, is driven by a combination of factors including Fortegra’s growing distribution partner network, expanding admitted and E&S insurance lines, and increasing market penetration in the service contract sector through the acquisitions of Smart AutoCare (January 2020) and Sky Auto (December 2020). Additionally, certain retail-oriented distribution partners were impacted by COVID-19 shutdowns in 2020, providing for a more favorable period over period comparison.
We believe the continued growth in commercial E&S and service contract lines will result in increased gross written premiums and premium equivalents, and therefore growth in unearned premiums and deferred revenues on the balance sheet. The growth in gross written premiums and premium equivalents, combined with higher retention in select products, has resulted in an increase of $399.1 million, or 31.7%, in Fortegra’s unearned premiums and deferred revenue on the balance sheet. As of December 31, 2021, Fortegra’s unearned premiums and deferred revenues were $1,658.8 million, as compared to $1,259.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
Total gross written premiums and premium equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1.7 billion as compared to $1.3 billion in 2019. U.S. Insurance lines increased by $98.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or 10.2%, driven by growth in commercial, service contract insurance and collateral protection lines. U.S. Warranty Solutions increased by $252.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or 85.0%, driven primarily by the acquisition of Smart AutoCare and growth in premium finance volumes. Europe Warranty Solutions increased by $19.0 million, or 55.6%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts.
The growth in gross written premiums and premium equivalents, combined with higher risk retention in select products, increased unearned premiums and deferred revenue on Fortegra’s balance sheet by $410.4 million, or 48.3%. As of December 31, 2020, Fortegra’s unearned premiums and deferred revenues were $1,259.7 million, as compared to $849.3 million as of December 31, 2019.
Combined Ratio, Underwriting Ratio and Expense Ratio
Combined ratio is an operating measure, which equals the sum of the underwriting ratio and the expense ratio. Underwriting ratio is the ratio of the GAAP line items net losses and loss adjustment expenses, member benefit claims and commission expense to earned premiums, net, service and administrative fees and ceding commissions and other revenue. Expense ratio is the ratio of the GAAP line items employee compensation and benefits and other underwriting, general and administrative expenses to earned premiums, net, service and administrative fees and ceding commissions and other revenue.
A combined ratio under 100% generally indicates an underwriting profit. A combined ratio over 100% generally indicates an underwriting loss. These ratios are commonly used in the insurance industry as a measure of underwriting profitability, excluding earnings on the insurance portfolio. Investors commonly use these measures to compare underwriting performance among companies separate from the performance of the investment portfolio. Management uses these measures to compare the profitability of various products we underwrite as well as profitability among our various agents and sales channels.
The combined ratio was 90.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of an underwriting ratio of 74.7% and an expense ratio of 15.9%, as compared to 91.5%, 74.6% and 16.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in the combined ratio year over year is primarily driven by the continued scalability of the technology and shared service platform, decreasing the expense ratio, while maintaining consistent underwriting performance. Our focus on underwriting expertise, A.I. driven lead generation, and technology-enhanced administration improves productivity, lowers administrative costs and results in agent relationships sustained over the long-term.
The combined ratio was 91.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of an underwriting ratio of 74.6% and an expense ratio of 16.9%, as compared to 92.4%, 76.5% and 15.9%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The improvement in the combined ratio and underwriting ratio from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to the shift in business mix as the result of the growth in commercial and service contract lines, while the increase in the expense ratio was primarily driven by the impact of purchase accounting on the recognition of revenues and expenses associated with our acquisition of Smart AutoCare.
Return on Average Equity
Return on average equity is expressed as the ratio of net income to average stockholders’ equity during the period. Management uses this ratio as a measure of the on-going performance of the totality of the Company’s operations.
Return on average equity was 17.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 8.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, with the increase driven by growth in underwriting and fee revenues, improvement in the combined ratio and realized and unrealized gains in 2021, as compared to realized and unrealized losses in 2020.
Return on average equity was 8.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 10.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, with the decline driven by realized and unrealized losses in 2020, as compared to realized and unrealized gains in 2019, partially offset by improvement in revenues associated with underwriting activities.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Underwriting and Fee Revenues and Underwriting and Fee Margin - Non-GAAP(1)
In order to better explain to investors the underwriting performance and the respective retentions between the Company and its agents and reinsurance partners, we use the non-GAAP metrics - underwriting and fee revenues and underwriting and fee margin. We generally manage our exposure to the risks we underwrite using both reinsurance (e.g., quota share and excess of loss) and retrospective commission agreements with our agents (e.g., commissions paid are adjusted based on the actual underlying losses incurred), which mitigate our risk. Period-over-period comparisons of revenues and expenses are often impacted by the agents and their PORC’s choice as to their risk retention appetite, specifically earned premiums, net, service and administration fees, ceding commissions, and other revenue, all components of revenue, and losses and loss adjustment expenses, member benefit claims, and commissions paid to our agents and reinsurers. Generally, when losses are incurred, the risk which is retained by our agents and reinsurers is reflected in a reduction in commissions paid.
Underwriting and fee revenues represents total revenues excluding net investment income, net realized and unrealized gains (losses). See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of underwriting and fee revenues to total revenues in accordance with GAAP.
Underwriting and fee margin represents income before taxes excluding net investment income, net realized and unrealized gains (losses), employee compensation and benefits, other expenses, interest expense and depreciation and amortization. We deliver our products and services on a vertically integrated basis to our agents. As such, underwriting and fee margin exclude general and administrative expenses, interest income, depreciation and amortization and other corporate expenses, including income taxes, as these corporate expenses support our vertically integrated delivery model and are not specifically supporting any individual business line. See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of underwriting and fee margin to total revenues in accordance with GAAP.
The below table shows underwriting and fee revenues and underwriting and fee margin by business mix for the following periods:
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Underwriting and fee revenues were $968.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $693.1 million,
for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total underwriting and fee revenues were up $275.2 million, or 39.7%, driven by growth in all product lines. U.S. Insurance revenues increased $182.6 million, or 36.0%, driven by growth in E&S commercial, collateral protection and credit insurance lines. The increase in U.S. Warranty Solutions was $68.0 million, or 41.8%, driven by growth in auto, consumer goods, and premium finance. Europe Warranty Solutions increased by $24.5 million, or 108.1%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts.
Underwriting and fee margin was $244.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $176.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $68.6 million, or 39.0%, driven by growth in all product lines. U.S. Insurance grew by $34.5 million, or 32.3%, as the underwriting ratio was consistent year-over-year at 79.5% while revenues increased. U.S. Warranty Solutions increased by $28.5 million, or 46.2%, driven by the growth in revenues and improvement in the underwriting ratio. Europe Warranty Solutions increased by $5.5 million, or 73.9%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts in those markets.
Underwriting and fee revenues were $693.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $619.5 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total underwriting and fee revenues were up $73.6 million, or 11.9%, driven by growth in U.S. and Europe Warranty Solutions, partially offset by a decline in U.S. Insurance. The decrease in U.S. Insurance was $18.0 million, or 3.4%, driven by increased ceded premiums and cancellations from the impacts of stimulus related to COVID-19 in our credit insurance and collateral protection lines. This was partially offset by growth in commercial and niche personal lines. The increase in U.S. Warranty Solutions was $75.8 million, or 87.0%, driven by the acquisition of Smart AutoCare and growth in auto, consumer goods, and premium finance. Europe Warranty Solutions increased by $15.8 million, or 231.5%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts.
Underwriting and fee margin was $176.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $145.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total underwriting and fee margin was up $30.2 million, or 20.7%, driven by growth in U.S. and Europe Warranty Solutions. U.S. Insurance was flat to prior year as the growth in commercial and niche personal lines offset the impacts of COVID-19 on our credit insurance and collateral protection lines. U.S. Warranty Solutions increased by $24.2 million, or 64.7%, driven by the acquisition of Smart AutoCare and growth in auto, consumer goods, and premium finance lines. Europe Warranty Solutions increased by $4.7 million, or 167.0%, driven by growth in auto and consumer goods service contracts in those markets.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Return on Average Equity
Adjusted net income represents income before taxes, less provision (benefit) for income taxes, and excluding the after-tax impact of various expenses that we consider to be unique and non-recurring in nature, including merger and acquisition related expenses, stock-based compensation, net realized and unrealized gains (losses), and intangibles amortization associated with purchase accounting.
Adjusted return on average equity represents adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders’ equity during the period.
Management uses both measures to assess the on-going performance of our operations. See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of adjusted net income and adjusted return on average equity to income before taxes and adjusted return on average equity.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted net income and adjusted return on average equity were $66.8 million and 22.2%, respectively, as compared to $43.4 million and 15.2%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in metrics was driven by the growth in revenues and improvement in the combined ratio.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, adjusted net income and adjusted return on average equity were $43.4 million and 15.2%, respectively, as compared to $32.8 million and 12.3%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in both of these metrics was driven by the growth in commercial, service contracts and niche personal lines. See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of adjusted net income and adjusted return on average equity to income before taxes and adjusted return on average equity.
Net Investment Income and Net Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses) on Investments
Our insurance investment portfolio includes investments held in statutory insurance companies and in unregulated entities. The portfolios held in statutory insurance companies are subject to different regulatory considerations, including with respect to types of assets, concentration limits, affiliate transactions and the use of leverage. Our investment strategy is designed to achieve attractive risk-adjusted returns across select asset classes, sectors and geographies while maintaining adequate liquidity to meet our claims payment obligations. As such, volatility from realized and unrealized gains and losses may impact period-over-period performance. Unrealized gains and losses on equity securities and loans held at fair value impact current period net income, while unrealized gains and losses on Available for Sale (“AFS”) securities impact AOCI.
Our net investment income includes interest and dividends, net of investment expenses, on our invested assets. We report net realized and unrealized gains and losses on our investments separately from our net investment income.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net investment income was $17.9 million compared to $9.9 million in 2020 with the increase driven by growth in investments, resulting in incremental interest income on fixed income securities and dividends on equity securities. Net realized and unrealized losses were $2.0 million, a decline of $9.9 million, driven by a reduction in realized and unrealized losses on equity securities from 2020 to 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net investment income was $9.9 million driven by growth in investments, resulting in incremental interest income on fixed income securities and dividends on equity securities. Net realized and unrealized losses were $11.9 million, a decline of $18.8 million, driven by realized and unrealized losses on equity securities in 2020 (primarily Invesque), as compared to gains on equity securities and other investments in 2019.
Tiptree Capital
Tiptree Capital consists of our Mortgage segment, which includes the operating results of Reliance, our mortgage business, and Tiptree Capital - Other, which consists of our other non-insurance operating businesses and investments. As of December 31, 2021, Tiptree Capital - Other includes our Invesque shares, maritime transportation operations, and the mortgage operations of Luxury, which is classified as held for sale on the balance sheet.
Mortgage
Through our Mortgage operating subsidiary, Reliance, we originate, sell, securitize and service one-to-four-family, residential mortgage loans, comprised of conforming mortgage loans, Federal Housing Administration (“FHA”), Veterans Administration (“VA”), United States Department of Agriculture (“USDA”), and to a lesser extent, non-agency jumbo prime.
We are an approved seller/servicer for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The Company is also an approved issuer and servicer for Ginnie Mae. The Company originates residential mortgage loans through its retail distribution channel (directly to consumers) in 39 states and the District of Columbia as of December 31, 2021.
The following tables present the Mortgage segment results for the following periods:
Results of Operations
(1) See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Revenues
Net Realized and Unrealized Gains (Losses)
Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) include gains on sale of mortgage loans and the fair value adjustment in mortgage servicing rights. Gains on the sale of mortgage loans represent the difference between the selling price and carrying value of loans sold and are recognized upon settlement. Such gains also include the changes in fair value of loans held for sale and loan-related hedges and derivatives. We transfer the risk of loss or default to the loan purchaser, however, in some cases we are required to indemnify purchasers for losses related to non-compliance with borrowers’ creditworthiness and collateral requirements. Because of this, we recognize gains on sale net of required indemnification and premium recapture reserves. The fair value adjustment on mortgage servicing rights represents fair value adjustments considering estimated prepayments and other factors associated with changes in interest rates, plus actual run-off in the servicing portfolio. We report these adjustments separate from servicing income and servicing expense.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes loan origination fees, interest income, and mortgage servicing income. Loan origination fees are earned as mortgage loans are funded. Servicing fees are earned over the life of the loan. Interest income includes interest earned on loans held for sale and interest income on bank balances and short-term investments.
Revenues - 2021 compared to 2020 and 2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2021, $1,608.3 million of loans were funded, compared to $1,658.1 million for 2020, a decrease of $49.8 million, or 3.0%. Origination volumes in 2021 and 2020 were primarily attributed to the lower interest rate environment and home price appreciation in the United States. Gain on sale margins decreased to 5.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, down approximately 70 basis points from 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net realized and unrealized gains for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $92.3 million, compared to $96.6 million for 2020, a decrease of $4.3 million or 4.4%. The primary driver of decreased gain on sale revenues were the decline in volumes and gain on sale margins, partially offset by positive fair value adjustments in mortgage servicing rights of $5.8 million as interest rates increased from the year ended December 31, 2020. Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.0 million, compared to $15.6 million for 2020, an increase of $3.4 million, or 21.9%, driven primarily by higher servicing fees from an increase in loans serviced. As of December 31, 2021, the mortgage servicing asset recorded in other assets on the balance
sheet was $29.8 million, an increase from $14.8 million as of December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, $1,658.1 million of loans were funded, compared to $1,142.6 million for 2019, an increase of $515.5 million, or 45.1%. The increase in origination volumes is primarily attributed to the lower interest rate environment and rising home prices in 2020 compared to 2019. Gain on sale margins also increased to 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020, up 165 basis points from 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $96.6 million, compared to $53.8 million for 2019, an increase of $42.8 million or 79.5%. The primary drivers of increased gains on sale were increases in origination volumes and gains on sale margins, partially offset by negative fair value adjustments in our mortgage servicing rights of $4.0 million as interest rates declined. Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15.6 million, compared to $12.3 million for 2019, an increase of $3.3 million or 26.8%, driven by increased loan origination volumes and servicing fees. As of December 31, 2020, the mortgage servicing asset recorded in other assets on the balance sheet was $14.8 million, an increase from $8.8 million as of December 31, 2019.
Expenses
Employee Compensation and Benefits
Employee compensation and benefits includes salaries, commissions, benefits, bonuses, other incentive compensation and related taxes for employees. Commissions expense for sales staff generally varies with loan origination volumes.
Interest Expense
Interest expense represents borrowing costs under warehouse and other credit facilities used primarily to fund loan originations. Amortization of deferred financing costs, including commitment fees, is included in interest expense.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation expense is mainly associated with furniture, fixtures and equipment while amortization expense is primarily associated with a trade name and internally developed software.
Other Expenses
Other expenses include loan origination expenses, namely, leads, appraisals, credit reporting and licensing fees, general and administrative expenses, including office rent, insurance, legal, consulting and payroll processing expenses, and servicing expense.
Expenses - 2021 compared to 2020 and 2020 compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2021, employee compensation and benefits was $56.8 million, compared to $58.2 million in 2020, a decrease of $1.4 million or 2.4%. This decrease was driven primarily by reduced commissions on lower origination volumes. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, interest expense and depreciation and amortization expense were both flat, at $1.2 million and $0.9 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expenses were $24.0 million, compared to $20.7 million in 2020 with the $3.3 million increase driven by increased loan origination expenses, including marketing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, employee compensation and benefits was $58.2 million, compared to $42.4 million in 2019, an increase of $15.8 million or 37.3%. This increase was driven primarily by increased commissions on higher origination volumes, in addition to increased incentive compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense was $1.2 million, compared to $1.8 million in 2019, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 33.3%. This is due to the reduced interest rate environment decreasing our cost of funds, partially offset by higher loan volumes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense was $1.0 million, compared to $0.8 million for 2019, up $0.2 million, due to purchases of fixed assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expenses were $20.7 million, compared to $18.2 million in 2019, driven by increased loan origination expenses, including marketing costs, and rent.
Income (loss) before taxes
Income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $28.4 million, compared to income before taxes of $31.1 million in 2020. The primary driver of the decrease was a decline in margins partially offset by higher servicing fees attributable to the larger servicing portfolio, in addition to positive fair value adjustments on the mortgage servicing rights asset, as compared to 2020.
Income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $31.1 million, compared to $3.0 million in 2019. The primary driver of the increase was the increase in revenue noted above, partially offset by higher compensation and other costs associated with the improved financial performance.
Tiptree Capital - Other
The following tables present a summary of Tiptree Capital - Other results for the following periods:
Results of Operations
(1) Includes our held for sale mortgage originator (Luxury), asset management, and certain intercompany elimination transactions.
Revenues
Tiptree Capital - Other earns revenues from the following sources: net interest income; revenues on our held for sale mortgage originator; realized and unrealized gains and losses on the Company’s investment holdings (primarily Invesque); and charter revenue from vessels within the Company’s maritime transportation operations.
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $105.1 million compared to $7.1 million for 2020. The primary driver of the change in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was unrealized gains on Invesque in 2021 compared to unrealized losses in 2020, partially offset by the suspension of its monthly dividend payment in April 2020, increased dry-bulk charter rates earned by the maritime transportation business, and growth in mortgage gain on sale revenues in the held for sale mortgage originator.
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $7.1 million, compared to $71.5 million for 2019. The primary driver of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were unrealized losses of $67.7 million on Invesque and the suspension of its monthly dividend payment, offset by a full year of tanker operations in our maritime transportation business and growth in mortgage gain on sale revenues in our held for sale mortgage originator.
Income (loss) before taxes
The income before taxes from Tiptree Capital - Other for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $17.2 million, compared to a loss before taxes of $61.2 million in 2020. The primary driver of the increase was unrealized gains in 2021 compared to losses in 2020 on our investment in Invesque, in addition to increased income before taxes in our maritime transportation business due to a rise in dry-bulk charter rates.
The loss before taxes from Tiptree Capital - Other for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $61.2 million, compared to income of $23.4 million in 2019. The primary drivers of the decrease were unrealized losses and discontinued dividend income on our investment in Invesque. Non-recurrence of the gain on sale of the management contracts and related assets for the CLOs managed in our asset management business in 2019 also drove the 2020 decline in income before taxes.
Adjusted net income - Non-GAAP(1)
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted net income increased to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.5 million in 2020. The increase was driven by improvement in maritime transportation operations from higher dry-bulk charter rates, partially offset by the impact of the discontinuation of the Invesque dividend in April 2020.
Adjusted net income decreased to $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $14.1 million in 2019. The key driver of the decrease was the dividend income on our investment in Invesque was discontinued in April 2020. See “- Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for a reconciliation to GAAP net income.
Corporate
The following table presents a summary of corporate results for the following periods:
Results of Operations
Corporate expenses include expenses of the holding company for interest expense, employee compensation and benefits, and public company and other expenses. Corporate employee compensation and benefits includes the expense of management, legal and accounting staff. Other expenses primarily consisted of audit and professional fees, insurance, office rent and other related expenses.
Employee compensation and benefits, including incentive compensation expense, was $28.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.2 million for 2020, driven by an increase in performance related employee incentive compensation. Of the incentive compensation expense, $8.6 million was related to stock-based compensation expense in 2021 primarily driven by the increase in Tiptree’s stock price, compared to $3.2 million in 2020. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $10.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding borrowing was $114.1 million, compared to $120.3 million at December 31, 2020. Other expenses of $11.2 million increased by $1.6 million from the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by $2.2 million of non-recurring professional and legal fees associated with preparation of the registration statement for the potential Fortegra initial public offering in 2021 (which registration statement has been withdrawn), compared to $0.8 million of non-recurring debt extinguishment fees associated with the refinancing of the corporate credit facility and acquisition-related legal fees in the prior year.
Employee compensation and benefits, including incentive compensation expense, was $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $15.9 million for 2019, driven primarily by a reduction in employee incentive compensation. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.0 million, up from $6.3 million in 2019, driven by a higher average outstanding balance during 2020 associated with our acquisition of Smart AutoCare in January 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding borrowing was $120.3 million, compared to $68.2 million at December 31, 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
The total income tax expense of $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the total income tax benefit of $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and total income tax expense of $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 are reflected as components of net income (loss).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s effective tax rate was equal to 32.6%. The effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was higher than the U.S. statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily from the impact of state taxes and non-deductible compensation, partially offset by the effect of stock based compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s effective tax rate was equal to 35.1%. The effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0%, primarily from the impact of expected refunds arising from the CARES Act. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s effective tax rate was equal to 31.0%. The effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 was higher than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0%, primarily from the impact of the non-recurring return-to-provision, as well as ongoing state and foreign taxes.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted, implementing numerous changes to tax law including temporary changes regarding the prior and future utilization of net operating losses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $7.3 million tax benefit related to the ability to carry back net operating losses to prior periods under the CARES Act, resulting in a decrease of our deferred tax asset of $16.8 million and increase to our current receivable of $24.1 million.
Balance Sheet Information
Tiptree’s total assets were $3,599.1 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $2,995.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The $603.4 million increase in assets is primarily attributable to the growth in the Insurance segment.
Total stockholders’ equity was $400.2 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $373.5 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily driven by net income for year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by dividends. As of December 31, 2021, there were 34,124,153 shares of common stock outstanding as compared to 32,682,462 as of December 31, 2020.
The following table is a summary of certain balance sheet information:
NON-GAAP MEASURES AND RECONCILIATIONS
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
In addition to GAAP results, management uses the non-GAAP financial measures underwriting and fee revenues and underwriting and fee margin in order to better explain to investors the underwriting performance and the respective retentions between the Company and its agents and reinsurance partners. We also use the non-GAAP financial measures adjusted net income, adjusted return on average equity and Adjusted EBITDA as measures of operating performance and as part of our resource and capital allocation process, to assess comparative returns on invested capital. Adjusted EBITDA is also used in determining incentive compensation for the Company’s executive officers. Management believes these measures provide supplemental information useful to investors as they are frequently used by the financial community to analyze financial performance and to compare relative performance among comparable companies. Adjusted net income, adjusted return on average equity, Adjusted EBITDA, underwriting and fee revenues and underwriting and fee margin are not measurements of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative or substitute for earned premiums, net income or any other measure derived in accordance with GAAP.
Underwriting and Fee Revenues and Underwriting and Fee Margin - Non-GAAP (Insurance only)
The following tables present revenue and expenses by business mix. We generally manage exposure to underwriting risks written by using both reinsurance (e.g., quota share and excess of loss) and retrospective commission agreements with our partners (e.g., commissions paid are adjusted based on the actual underlying losses incurred), which mitigates Fortegra’s risk. Period-over-period comparisons of revenues and expenses are often impacted by the PORCs and distribution partners’ choice as to whether to retain risk, specifically service and administration fees and ceding commissions, both components of revenue, and policy and contract benefits and commissions paid to our partners and reinsurers. Generally, when losses are incurred, the risk which is retained by our partners and reinsurers is reflected in a reduction in commissions paid. In order to better explain to investors the underwriting performance and the respective retentions between the Company and its agents and reinsurance partners, we use the non-GAAP metrics underwriting and fee revenues and underwriting and fee margin.
Underwriting and Fee Revenues - Non-GAAP
We define underwriting and fee revenues as total revenues from the Insurance segment excluding net investment income and net realized and unrealized gains (losses). Underwriting and fee revenues represents revenues generated by underwriting and fee-based operations and allows us to evaluate the Company’s underwriting performance without regard to investment income. We use this metric as we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our underlying business performance. Underwriting and fee revenues should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenues calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define underwriting and fee revenues differently.
Underwriting and Fee Margin - Non-GAAP
We define underwriting and fee margin as income before taxes from the Insurance segment, excluding net investment income, net realized and unrealized gains (losses), employee compensation and benefits, other expenses, interest expense and depreciation and amortization. Underwriting and fee margin represents the underwriting performance of our underwriting and fee-based lines. As such, underwriting and fee margin excludes general administrative expenses, interest expense, depreciation and amortization and other corporate expenses as those expenses support the vertically integrated business model and not any individual component of the Company’s business mix. We use this metric as we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into the specific performance of our underlying business mix. Underwriting and fee margin should not be viewed as a substitute for income before taxes calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define underwriting and fee margin differently.
Adjusted Net Income - Non-GAAP
We define adjusted net income as income before taxes, less provision (benefit) for income taxes, and excluding the after-tax impact of various expenses that we consider to be unique and non-recurring in nature, including merger and acquisition related expenses, stock-based compensation, net realized and unrealized gains (losses) and intangibles amortization associated with purchase accounting. We use adjusted net income as an internal operating performance measure in the
management of business as part of our capital allocation process. We believe adjusted net income provides useful supplemental information to investors as it is frequently used by the financial community to analyze financial performance between periods and for comparison among companies. Adjusted net income should not be viewed as a substitute for income before taxes calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted net income differently.
We present adjustments for amortization associated with acquired intangible assets. The intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting in connection with Tiptree’s acquisition of Fortegra Financial in 2014, Defend in 2019, and Smart AutoCare and Sky Auto in 2020. The intangible assets acquired contribute to overall revenue generation, and the respective purchase accounting adjustments will continue to occur in future periods until such intangible assets are fully amortized in accordance with the respective amortization periods required by GAAP.
Adjusted Return on Average Equity - Non-GAAP
We define adjusted return on average equity as adjusted net income expressed on an annualized basis as a percentage of average beginning and ending stockholders’ equity during the period. See “-Adjusted Net Income-Non-GAAP” above. We use adjusted return on average equity as an internal performance measure in the management of our operations because we believe it gives our management and other users of our financial information useful insight into our results of operations and our underlying business performance. Adjusted return on average equity should not be viewed as a substitute for return on average equity calculated in accordance with GAAP, and other companies may define adjusted return on average equity differently.
The footnotes below correspond to the tables above, under “-Adjusted Net Income - Non-GAAP and “-Adjusted Return on Average Equity - Non-GAAP”.
(1) Specifically associated with acquisition purchase accounting. See Note (3) Acquisitions.
Adjusted EBITDA - Non-GAAP
The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net income of the Company plus corporate interest expense, plus income taxes, plus depreciation and amortization expense, less the effects of purchase accounting, plus non-cash fair value adjustments, plus significant non-recurring expenses, and plus unrealized gains (losses) on available for sale securities reported in other comprehensive income. Adjusted EBITDA is used to determine incentive compensation for the Company’s executive officers. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative or substitute for GAAP net income.
(1)
Corporate debt interest expense includes interest expense from secured corporate credit agreements, junior subordinated notes and preferred trust securities. Interest expense associated with asset-specific debt is not added-back for Adjusted EBITDA.
(2)
For maritime transportation operations, depreciation and amortization is deducted as a reduction in the value of the vessel.
(3)
Acquisition, start-up and disposition costs, including debt extinguishment, legal, taxes, banker fees and other costs.
Book Value per share - Non-GAAP
Management believes the use of this financial measure provides supplemental information useful to investors as book value is frequently used by the financial community to analyze company growth on a relative per share basis. The following table provides a reconciliation between total stockholders’ equity and total shares outstanding, net of treasury shares.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal sources of liquidity are unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and other liquid investments and distributions from operating subsidiaries, including income from our investment portfolio and sales of assets and investments. We intend to use our cash resources to continue to fund our operations and grow our businesses. We may seek additional sources of cash to fund acquisitions or investments. These additional sources of cash may take the form of debt or equity and may be at the parent, subsidiary or asset level. We are a holding company and our liquidity needs are primarily for interest payments on the Fortress credit facility, compensation, professional fees, office rent and insurance costs. In February 2020, we refinanced our existing facility with Fortress, extending the maturity to February 2025 and increasing the principal amount to $125 million, generating approximately $53 million of cash after repaying the existing facility and expenses. A portion of those funds were invested in Fortegra to fund growth, with the remainder used to provide additional liquidity. As a condition to the closing of the WP Transaction, we will assign the Fortress credit facility to Fortegra who will use proceeds from the WP Transaction to payoff all of the unpaid principal balance of the Fortress credit facility. In addition, on or prior to the closing of the WP Transaction, Fortegra will have certain of its subsidiaries repay $30.0 million principal balance of aggregate intercompany promissory notes to Tiptree Holdings LLC, plus accrued interest.
Our subsidiaries’ ability to generate sufficient net income and cash flows to make cash distributions will be subject to numerous business and other factors, including restrictions contained in agreements for the strategic investment by Warburg Pincus in Fortegra, our subsidiaries’ financing agreements, regulatory restrictions, availability of sufficient funds at such subsidiaries, general economic and business conditions, tax considerations, strategic plans, financial results and other factors such as target capital ratios and ratio levels anticipated by rating agencies to maintain or improve current ratings. We expect our cash and cash equivalents and distributions from operating subsidiaries, our subsidiaries’ access to financing, and sales of investments to be adequate to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months, as well as the long term.
As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents, excluding restricted cash, were $175.7 million, compared to $136.9 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $38.8 million primarily as a result of additional gross written premium and premium equivalents at Fortegra.
Our mortgage business relies on short term uncommitted sources of financing as a part of their normal course of operations. To date, we have been able to obtain and renew uncommitted warehouse credit facilities. If we were not able to obtain financing, then we may need to draw on other sources of liquidity to fund our mortgage business. See Note (11) Debt, net in the notes to consolidated financial statements, for additional information regarding our mortgage warehouse borrowings.
We believe that cash flow from operations will provide sufficient capital to continue to grow the business and fund interest on the outstanding debt, capital expenditures and other general corporate needs over the next several years. As we continue to expand our business, including by any acquisitions we may make, we may, in the future, require additional working capital for increased costs.
For purposes of determining enterprise value and Adjusted EBITDA, we consider corporate credit agreements and preferred trust securities, which we refer to as corporate debt, as corporate financing and associated interest expense is added back. The below table outlines this amount by debt outstanding and interest expense at the insurance company and corporate level.
Corporate Debt
As of December 31, 2021, the credit facility with Fortress carries a rate of LIBOR (with a minimum LIBOR rate of 1.0%), plus a margin of 6.75% per annum. The agreement requires quarterly principal payments of approximately $1.56 million. See Note (11) Debt, net in the notes to consolidated financial statements for details.
On August 4, 2020, Fortegra entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement by and among Fortegra and its wholly-owned subsidiary, LOTS Intermediate Co., as borrowers, the lenders from time to time party thereto, certain of
Fortegra’s subsidiaries, as guarantors, and Fifth Third Bank, National Association, as the administrative agent and issuing lender (the “Fortegra Credit Agreement”). The Fortegra Credit Agreement provides for a $200.0 million revolving credit facility, all of which is available for the issuance of letters of credit, with a sub-limit of $17.5 million for swing loans, and matures on August 4, 2023.
Consolidated Comparison of Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $204.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2021, the primary sources of cash from operating activities included consolidated net income (excluding unrealized gains and losses), proceeds from mortgage loans outpacing originations and growth in insurance company unearned premiums and net deferred revenues, partially offset by increases in deferred acquisition costs and reinsurance receivables.
Cash provided by operating activities was $140.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, the primary sources of cash from operating activities included proceeds from mortgage loans outpacing originations, offset by increases in notes and accounts receivable and decreases in unearned premiums from our insurance operations.
Cash provided by operating activities was $23.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, the primary sources of cash from operating activities included consolidated net income (excluding unrealized gains and losses), increases in unearned premiums, reinsurance payables, and deferred revenues, offset by increases in notes and accounts receivable and reinsurance receivables related to growth in our insurance operations.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $273.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2021, the primary use of cash from investing activities was the purchase of investments outpacing proceeds from the sales of investments in our insurance investment portfolio, and the issuance of notes receivable outpacing proceeds.
Cash used in investing activities was $123.5 million for the year ended year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, the primary use of cash from investing activities was the purchase of investments outpacing proceeds from the sales of investments in our insurance investment portfolio and the issuance of notes receivables outpacing proceeds. This was partially offset by proceeds received in connection with the acquisition of Smart AutoCare.
Cash used in investing activities was $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, the primary use of cash from investing activities was the issuance of notes receivables outpacing proceeds. This was offset by proceeds associated with a contingent earn-out from our sale of Care, proceeds from the sale of our Telos business, and sales and maturities of investments in excess of purchases in our insurance investment portfolio.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $73.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2021, proceeds from borrowings exceeded principal repayments on mortgage warehouse facilities and asset-based debt supporting our premium finance operations in the insurance business, partially offset by net redemptions of non-controlling interest of $3.5 million, the repurchase of the Company’s common stock and other changes in additional paid-in capital of $8.1 million and the payment of $5.3 million in dividends.
Cash provided by financing activities was $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, our new borrowings exceeded our principal paydowns, primarily from increased borrowings on our secured term credit agreement and our secured corporate revolving credit agreement in our insurance operations, partially offset by decreased borrowings on our mortgage
warehouse facilities. Net cash provided by increased borrowings was offset by the repurchase of $13.9 million of the Company’s common stock and the payment of $5.6 million in dividends.
Cash provided by financing activities was $36.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2019, our new borrowings exceeded our principal repayments primarily from increased borrowings on our mortgage warehouse facilities due to increased volume in our mortgage business, increased borrowing on our secured corporate credit agreement in our insurance business to support growth, and a vessel backed term loan, offset by the repayment of asset based borrowings in our credit loan fund, held within our insurance investment portfolio. Net cash provided by increased borrowings was partially offset by the repurchase of $9.1 million of the Company’s common stock and the payment of $5.5 million in dividends.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note (2) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. As disclosed in Note (2), the preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
The Company believes that the following discussion addresses the Company’s most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Impairment
Goodwill and Intangible Assets, net
The initial measurement of goodwill and intangibles requires judgment concerning estimates of the fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized but subject to tests for impairment annually or if events or circumstances indicate it is more likely than not they may be impaired. Finite-lived intangible assets are subject to impairment if events or circumstances indicate a possible inability to realize the carrying amount. At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had two reporting units for goodwill impairment testing, of which the fair value substantially exceeded carrying value as of that date. See Note (9) Goodwill and Intangible Assets, net.
Reserves
Unpaid claims are reserve estimates that are established in accordance with GAAP using generally accepted actuarial methods. Credit life and accidental death and destruction (AD&D) unpaid claims reserves include claims in the course of settlement and incurred but not reported (IBNR) claims. Credit disability unpaid claims reserves also include continuing claim reserves for open disability claims. For all other Fortegra product lines, unpaid claims reserves are bulk reserves and are entirely IBNR. The Company uses a number of algorithms in establishing its unpaid claims reserves. These algorithms are used to calculate unpaid claims as a function of paid losses, earned premium, target loss ratios, in-force amounts, unearned premium reserves, industry recognized morbidity tables or a combination of these factors.
In arriving at the unpaid claims reserves, the Company conducts an actuarial analysis on a basis gross of reinsurance. The same estimates used as a basis in calculating the gross unpaid claims reserves are then used as the basis for calculating the net unpaid claims reserves, which take into account the impact of reinsurance. Anticipated future loss development patterns form a key assumption underlying these analyses. Our claims are generally reported and settled quickly, resulting in consistent historical loss development patterns. From the anticipated loss development patterns, a variety of actuarial loss projection techniques are employed, such as the chain ladder method, the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method and expected loss ratio method.
The unpaid claims reserves represent the Company’s best estimates, generally involving actuarial projections at a given time. Actual claim costs are dependent upon a number of complex factors such as changes in doctrines of legal liabilities and damage awards. These factors are not directly quantifiable, particularly on a prospective basis. The Company periodically reviews and updates its methods of making such unpaid claims reserve estimates and establishing the related liabilities based on our actual experience. The Company has not made any changes to its methodologies for determining unpaid claims reserves in the periods presented.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company experienced an increase in prior year development of $2.6 million, $5.4 million, and $5.2 million, respectively. In 2021, the $2.6 million increase in prior year development is
primarily due to higher-than-expected claim severity from business written by a small group of producers of our personal and commercial lines of business. In 2020, the $5.4 million increase was due to higher than expected claim frequency from business written by a small group of producers of our personal and commercial lines of business, of which $2.2 million related to our non-standard auto business. The underlying cause of the 2020 prior year development was the result of a subset of risk where the loss ratio pegs used in our year end actuarial determination was low given the ultimate frequency that emerged. In 2019, the entire $5.2 million increase related to our non-standard auto business. The underlying cause of this development was higher than expected claim frequency. The non-standard programs which contributed to the prior year development in both 2020 and 2019, one active program which was new in 2018 and two programs in run-off, experienced loss emergence in excess of levels contemplated when originally pricing the products. The Company responded to this emergence by filing for increased rates for the one underperforming active program and non-renewing all business for the two programs in run-off.
Management considers the prior year development for all three years to be insignificant when considered in the context of our annual earned premiums, net as well as our net losses and loss adjustment expenses and member benefit claims expenses. Earned premiums, net in 2021 were $685.6 million and net losses and loss adjustment expenses were $253.5 million, which resulted to a loss ratio of 37.0%. Without the $2.6 million prior year development, the calendar year loss ratio would have been approximately 0.4% lower. For comparison, the 2020 and 2019 loss ratios were 37.2% and 30.3%, respectively. In general, the Company's loss ratio results have been predictable and consistent over time. In 2021, the $2.6 million prior year development represented only 3.7% of pretax income of our insurance business of $69.9 million, and 3.1% of the opening net liability for losses and loss adjustment expense of $83.9 million in the same year. Actuarial estimates are subject to estimation variability, and while management uses its best judgment in establishing the estimate of required unpaid claims, different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different unpaid claims estimates. The variability in these estimates can, and have in the past, been significant to pretax income.
We analyze our development on a quarterly basis and given the short duration nature of our products, favorable or adverse development emerges quickly and allows for timely reserve strengthening, if necessary, or modifications to our product pricing or offerings.
Based upon our internal analysis and our review of the statement of actuarial opinions provided by our actuarial consultants, we believe that the amounts recorded for policy liabilities and unpaid claims reasonably represents the amount necessary to pay all claims and related expenses which may arise from incidents that have occurred as of the balance sheet date.
While management has used its best judgment in establishing the estimate of required unpaid claims, different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different unpaid claims estimates. The determination of best estimates is affected by many factors, including but not limited to:
•the quality and applicability of historical data,
•current and future economic conditions,
•trends in loss frequencies and severities for various causes of loss,
•changes in claims reporting patterns,
•claims settlement patterns and timing,
•regulatory, legislative and judicial decisions,
•morbidity patterns, and
•the attitudes of claimants towards settlements.
The adequacy of our unpaid claims reserves will be impacted by future trends that impact these factors. Two key measures of loss activity are loss frequency, which is the measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity, which is a measure of the average size of claims. Factors affecting loss frequency include the effectiveness of loss controls, changes in economic activity and weather patterns. Factors affecting loss severity include changes in policy limits, retentions, rate of inflation and judicial interpretations.
If the actual level of loss frequency and severity are higher or lower than expected, the ultimate reserves required will be different than management’s estimate. Based on our actuarial analysis, we have determined that an aggregate change that is greater than 5% in loss frequency and loss severity is not reasonably likely given the Company’s low limit underwriting and low severity philosophies. The effect of higher and lower levels of loss frequency and severity on our ultimate costs for claims occurring in 2021 would be as follows:
Based upon our internal analysis and our review of the statement of actuarial opinions provided by our actuarial consultants, we believe that the amounts recorded for policy liabilities and unpaid claims reasonably represents the amount necessary to pay all claims and related expenses which may arise from incidents that have occurred as of the balance sheet date.
Deferred Acquisition Costs
The Company defers certain costs of acquiring new and renewal insurance policies, and other products as follows:
Insurance policy related deferred acquisition costs are limited to direct costs that resulted from successful contract transactions and would not have been incurred by the Company’s insurance company subsidiaries had the transactions not occurred. These capitalized costs are amortized as the related premium is earned.
Other deferred acquisition costs are limited to prepaid direct costs, typically commissions and contract transaction fees, that resulted from successful contract transactions and would not have been incurred by the Company had the transactions not occurred. These capitalized costs are amortized as the related service and administrative fees are earned.
The Company evaluates whether all deferred acquisition costs are recoverable at year end, and considers investment income in the recoverability analysis for insurance policy related deferred acquisition costs. As a result of the Company’s evaluations, no write-offs for unrecoverable deferred acquisition costs were recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Amortization of deferred acquisition costs was $375.1 million, $265.8 million and $287.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Revenue Recognition
The Company earns revenues from a variety of sources:
Earned Premiums, net
Net earned premium is from direct and assumed earned premium consisting of revenue generated from the direct sale of insurance policies by the Company’s distributors and premiums written for insurance policies by another carrier and assumed by the Company. Whether direct or assumed, the premium is earned over the life of the respective policy using methods appropriate to the pattern of losses for the type of business. Methods used include the Rule of 78's, pro rata, and other actuarial methods. Management selects the appropriate method based on available information, and periodically reviews the selections as additional information becomes available. Direct and assumed premiums are offset by premiums ceded to the Company's reinsurers, including PORCs, earned in the same manner. The amount ceded is proportional to the amount of risk assumed by the reinsurer.
Service and Administrative Fees
The Company earns service and administrative fees from a variety of activities. Such fees are typically positively correlated with transaction volume and are recognized as revenue as they become both realized and earned. Revenues from contracts with customers were $258.6 million, $163.6 million and $89.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and include auto and consumer goods service contracts, motor clubs, other service and administrative fees, vessel related revenue and management fee income. See Note (14) Revenue from Contracts with Customers for more
detailed disclosure regarding these revenues.
Service fee revenue is recognized as the services are performed. Administrative fee revenue includes the administration of premium associated with our producers and their PORCs. In addition, we also earn fee revenue from debt cancellation, motor club, and auto and consumer goods service contracts. Related administrative fee revenue is recognized consistent with the earnings recognition pattern of the underlying insurance policies, debt cancellation contracts, vehicle service contracts and motor club memberships being administered, using Rule of 78's, modified Rule of 78's, pro rata, or other actuarial methods as appropriate for the contract. Management selects the appropriate method based on available information, and periodically reviews the selections as additional information becomes available.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in the tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period that includes the enactment date. Additionally, taxing jurisdictions could retroactively disagree with our tax treatment of certain items, and some historical transactions have income tax effects going forward. Accounting guidance requires these future effects to be evaluated using current laws, rules and regulations, each of which can change at any time and in an unpredictable manner.
The Company establishes valuation allowances for deferred tax assets when, in its judgment, it concludes that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. These judgments are based on projections of future income, including tax-planning strategies, by individual tax jurisdictions. Changes in economic conditions and the competitive environment may impact the accuracy of the Company’s projections. On a quarterly basis, the Company assesses the likelihood that its deferred tax assets will be realized and determines if adjustments to the Company’s valuation allowance is appropriate.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting standards, see Note (2) Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.