ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing under Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this annual report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and expected financial results, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the "Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" in this Item 7 and "Risk Factors" presented under Item 1A for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis in this annual report.
A discussion of changes in our Financial Results and Cash Flow Comparisons from fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2021 has been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021.
BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
We own and operate a network of full service agricultural and construction equipment stores in the United States and Europe. Based upon information provided to us by CNH Industrial N.V. or its U.S. subsidiary CNH Industrial America, LLC, collectively referred to in this Form 10-K as CNH Industrial, we are the largest retail dealer of Case IH Agriculture equipment in the world, one of the largest retail dealers of Case Construction equipment in North America and one of the largest retail dealers of New Holland Agriculture and New Holland Construction equipment in the U.S. We operate our business through three reportable segments: Agriculture, Construction and International. Within each segment, we have four principal sources of revenue: new and used equipment sales, parts sales, service, and equipment rental and other activities.
The agricultural equipment we sell and service includes machinery and attachments for uses ranging from large-scale farming to home and garden use. The construction equipment we sell and service includes heavy construction machinery, light industrial machinery for commercial and residential construction, road and highway construction machinery, energy, and forestry operations equipment. We offer our customers a one-stop solution for their equipment needs through:
•new and used equipment sales;
•parts sales;
•equipment repair and maintenance services; and
•equipment rental and other activities.
The new equipment and parts we sell are supplied primarily by CNH Industrial. According to its public reports, CNH Industrial is a leading manufacturer and supplier of agricultural and construction equipment based on the number of units sold, primarily through the Case IH Agriculture, New Holland Agriculture, Case Construction and New Holland Construction brands. Sales of new CNH Industrial products accounted for approximately 73% of our new equipment revenue in fiscal 2022, with our single largest manufacturer other than CNH Industrial representing approximately 2% of our total new equipment sales in fiscal 2022. We acquire used equipment for resale primarily through trade-ins from our customers and in some cases through selective purchases. We sell parts and provide in-store and on-site repair and maintenance services. We rent equipment and provide other ancillary services such as equipment transportation, GPS signal subscriptions, farm data management systems, precision farming equipment, and finance and insurance products.
Throughout our 41-year operating history, we have built an extensive, geographically contiguous network of 74 stores located in the United States and 35 stores in Europe. We have a history of growth through acquisitions, including over 50 acquisitions in 11 U.S. states and four European countries since January 1, 2003. We believe that there will continue to be opportunities for dealership consolidation in the future, and we expect that acquisitions will continue to be a component of our long-term growth strategy.
Certain External Factors Affecting our Business
We are subject to a number of factors that affect our business including those factors discussed in the sections in this annual report entitled "Risk Factors" and "Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements." Certain of these external factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
Table of Content
Russia/Ukraine Geopolitical Conflict
As discussed in Risk Factors and Note 22, to the consolidated Financial Statements, our Ukrainian operations closed for a period of time. While some have reopened others may remain closed indefinitely or perhaps permanently. To the extent the conflict continues, our International revenues and profits will be adversely affected.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on the Company
The outbreak and global spread of COVID-19, which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the President of the United States in March 2020, continues to have an impact on society, economies, financial markets, and businesses. While the Company's products and services were determined to be an essential business, the pandemic has had an impact on our business operations, existing employees and ability to find new employees, customers, and suppliers. Uncertainty remains regarding the magnitude and duration of the pandemic and the resulting financial effects and will depend on future developments including the efficacy of vaccines, the spread of COVID-19 variants, and the extent of governmental responses, including potential vaccine or testing mandates.
On November 5, 2021, the Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA") announced an Emergency Temporary Standard ("ETS") requiring all employers with at least 100 employees to ensure their employees are fully vaccinated or require weekly testing of unvaccinated employees. On January 13, 2022, the US Supreme Court granted emergency relief to stay the implementation of the ETS and on January 26, 2022, OSHA withdrew the standard. Although OSHA withdrew the vaccination and testing ETS as an enforceable emergency temporary standard, the agency is not withdrawing the ETS as a proposed rule. The agency is prioritizing resources and is focusing on finalizing a permanent COVID-19 Healthcare Standard. The ultimate impact of a permanent standard on the Company, if one were to be adopted, is currently unknown and difficult to predict.
The Company has assessed the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on its results of operations for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, and although there have been challenges, no material adverse impacts were identified. We continue to monitor developments involving our workforce, customers, and suppliers and continue to take steps to mitigate against additional impacts.
Supply Chain Disruptions
In recent months, we have seen increasing supply chain disruptions, including country of origin production and port delays. Additionally, trucker, dockworker, and labor shortages, a surge of consumer demand, and other factors have led to industry-wide delays. In response, we have been, and expect to continue to be, proactive in ordering inventory, parts, and components to ensure our operations can continue without significant delay; however, we have experienced price increases, disruptions and delays on delivery of certain products.
Macroeconomic and Industry Factors
Our Agriculture and International businesses are primarily driven by the demand for agricultural equipment for use in the production of food, fiber, feed grain and renewable energy; home and garden applications; and the maintenance of commercial, residential and government properties. Agriculture industry factors such as changes in agricultural commodity prices and net farm income, have an effect on customer sentiment and their ability to secure financing for equipment purchases. Macroeconomic and industry factors that affect commodity prices and net farm income include changing worldwide demand for agriculture commodities, crop yields and supply disruptions caused by weather patterns and crop diseases, crop stock levels, production costs, and changing U.S. dollar foreign currency exchange rates. Based on U.S. Department of Agriculture ("USDA") publications, the most recent estimate of net farm income for calendar year 2021 increased 25.1% compared to calendar year 2020 due to U.S. crop production and increased commodity exports and partially offset by a reduction in U.S. Federal government's direct farm program payments. Based on its February 2022 report, the USDA projected net farm income for calendar year 2022 to decrease 4.5%, as compared to calendar year 2021.
Our Construction business is primarily impacted by the demand for construction equipment for use in private and government commercial, residential, and infrastructure construction; demolition; maintenance; energy and forestry operations. Industry reports show that demand for construction equipment in our markets is driven by several factors, one of which is public infrastructure spending, including roads and highways, sewer and water. Any growth in federal allocations to public infrastructure spending over the next few years should positively impact our future results of operations. Likewise, any decline in federal allocations to public infrastructure spending over the next few years should negatively impact our future results of operations.
Table of Content
Seasonality & Weather
The agricultural and construction equipment businesses are highly seasonal, which causes our quarterly results and our available cash flow to fluctuate during the year. Our customers generally purchase and rent equipment in preparation for, or in conjunction with, their busy seasons, which for farmers are the spring planting and fall harvesting seasons; and which for Construction customers is typically the second and third quarters of our fiscal year for much of our Construction footprint. Our parts and service revenues are typically highest during our customers' busy seasons as well, due to the increased use of their equipment during this time, which generates the need for more parts and service work. However, weather conditions impact the timing of our customers' busy times, which may cause greater than expected fluctuations in our quarterly financial results year over year. In addition, the fourth quarter typically is a significant period for equipment sales in the U.S. because of our customers’ year-end tax planning considerations, the timing of dealer incentives and the increase in availability of funds from completed harvests and construction projects.
Seasonal weather trends, particularly severe wet or dry conditions, can have a significant impact on regional agricultural and construction market performance by affecting crop production and the ability to undertake construction projects. Weather conditions that adversely affect the agricultural or construction markets decrease the demand for our products and services.
In addition, numerous external factors such as credit markets, commodity prices, and other circumstances may disrupt normal purchasing practices and buyer sentiment, further contributing to the seasonal fluctuations.
Dependence on our Primary Supplier
The majority of our business involves the distribution and servicing of equipment manufactured by CNH Industrial. In fiscal 2022, CNH Industrial supplied approximately 76% of the new equipment sold in our Agriculture segment, 66% of the new equipment sold in our Construction segment, and 70% of the new equipment sold in our International segment, and represented a significant portion of our parts revenue. Thus, we believe the following factors have a significant impact on our operating results:
•CNH Industrial’s product offerings, reputation and market share;
•CNH Industrial’s product prices and incentive and discount programs;
•CNH Industrial's supply of inventory;
•CNH Industrial's offering of floorplan payable financing for the purchase of a substantial portion of our inventory; and
•CNH Industrial's offering of financing and leasing used by our customers to purchase CNH Industrial equipment from us.
Credit Market Changes
Changes in credit markets can affect our customers' ability and willingness to make capital expenditures, including purchasing our equipment. Tight credit markets, a low level of liquidity in many financial markets, and extreme volatility in fixed income, credit, currency and equity markets have the potential to adversely affect our business. Such disruptions in the overall economy and financial markets and the related reduction in consumer confidence in the economy, slow activity in the capital markets, negatively affect access to credit on commercially acceptable terms, and may adversely impact our customers' access to credit and the terms of any such credit. However, if retail interest rates remain low, our business may be positively affected by customers who find financing purchases of our equipment more attractive due to lower borrowing costs.
Our business is also particularly dependent on our access to credit markets to manage inventory and finance acquisitions. We cannot predict what future changes will occur in credit markets or how these changes will impact our business.
Inflation
Inflationary pressures have led to rising inventory and supply costs as well as increased labor costs. To date, in those instances in which we have experienced cost increases, we have been able to increase selling prices to offset much of the increases and expect to continue to do so in the future.
Significant Items Impacting Our Financial Position and Results of Operations
Jaycox Acquisition
On December 1, 2021, we continued our strategy of acquiring dealerships in desired market areas with our acquisition of Jaycox Implement ("Jaycox"). Jaycox consists of three CaseIH agriculture dealership locations in Worthington and Luverne,
Table of Content
Minnesota and Lake Park, Iowa. Total cash consideration paid for the business was $28.2 million which was financed through available cash resources. In conjunction with the acquisition, we purchased the real estate for $5.5 million which was financed with available cash and long term debt. The three Jaycox locations are included within our Agriculture segment.
Montana and Wyoming Divestiture
On January 24, 2022, we divested four dealership locations in Billings, Great Falls, and Missoula, Montana and Gillette, Wyoming. The sale of these locations resulted in a $5.7 million gain which is included in fiscal 2022 consolidated operating expenses. The gain on the sale is included in the Construction segment.
HorizonWest Acquisition
On May 4, 2020, the Company acquired certain assets of HorizonWest Inc. This acquired Case IH agriculture dealership complex consisted of three agriculture equipment stores in Scottsbluff and Sidney, Nebraska and Torrington, Wyoming, which expands the Company's agriculture presence in Nebraska and into Wyoming. The total consideration transferred for the acquired business was $6.8 million paid in cash, which the Company financed through available cash resources and capacity under our existing floorplan payable and other credit facilities. The three HorizonWest dealerships are included within our Agriculture segment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
In the preparation of financial statements prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), we are required to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and the related disclosures. While we believe the estimates and judgments we use in preparing our financial statements are appropriate, they are subject to future events and uncertainties regarding their outcome and therefore actual results may materially differ from these estimates. We describe in Note 1, Business Activity and Significant Accounting Polices, of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements the significant accounting policies used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. We consider the following items in our consolidated financial statements to require significant estimation or judgment.
Revenue Recognition
Equipment revenue transactions include the sale of agricultural and construction equipment and often include both cash and noncash consideration received from our customers, with noncash consideration in the form of used, trade-in, equipment assets. The amount of revenue recognized in the sale transaction is dependent on the value assigned to the trade-in asset. Significant judgment is required to estimate the value of trade-in assets. We assign value based on the estimated selling price for that piece of equipment in the applicable market, less a gross profit amount to be realized at the time the trade-in asset is sold and an estimate of any reconditioning work required to ready the asset for sale. We estimate future selling prices of trade-in assets using various external industry data and relevant internal information, and consider the impact of various factors including model year, hours of use, overall condition, and other equipment specifications. Our estimates of the value of trade-in assets are impacted by changing market values of used equipment and the availability of relevant and reliable third-party data. In instances in which relevant third-party information is not available, the value assigned to trade-in equipment is dependent on internal judgments.
Inventories
New and used equipment inventories are stated at the lower of cost (specific identification) or net realizable value. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. The majority of our used equipment inventory is acquired through trade-ins from our customers and is initially measured and recognized based on the estimated future selling price of the equipment, less a gross profit amount to be realized when the trade-in asset is sold and an estimate of any reconditioning work required to ready the asset for sale. Subsequent to the initial recognition, all new and used equipment inventories are subject to lower of cost or net realizable value assessments. We estimate net realizable value using internal information, management judgment and third-party data that considers various factors including age and condition of equipment, hours of use and market conditions. Generally, used equipment prices are more volatile to changes in market conditions than prices for new equipment due to incentive programs that may be offered by manufacturers to assist in the sale of new equipment. We review our equipment inventory values and adjust them whenever the carrying amount exceeds the estimated net realizable value.
Parts inventories are valued at the lower of average cost or net realizable value. We estimate net realizable value of our parts inventories based on various factors including aging and sales history of each type of parts inventory.
Table of Content
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment and operating lease assets. We review these assets for potential impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the estimated future undiscounted cash flows of such assets to their carrying values. If the estimated undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, the carrying value is considered recoverable and no impairment recognition is required. However, if the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the asset, the second step of the impairment analysis must be performed to measure the amount of the impairment, if any. The second step of the impairment analysis compares the estimated fair value of the long-lived asset to its carrying value and any amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value is recognized as an impairment charge.
When reviewing long-lived assets for impairment, we group long-lived assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Long-lived assets deployed and used by individual store locations are reviewed for impairment at the individual store level. Other long-lived assets shared across stores within a segment or shared across segments are reviewed for impairment on a segment or consolidated level as appropriate.
During our 2022 fiscal year, we determined that events or circumstances were present that may indicate that the carrying amount of certain of our store long-lived assets might not be recoverable. The events or circumstances which indicated that certain of our store long-lived assets might not be recoverable included a current period operating loss combined with historical losses and anticipated future operating losses within certain of our stores, or an expectation that a long-lived asset (or asset group) will be disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life. In light of these circumstances, we performed step one of the impairment analysis for these assets, which have a combined carrying value of $25.8 million, to determine if the asset values are recoverable. In certain cases, the analysis indicated that the carrying value is not recoverable. The aggregate carrying value of such assets totaled $5.2 million. Based on this conclusion, we performed step two of the impairment analysis and estimated the fair value of these assets using an income approach that incorporated unobservable inputs including estimated forecasted net cash flows generated from the use and disposition of these assets. Step two of the analysis indicated that an impairment charge in the amount of $0.4 million was necessary, which related to the International segment. In all other cases, in which the aggregate carrying value of such assets totaled $20.6 million, our analyses indicated that the carrying values are recoverable based on our estimates of future undiscounted cash flows under step one of the impairment analysis.
Our impairment analyses require significant judgment, including identification of the grouping of long-lived and other assets and liabilities for impairment testing, estimates of future cash flows arising from these groups of assets and liabilities, and estimates of the remaining useful lives of the long-lived assets being evaluated. Our estimates inherently include a degree of uncertainty and are impacted by macroeconomic and industry conditions, the competitive environment and other factors. Adverse changes in any of these factors in future periods could result in impairment charges in future periods which could materially impact our results of operations and financial position.
Income Taxes
In determining our provision for (benefit from) income taxes, we must make certain judgments and estimates, including an assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets. In evaluating our ability to realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our historical operating results and our expectation of future taxable income, the availability to implement prudent tax-planning strategies, and the carryforward periods over which the assets may be realized. These assumptions require significant judgment and estimation.
In reviewing our deferred tax assets as of January 31, 2022, we concluded that a full valuation allowance continued to be warranted on our Ukrainian subsidiary. It was also concluded that a full valuation allowance was warranted on our German subsidiary which was previously only a partial valuation allowance. We also recorded a full valuation allowance on our Luxembourg holding company. Due to improved performance, a partial release of a valuation allowance for the Company's Bulgarian subsidiary was recorded. In total, valuation allowances of $6.0 million exist for our international entities as of January 31, 2022.
At the end of fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, the Company concluded, a full valuation allowance continued to be warranted in certain jurisdictions. It was also concluded that a full valuation allowance for the Company's Ukrainian subsidiary was warranted and a partial valuation allowance for the Company's German subsidiary was warranted, as such the Company recorded an additional $3.8 million valuation allowance for these two subsidiaries. In total, valuation allowances of $6.1 million existed for certain of our international entities as of January 31, 2021.
The initial recognition of, and any changes in, a deferred tax asset valuation allowance are recorded to the provision for income taxes and impacts our effective tax rate. Our assessment of the need for and magnitude of valuation allowances for
Table of Content
our deferred tax assets may be impacted by changes in tax laws, our assumptions regarding the ability to generate future taxable income and the availability of tax-planning strategies. Changes in any of these factors could lead to a change in the recognized valuation allowance which may impact our future results of operations and financial position.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, Business Activity and Significant Accounting Polices, of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements recently adopted or not yet adopted and the impact or anticipated impact of such pronouncements to our consolidated financial statements.
Key Financial Metrics
In addition to tracking our sales and expenses to evaluate our operational performance, we also monitor the following key financial metrics. The results of some of these metrics are discussed further throughout the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this Form 10-K.
Inventory Turnover
Inventory turnover measures the rate at which inventory is sold during the year. We calculate it by dividing cost of sales on equipment for the last twelve months by the average of the month-end balances of our equipment and parts inventories for the same twelve-month period. We believe that inventory turnover is an important management metric in evaluating the efficiency at which we are managing and selling our inventories.
Same-Store Results
Same-store results for any period represent results of operations by stores that were part of our Company for the entire comparable period in the preceding fiscal year. We do not distinguish relocated or newly-expanded stores in this same-store analysis. Closed stores are excluded from the same-store analysis.
Absorption
Absorption is an industry term that refers to the percentage of an equipment dealer's operating expense covered by the combined gross profit from parts, service and rental fleet activity. We calculate absorption by dividing our gross profit from sales of parts, service and rental fleet by our operating expenses, less commission expense on equipment sales, plus interest expense on floorplan payables and rental fleet debt. We believe that absorption is an important management metric because during economic down cycles our customers tend to postpone new and used equipment purchases while continuing to run, maintain and repair their existing equipment. Thus, operating at a high absorption rate enables us to operate profitably throughout economic down cycles.
Dollar Utilization
Dollar utilization is a measurement of asset performance and profitability used in the rental industry. We calculate the dollar utilization of our rental fleet equipment by dividing the rental revenue earned on our rental fleet by the average gross carrying value of our rental fleet (comprised of original equipment costs plus additional capitalized costs) for that period. While our rental fleet has variable expenses related to repairs and maintenance, its primary expense for depreciation is fixed. Low dollar utilization of our rental fleet has a negative impact on gross profit margin and gross profit dollars due to the fixed depreciation component. However, high dollar utilization of our rental fleet has a positive impact on gross profit margin and gross profit dollars.
Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as earnings before finance costs, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and is a metric frequently used to assess and evaluate financial performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a measure of financial performance, as a supplemental measure to evaluate the Company's overall operating performance and believes it provides a useful metric for comparability between periods and across entities within our industry by excluding differences in capital structure, income taxes, non-cash charges and certain activities that occur outside of the ordinary course of our business. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as our net income (loss), adjusted for net interest (excluding floorplan interest expense), income taxes, depreciation, amortization, and items included in our non-GAAP reconciliation, for each of the respective periods. Adjusted EBITDA should be evaluated in addition to, and not considered a substitute for, or superior to, any GAAP measure of net income (loss). In addition, other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA in a different manner, which may hinder comparability with other companies. Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income.
Table of Content
Key Financial Statement Components
Revenue
•Equipment: We derive equipment revenue from the sale of new and used agricultural and construction equipment.
•Parts: We derive parts revenue from the sale of parts for brands of equipment that we sell, other makes of equipment, and other types of equipment and related components. Our parts sales provide us with a relatively stable revenue stream that is less sensitive to the economic cycles that affect our equipment sales.
•Service: We derive service revenue from repair and maintenance services to our customers' equipment. Our repair and maintenance services provide a high-margin, relatively stable source of revenue through changing economic cycles.
•Rental and other: We derive other revenue from equipment rentals and ancillary equipment support activities such as equipment transportation, GPS signal subscriptions and reselling financial and insurance products.
Cost of Revenue
•Equipment: Cost of equipment revenue is the lower of the acquired cost or the net realizable value of the specific piece of equipment sold.
•Parts: Cost of parts revenue is the lower of the acquired cost or the market value of the parts sold, based on average costing.
•Service: Cost of service revenue represents costs attributable to services provided for the maintenance and repair of customer-owned equipment and equipment then on-rent by customers.
•Rental and other: Costs of other revenue represent costs associated with equipment rental, such as depreciation, maintenance and repairs, as well as costs associated providing transportation, hauling, parts freight, GPS subscriptions and damage waivers, including, among other items, drivers' wages, truck depreciation, fuel costs, shipping costs and our costs related to damage waiver policies.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses include sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions (which generally are based upon equipment gross profit margins), payroll and related benefit costs, insurance expenses, professional fees, property rental and related costs, property and other taxes, administrative overhead, and depreciation associated with property and equipment (other than rental and trucking equipment).
Floorplan Interest
The cost of financing inventory is an important factor affecting our results of operations. Floorplan payable financing from CNH Industrial Capital, the Bank Syndicate Agreement, DLL Finance and various credit facilities related to our foreign subsidiaries represent the primary sources of financing for equipment inventories. CNH Industrial regularly offers interest-free periods as well as additional incentives and special offers. As of January 31, 2022, 78.8% of our floorplan payable financing was non-interest bearing.
Other Interest Expense
Interest expense represents the interest on our debt instruments, other than floorplan payable financing facilities. This includes long-term debt used to finance the purchase of real estate and vehicles.
Table of Content
Results of Operations
Comparative financial data for each of our four sources of revenue for fiscal 2022 and 2021 are presented below. The results include the acquisitions made during these periods. The year-to-year comparison included below is not necessarily indicative of future results. Information regarding segment revenue and income (loss) before income taxes is presented for each fiscal year following our discussion of the consolidated results of operations. Additional information regarding our segments is included in Note 21 of our consolidated financial statements.
Table of Content
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the fiscal years indicated.
Fiscal Year Ended January 31, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended January 31, 2021
Consolidated Results
Revenue
The increase in total revenue for fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021, was primarily the result of Company-wide same-store sales increase of 23.5% over the prior fiscal year and our acquisitions of HorizonWest and Jaycox, completed in May 2020 and December 2021, respectively. The strong same store sales increase was primarily driven by strong agriculture equipment sales due to higher commodity prices, higher net farm income, and good growing conditions in our international footprint.
Table of Content
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 27.3% or $71.4 million from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2022, primarily due to higher revenue and gross profit from our equipment, parts, and service business. Gross profit margin increased from 18.5% in fiscal 2021 to 19.4% in fiscal 2022. The increase in overall gross profit margin was primarily due to stronger equipment margins, which were positively impacted by favorable end market conditions, healthy inventory, and a $6.4 million increase in the amount earned under manufacturer incentive programs.
Our company-wide absorption rate improved to 84.6% for fiscal 2022 as compared to 77.7% during fiscal 2021 as the increase in gross profit from parts and service combined with lower floorplan interest expenses more than offset the increase in operating expenses compared to that of fiscal 2021. The overall absorption rate in fiscal 2022 was positively impacted by a one-time gain of $5.7 million on the fourth quarter divestiture of three Montana and one Wyoming stores in our Construction segment.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for fiscal 2022 increased $20.3 million, as compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to variable expenses associated with increased sales, which was partially offset by a one-time gain of $5.7 million on the fourth quarter fiscal 2022 divestiture of three Montana and one Wyoming stores in our Construction segment. In fiscal 2022, operating expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased to 14.1% from 15.6% in fiscal 2021. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of total revenue was due to the increase in total revenue in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, which positively affected our ability to leverage our fixed operating costs.
Table of Content
Impairment
During fiscal 2022, the Company did not recognize any goodwill impairment charges and recognized a total of $1.5 million of impairment charges related to certain intangible and long-lived assets. In fiscal 2021, the Company recognized $1.5 million of impairment charges related to goodwill and $1.7 million of impairment charges related to other intangible and long lived assets. The fiscal 2022 and 2021 impairment expenses were primarily related to the impairment of goodwill and certain other intangible assets in our International segment.
Other Income (Expense)
The increase in Interest and other income (expense) compared to fiscal 2021 is primarily the result of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the Ukrainian currency. The decrease in floorplan interest expense for fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021, was due to an overall lower interest rate environment as well as lower borrowings. The increase in other interest expense in fiscal 2022 is the result of an increased amount of long term debt resulting from real estate purchased in fiscal 2022.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate decreased from 37.1% in fiscal 2021 to 24.0% in fiscal 2022. The Company's effective tax rate decreased due to changes in valuation allowances recognized for deferred tax assets. In fiscal 2021, the Company added a full valuation allowance for the Company's Ukrainian subsidiary as well as a partial valuation allowance for the Company's German subsidiary. In fiscal 2022, the Company released a portion of the valuation allowance on its Bulgarian subsidiary's deferred tax assets, which was offset by a valuation allowance on its Luxembourg holding company.
See Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements for further details on our effective tax rate.
Table of Content
Segment Results
Agriculture
Agriculture segment revenue for fiscal 2022 increased 21.5% or $190.3 million compared to the same period last year. Agriculture same-store sales increased 19.3% for fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021. Equipment sales were driven by increased equipment demand due to higher commodity prices and higher net farm income. The HorizonWest and Jaycox acquisitions, which were completed in May 2020 and December 2021, respectively, also contributed to the total sales growth for the segment.
Agriculture segment income before income taxes for fiscal 2022 improved by $26.1 million or 76.0% compared to fiscal 2021. The improvement in segment results was the result of stronger equipment margins which were positively impacted by favorable end market conditions, healthy inventory, and a $5.1 million increase in the amount earned under manufacturer incentive programs. Decreased inventory levels resulted in lower floorplan interest expense which also contributed to the improvement in segment results.
Construction
Construction segment revenue for fiscal 2022 increased 3.7% or $11.4 million compared to fiscal 2021 due to a same-store sales increase of 14.8% which more than offset our divestiture of the Phoenix and Tucson stores in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. Higher equipment sales were driven by increased construction activity throughout the footprint.
The Construction segment income before income taxes was $15.5 million for fiscal 2022 compared to income of $0.2 million for the prior year. The improvement in segment results was the result of improved equipment margins and lower floorplan and other interest expense. The segment also benefited from a $5.7 million gain on the divestiture of our Billings, Great Falls, and Missoula, Montana and Gillette, Wyoming locations.
International
International segment revenue for fiscal 2022 increased 45.2% or $99.0 million compared to fiscal 2021. Higher segment revenue is being driven by higher commodity prices as well as favorable growing conditions for much of our farming footprint, which had a positive impact on all sources of sales, but primarily equipment sales.
Our International segment income before income taxes was $12.6 million for fiscal 2022, compared to loss before income taxes of $6.0 million for fiscal 2021. The higher segment results were primarily the result of increased equipment sales and equipment gross profit margin including a $1.3 million increase in manufacturer incentive programs. Impairment charges of $1.5 million were recognized in fiscal 2022, compared to impairment charges of $2.3 million in fiscal 2021.
Shared Resources/Eliminations
We incur centralized expenses/income at our general corporate level, which we refer to as “Shared Resources,” and then allocate most of these net expenses to our segments. Since these allocations are set early in the year, and a portion is
Table of Content
planned to be unallocated, unallocated balances may occur. Shared Resource loss before income taxes was $1.8 million for fiscal 2022 compared to income before income taxes of $2.2 million for fiscal 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our net income and diluted earnings per share ("diluted EPS"), both GAAP measures, we present and our management utilizes adjusted net income, adjusted diluted EPS, and adjusted EBITDA, all non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, these non-GAAP financial measures include adjustments for items such as ERP transition costs for fiscal year 2021, impairment charges, and foreign currency remeasurement gains/losses in Ukraine. Furthermore, we calculate adjusted EBITDA as our net income (loss), adjusted for net interest (excluding floorplan interest expense), income taxes, depreciation, amortization, and the adjustments included in our non-GAAP reconciliation as described above, for each of the respective periods. We believe that the presentation of adjusted net income, adjusted diluted EPS and adjusted EBITDA is relevant and useful to our management and investors because they each provide a measurement of earnings on activities that we consider to occur in the ordinary course of our business. In addition, our management uses adjusted EBITDA, as a supplemental measure of financial performance, to evaluate the Company's overall operating performance and believes it provides a useful metric for comparability between periods and across entities within our industry by excluding differences in capital structure, income taxes, non-cash charges and certain activities that occur outside of the ordinary course of our business. Adjusted net income, adjusted diluted EPS, and adjusted EBITDA should be evaluated in addition to, and not considered a substitute for, or superior to, the most comparable GAAP financial measure. In addition, other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures in a different manner, which may hinder comparability of our results with those of other companies.
Changes in Presentation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2022, the Company discontinued the use of the adjusted cash-flow measure and revised its presentation of two non-GAAP financials measures, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted EPS, to better align with SEC guidance. The adjustment for income tax valuation allowance, a non-cash tax expense related to the use of deferred tax assets in certain jurisdictions, will no longer be an adjustment included in these two non-GAAP financial measures. For comparability, references to prior periods' non-GAAP financial measures have also been updated to show the effect of omitting the valuation allowance from Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted EPS - see tables below.
The following tables reconcile net income and diluted EPS, GAAP financial measures, to adjusted net income, adjusted diluted EPS, and adjusted EBITDA, all non-GAAP financial measures.
Table of Content
(1)The tax effect of U.S. related adjustments was calculated using a 26% tax rate, determined based on a 21% federal statutory rate and a 5% blended state income tax rate. The tax effect of the Germany related adjustments was calculated using a 29% tax rate. Included in the tax effect of the adjustments is the tax impact of foreign currency changes in Ukraine of $1.2 million for fiscal 2021.
(2)Adjustments are net of the impact of amounts allocated to participating securities where applicable
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash reserves, cash generated from operations, and borrowings under our floorplan payable and other credit facilities. We expect these sources of liquidity to be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements, acquisitions, capital expenditures and other investments in our business, service our debt, pay our tax and lease obligations and other commitments and contingencies, and meet any seasonal operating requirements for the foreseeable future, provided, however, that our borrowing capacity under our credit agreements is dependent on compliance with various financial covenants as further described in Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K. We have worked in the past, and will continue to work in the future if necessary, with our lenders to implement satisfactory modifications to these financial covenants when appropriate for the business conditions confronted by us.
Equipment Inventory and Floorplan Payable Credit Facilities
Floorplan payable balances reflect the amount owed for new equipment inventory purchased from a manufacturer and used equipment inventory, which is primarily purchased through trade-in on equipment sales, net of unamortized debt issuance costs incurred for floorplan credit facilities. Certain of the manufacturers from which we purchase new equipment inventory offer financing on these purchases, either offered directly from the manufacturer or through the manufacturers’ captive finance affiliate. CNH Industrial's captive finance subsidiary, CNH Industrial Capital, also provides financing of used equipment inventory. We also have floorplan payable balances with non-manufacturer lenders for new and used equipment inventory. Borrowings and repayments on manufacturer floorplan facilities are reported as operating cash flows, while borrowings and repayments on non-manufacturer floorplan facilities are reported as financing cash flows in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
As of January 31, 2022, we had floorplan payable lines of credit for equipment purchases totaling $752.0 million, which includes a $450.0 million credit facility with CNH Industrial Capital, a $185.0 million floorplan payable line under the Bank Syndicate Agreement, a $50.0 million credit facility with DLL Finance, and additional credit facilities related to our foreign subsidiaries. Available borrowing capacity under these lines of credit are reduced by amounts outstanding under such facilities, borrowing base calculations and amount of standby letters of credit outstanding with respect to the Bank Syndicate Agreement, and certain acquisition-related financing arrangements with respect to the CNH Industrial Capital credit facility. As of January 31, 2022, the Company was in compliance with the financial covenants under its credit agreements. Additional
Table of Content
details on each of these credit facilities are disclosed in Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report.
As of January 31, 2022, the Company was not subject to the fixed charge ratio covenant under the Bank Syndicate Agreement as our adjusted excess availability plus eligible cash collateral (as defined in the Bank Syndicate Agreement) was not less than 15% of the total amount of the credit facility. Please refer to Note 8 to our consolidated financial statement included in Item 8 for further information regarding the Company's line of credit.
Our equipment inventory turnover increased to 3.4 times for fiscal 2022 compared to 2.0 times for fiscal 2021. Our equipment inventories amount decreased 4.2% from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022. The improvement in equipment turnover was due to the combination of the increase in equipment sales volume in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 and a decrease in our average equipment inventory over these time periods. Our equity in equipment inventory, which reflects the portion of our equipment inventory balance that is not financed by floorplan payables, increased to 58.2% as of January 31, 2022, from 52.1% as of January 31, 2021. The increase in our equity in equipment inventory is primarily due to a high level of cash generation in fiscal 2022, which was applied against interest bearing floorplan payables.
Long-Term Debt Facilities
As of January 31, 2021, we had a $65.0 million working capital line of credit under the Bank Syndicate Agreement (the "Revolver Loan"). The Revolver Loan is used to finance our working capital requirements and fund certain capital expenditures, as needed. As of January 31, 2022, the Company did not have a need to utilize any of the Revolver Loan, as such the outstanding balance was zero. The Company works with various lenders to finance the purchase of real estate we currently lease or are acquiring through an acquisition. The Company may also decide in the future to finance a portion of our rental fleet as well as our capital expenditures using long-term debt from various lenders.
Adequacy of Capital Resources
Our primary uses of cash have been to fund our operating activities, including the purchase of inventories and providing for other working capital needs; meeting our debt service requirements; making payments due under our various leasing arrangements; and funding capital expenditures, including the purchase of rental fleet assets. The primary factor affecting our ability to generate cash and to meet cash requirements, is our operating performance as impacted by (i) industry factors, (ii) competition, (iii) general economic conditions, (iv) the timing and extent of acquisitions, and (v) business and other factors including those identified in Item 1A "Risk Factors" and discussed in this Form 10-K.
Our ability to service our debt will depend upon our ability to generate necessary cash. This will in turn depend on our future acquisition activity, operating performance, general economic conditions, and financial, competitive, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our immediate control. Based on our current operational performance, we believe our cash flow from operations, available cash, and available borrowings under our existing credit facilities will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for, at a minimum, the next 12 months.
In fiscal 2022, we used $14.6 million in cash for rental fleet purchases and $23.0 million in cash for property and equipment purchases and financed $14.6 million in property and equipment purchases with long-term debt and finance leases. The property and equipment purchases in fiscal 2022 primarily related to improvements to, or purchases of, real estate assets and the purchase of vehicles. In fiscal 2021, we used $7.1 million in cash for rental fleet purchases, $13.0 million in cash for property and equipment purchases, and financed $19.5 million in property and equipment purchases with long-term debt. The property and equipment purchases in fiscal 2022 primarily related to the purchase of vehicles, trucks and real estate. We expect our cash expenditures for property and equipment, exclusive of rental fleet purchases, for fiscal 2023 to be approximately $25.0 million and expect cash expenditures for our rental fleet for fiscal 2023 to be approximately $10.0 million. The actual amount of our fiscal 2023 capital expenditures will depend upon factors such as general economic conditions, growth prospects for our industry and our decisions regarding financing and leasing options. We currently expect to finance property and equipment purchases with borrowings under our existing credit facilities, financing with long-term debt, with available cash or with cash flow from operations. We may need to incur additional debt if we pursue any future acquisitions.
There can be no assurances, however, that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available under the credit facilities with the Bank Syndicate, CNH Industrial Capital and DLL Finance in amounts sufficient to allow us to service our indebtedness and to meet our other commitments. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or to obtain sufficient future borrowings, we may be required to seek one or more alternatives such as refinancing or restructuring our indebtedness, selling material assets or operations or seeking to raise additional debt or equity capital. There can be no assurances that we will be able to succeed with one of these alternatives on commercially reasonable terms, if at all. In addition, if we pursue strategic acquisitions, we may require additional equity or debt financing to consummate the transactions, and we cannot assure you that we will succeed in obtaining this financing on favorable terms or at all. If we incur additional indebtedness to finance any of these transactions, this may place increased
Table of Content
demands on our cash flow from operations to service the resulting increased debt. Our existing debt agreements contain restrictive covenants that may restrict our ability to adopt any of these alternatives. Any non-compliance by us under the terms of our debt agreements could result in an event of default which, if not cured, could result in the acceleration of our debt. We have met all financial covenants under these credit agreements as of January 31, 2022. If anticipated operating results create the likelihood of a future covenant violation, we would seek to work with our lenders on an appropriate modification or amendment to our financing arrangements.
Cash Flow
Cash Flow Provided By Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was $158.9 million compared to $173.0 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities of $14.1 million from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2022 is primarily the result of a consistent inventory balance and manufacturer floorplan payable balance during fiscal 2022 compared to a reduction in inventories in fiscal 2021, this was partially offset by an increase in receivables and prepaid expenses for fiscal 2022.
Cash Flow Used For Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities is primarily comprised of cash used for property and equipment purchases, including rental fleet purchases, and for business acquisitions.
Net cash used for investing activities was $55.2 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $20.3 million in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2022, the Company used $37.6 million of cash, compared to use of $20.1 million in fiscal 2021, for additional investment in our rental fleet, vehicles, capital improvements, and purchases of real estate. In addition, the Company utilized $33.6 million of cash in fiscal 2022, compared to use of $6.8 million in the prior fiscal year, for acquisitions.
Cash Flow Provided By (Used For) Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities was $35.3 million in fiscal 2022, compared to net cash used for financing activities of $117.9 million in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2022, net cash used for financing activities was the result of decreased non-manufacturer floorplan payables, which was reduced due to use of cash provided by operating activities.
Future Cash Requirements
We enter into contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business that may require future cash payments. Such obligations include, but are not limited to, debt arrangements, leasing arrangements, and costs related to Information Technology ("IT"), including ERP expenses. The Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements provide additional information in regard to Long Term Debt (Note 10) and Leases (Note 13). Other purchase obligations consist primarily of ERP related expenses with estimated cash payments of $4.4 million for fiscal 2023, $9.1 million combined for fiscal years 2024, 2025, and 2026.
Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a "safe harbor" for forward-looking statements. We include "forward-looking" information in this Form 10-K, including this Item 7, as well as in other materials filed or to be filed by us with the SEC (as well as information included in oral statements or other written statements made or to be made by us).
This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by the following words: "anticipate," "believe," "continue," "could," "estimate," "expect," "intend," "may," "ongoing," "plan," "potential," "predict," "project," "should," "will," "would," or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, although not all forward-looking statements contain these words. These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our or our industry's actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from the information expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are only predictions and are not guarantees of performance. These statements are based on our management's beliefs and assumptions, which in turn are based on currently available information. Our forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K generally relate to the following:
•our beliefs and intentions with respect to our growth strategies, including growth through strategic acquisitions, the types of acquisition targets we intend to pursue, the availability of suitable acquisition targets, the industry climate for dealer consolidation, and our ability to implement our growth strategies;
•our beliefs with respect to factors that will affect demand and seasonality of purchasing in the agricultural and construction industries;
Table of Content
•our beliefs with respect to our primary supplier (CNH Industrial) of equipment and parts inventory;
•our beliefs with respect to the equipment market, our competitors and our competitive advantages;
•our beliefs with respect to the impact of U.S federal government policies on the agriculture economy;
•our beliefs with respect to the impact of commodity prices for the fossil fuels and other commodities on our operating results;
•our beliefs with respect to the impact of government regulations;
•our beliefs with respect to our business strengths and the diversity of our customer base;
•our plans and beliefs with respect to real property used in our business;
•our plans and beliefs regarding future sales, sales mix, and marketing activities;
•our beliefs and assumptions regarding the payment of dividends;
•our beliefs and assumptions regarding valuation reserves, equipment inventory balances, fixed operating expenses, and absorption rate;
•our beliefs and expectations regarding the impact of the Russia-Ukraine military conflict on our Ukrainian operations;
•our beliefs and assumptions with respect to our rental equipment operations;
•our beliefs with respect to our employee relations;
•our assumptions, beliefs and expectations with respect to past and future market conditions, including interest rates, and public infrastructure spending, new environmental standards, and the impact these conditions will have on our operating results;
•our beliefs with respect to the impact of our credit agreements, including future interest expense, limits on corporate transactions, financial covenant compliance, and ability to negotiate amendments or waivers, if needed;
•our beliefs with respect to the impact of increase or decrease in applicable foreign exchange rates;
•our plans and assumptions for future capital expenditures and rental fleet purchases;
•our cash needs, sources of liquidity, and the adequacy of our working capital.
Forward-looking statements are only predictions and are not guarantees of performance. These statements are based on our management's beliefs and assumptions, which in turn are based on currently available information. Important assumptions relating to the forward-looking statements include, among others, assumptions regarding demand for our products, the expansion of product offerings geographically, the timing and cost of planned capital expenditures, competitive conditions and general economic conditions. These assumptions could prove inaccurate. Forward-looking statements also involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results that differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statement. Many of these factors are beyond our ability to control or predict. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
•the impact of the Russian-Ukraine military conflict on our operations in Ukraine;
•assumptions regarding our cash needs and the amount of inventory we need on hand;
•general economic conditions and construction activity in the markets where we operate;
•our dependence on CNH Industrial, our primary supplier of equipment and parts inventory, and our relationships with other equipment suppliers;
•the terms of the CNH dealer agreements that subject us to restrictions that may adversely impact our business and growth;
•the risks associated with our international operations;
•risks resulting from the implementation or design of our new ERP system;
•risks resulting from the impact of the enactment of "right to repair" legislation;
•the impact of security breaches and other disruptions to our information system;
•our level of indebtedness and ability to comply with the terms of agreements governing our indebtedness;
Table of Content
•the risks associated with the expansion of our business;
•the risks resulting from outbreaks or other public health crises, including COVID-19;
•the potential inability to integrate any businesses we acquire;
•competitive pressures;
•significant fluctuations in the price of our common stock;
•risks related to our dependence on our information technology systems and the impact of potential breaches and other disruptions;
•compliance with laws and regulations; and
•other factors discussed under "Risk Factors" or elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
You should read the risk factors and the other cautionary statements made in this Form 10-K as being applicable to all related forward-looking statements wherever they appear in this Form 10-K. We cannot assure you that the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K will prove to be accurate. Furthermore, if our forward-looking statements prove to be inaccurate, the inaccuracy may be material. In light of the significant uncertainties in these forward-looking statements, you should not regard these statements as a representation or warranty by us or any other person that we will achieve our objectives and plans in any specified timeframe, if at all. Other than as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements, even though our situation may change in the future.
Table of Content