Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Report.
Overview
We are a bioelectronic device company delivering non-invasive neuromodulation products for treatment of inflammatory conditions. Bioelectronic medicine, also referred to as electroceuticals or neuromodulation, is the treatment of disease and conditions by preferentially activating electrical functions of the body to modify central or peripheral nerve activity.
Business Developments
Since our formation in September 2016, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to research and development, to regulatory clearance and to early market development and testing for our first product, released September 2019 in the United States. We are not profitable and have incurred losses in each year since our inception. Our net loss was $8,494,000 and $3,639,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $19,546,000. We currently have one product approved for sale with two United States indications and CE Mark. We expect to incur sales and marketing costs to drive adoption and market access in the United States market, with later expansion under the CE Mark. We expect to incur additional research and development expenses related to extending the indications for our product(s). We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses related to scaling our operations and operating as a public company.
In February 2018, we initiated the FDA pivotal trial for ClearUP Sinus Pain Relief, a handheld neuromodulation device targeting the symptoms of sinus inflammation, and secured FDA clearance in January 2019. In February 2020, we were granted the CE Mark for ClearUP and in March 2021, the FDA extended the use of ClearUP to allow broader marketing. We expect that our operating expenses will increase significantly as we discover, acquire, validate and develop additional product candidates; seek regulatory approval and, if approved, proceed to commercialization of new products; obtain, maintain, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio; and hire additional personnel. Furthermore, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company that we did not experience as a private company. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future.
We have funded our operations primarily from the proceeds from the IPO, issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock and convertible notes payable and the sale of our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had $12,975,000 in cash and cash equivalents.
We currently generate sales revenue direct-to-consumer though our own websites, Amazon.com and Walmart.com. We also sell major and specialty U.S. online retailers such as BestBuy.com and FSAStore.com. Our ability to grow sales revenue will depend on successfully executing a comprehensive marketing campaign to drive additional sales through existing and new channels. Long-term growth will be commensurate with our ability to successfully identify, develop, and secure regulatory approval of one or more additional product candidates beyond ClearUP. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through private or public equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of our products and/or future product candidates.
We rely heavily on third-party service providers, including marketing agencies, clinical research organizations and academic research partnerships, finance and accounting support, legal support, and contract manufacturing organizations to carry out our operations. We expect to increase headcount selectively but will continue to rely significantly on third-party service providers with specialized expertise and/or facilities.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue is generated by the sale of our ClearUP product and ancillary products, including accessories and accelerated shipping charges and is net of return and warranty reserve allowances. We currently sell direct-to-consumer through our own websites, Amazon.com and Walmart.com. We also sell to major and specialty U.S. online retailers such as BestBuy.com and FSAStore.com. Product revenue and net product average order value include product and ancillary revenues net of selling expenses but exclude return and warranty reserve allowances.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists primarily of the materials and services to manufacture our products, the internal personnel costs to oversee manufacturing and supply chain functions, and the shipment of goods to customers. A significant portion of our cost of sales is currently in fixed and semi-fixed expenses associated with the management of manufacturing and supply chain. Cost of sales is expected to increase on an absolute basis as sales volume increases. Cost of sales is expected to decrease as a proportion of revenue with (1) the release of ClearUP Gen 2 and (2) the allocation of fixed and semi-fixed expenses over increasing unit sales volume.
Gross Margin
Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by and likely fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to a variety of factors, including sales volumes, product and channel mix, pricing strategies, costs of finished goods, and product return rates, new product launches and potential new manufacturing partners and suppliers. We expect our gross margin to increase with the launch of ClearUP Gen 2 and increasing sales volume over which fixed and semi-fixed costs are allocated.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to conduct research, including the discovery, development and validation of product candidates. Research and development expenses include personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, third-party contractor services, including development and testing of prototype devices, and maintenance of limited in-house research facilities. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred. We expect research and development expenses to increase with the discovery and validation of new product candidates.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses include personnel costs and expenses for advertising and other marketing services. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase as we expand the marketing of our products and pursue sales growth.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services and other expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Outside professional services consist of legal, finance, accounting and audit services, and other consulting fees. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we build our operational infrastructure. We expect general and administrative expenses will decrease as a proportion of revenue as revenue scales against fixed and semi-fixed administrative expenses.
Other Income / Expense, Net
Other expense, net primarily consists of the fair value adjustments related to the derivative liability for conversion rights, amortization of debt discount included in interest expense and the loss from the extinguishment of debt from the conversion of the convertible notes to common stock.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations (in thousands):
Revenue
Revenue increased $306,000 (36%) from $860,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1,166,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to increased unit sales of 21% from approximately 10,400 units for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately 12,600 units for the year ended December 31, 2021 and increases in net product average order value for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 as described in more detail below. Ancillary revenues were less than 1% of total revenue for both of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Direct-to-consumer product revenue increased $140,000 (25%) from $551,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $691,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which increase is primarily attributable to increased unit sales of 17% from approximately 4,800 units for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately 5,600 units for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net product average order value increased to $123.39 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $114.79 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a reduction in consumer pricing incentives during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020.
Retail channel product revenue increased $177,000 (44%) from $415,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $592,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which increase is primarily attributable to increased unit sales of 25% from approximately 5,600 units for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately 7,000 units for the year ended December 31, 2021. Average product order value increased to $84.57 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $74.11 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to our focus on selling product through higher margin retail channel customers for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020.
Return and warranty reserves as a percentage of product revenue was approximately 11.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 9.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021. We lowered the return and warranty reserve due to lower return rates which we believe were a result of our efforts to provide more effective online and print media on how to use our products.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,295,000 compared to $1,085,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $210,000 or 19%. The period over period increase was primarily attributable to increased unit sales of 21% from approximately 10,400 unit for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately 12,600 units for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Variable cost of goods sold includes product costs, fulfillment, shipping and other variances and adjustments. Variable cost of goods sold was $1,039,000 or $82.46 per unit given 12,600 units for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $737,000 or $70.87 per unit given 10,400 units for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in variable cost of goods sold was due to increased costs related to global supply chain issues. Fulfillment and shipping costs are significantly lower for retail channel bulk orders.
Fixed cost of goods sold includes allocation of fixed and semi-fixed expenses, including, non-cash Company personnel allocation and monthly minimum management, storage and processing fees from our third-party logistics provider. Fixed cost of goods sold decreased to $256,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $348,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower non-cash Company personnel allocation as the Company refined its production management processes. Non-cash Company personnel allocation for the fourth quarter of 2021 was $22,500.
Revenue less variable cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $127,000 compared to $123,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $(129,000) compared to $(225,000) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by and likely fluctuate on a quarterly basis due to a variety of factors, including sales volumes, product and channel mix, pricing strategies, costs of finished goods, and product return rates, new product launches and potential new manufacturing partners and suppliers. We expect our gross margin to increase with the launch of ClearUP Gen 2 and increasing sales volume over which fixed and semi-fixed costs are allocated.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $219,000 from $659,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $878,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The emphasis of activity in 2020 was primarily related to completion of a four-week at home clinical study supporting the application for a CE Mark for ClearUP. Activity in 2021 was primarily focused on developing ClearUP Gen 2, and preparation for seeking FDA approval for a second indication for the ClearUP product line.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased to $1,696,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1,306,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $390,000 primarily related to $300,000 of increased fourth quarter spending in anticipation of and use of proceeds of our November 2021 IPO to expand our sales and marketing efforts, including (i) expanding advertising; (ii) growing our social media presence; (iii) upgrading and optimizing ecommerce infrastructure, online/website design; and (iv) other initiatives marketing initiatives.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $1,915,000 from $2,929,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1,014,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increase salaries, consulting fees, audit fees and other professional services to upgrade the accounting and finance function and to obtain an audit.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to the loss on extinguishment of debt upon conversion of the convertible notes payable to common stock of $1,636,000, amortization of debt discount of $1,747,000 and interest expense of $76,000 offset by the income from the forgiveness of the PPP loan and the change in the fair value of the conversion feature derivative liabilities. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the amortization of debt discount of $411,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have generated $2,446,000 in revenue from product sales and have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $12,975,000, working capital of $13,070,000 and an accumulated deficit of $19,546,000. We have financed our operations to date primarily through issuances of SAFE instruments, convertible notes and convertible preferred stock and the proceeds from the IPO in November 2021. In 2019, we sold an aggregate of 2,787,854 shares of our convertible preferred stock to accredited investors, generating net proceeds of $3,843,000, and borrowings from convertible notes payables issued to investors in the amount of $1,710,000. In 2020, we borrowed $1,573,000 by issuing convertible notes and issued notes payable to borrow $195,000. In November 2021, we completed our IPO, generating net proceeds to the Company of approximately $14,887,000. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we borrowed $2,613,000 by issuing convertible notes payable.
In addition, on October 28, 2021, we entered into a Revolving Line of Credit Note with Tethered LLC (“Tethered”) providing us with a $250,000 revolving line of credit (the “Line of Credit”), pursuant to which we may request advances until December 3, 2022. Advances drawn under the Line of Credit bear interest at an annual rate of 6.0%, and each advance will be payable on the maturity date with the interest on outstanding advances payable monthly. We may, at our option, prepay any borrowings under the Line of Credit, in whole or in part, at any time prior to the maturity date, without premium or penalty. To date, we have not drawn down on the Line of Credit.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of $8,494,000 and $3,639,000, respectively, and used $5,612,000 and $3,027,000 of cash for operations, respectively. Management expects to incur substantial additional operating losses for at least the next two years to expand our markets, complete development of new products, obtain regulatory approvals, launch and commercialize our products and continue research and development programs.
Recent Developments
In April 2021, we issued a convertible note payable for total proceeds of $115,000. The note is unsecured, has interest accrued at a rate of 3% per annum and has a term of thirteen months.
On May 11, 2021, the SBA approved forgiveness of our PPP Loan, including accrued interest. The amount forgiven by the SBA was $157,000.
Effective as of June 7, 2021, the Company reincorporated as a Delaware corporation.
From June 2021 through July 2021, we issued convertible notes payables for total proceeds of $1,866,000. The notes were issued at an original issue discount of $244,000 with principal outstanding of $2,110,000. The notes are unsecured, have a term of twenty-three months, and accrue interest at a rate of 3% per annum.
In June 2021, we issued convertible notes payable for total proceeds of $132,000. The notes are unsecured, have a term of twenty-three months, and accrue interest at a rate of 3% per annum.
In June 2021, we issued a convertible notes payable to our Chief Executive Officer for total proceeds of $100,000. The note is unsecured, has a term of twenty-three months, and accrues interests at a rate of 3% per annum.
In August 2021, after receiving Board approval of the same on July 29, 2021, holders of a majority of our issued and outstanding securities authorized our Board, acting in its sole discretion without further approval of our stockholders, to effect a reverse split of our issued and outstanding common stock, at a ratio of not less than 1-for-2, but not more than 1-for-15, at any time on or before July 29, 2021. On August 29, 2021, our Board approved a reverse split ratio of 1-for-4, and on August 31, 2021, we filed a Certificate of Amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation to implement the reverse stock split.
On October 28, 2021, the Company entered into a Revolving Line of Credit Note with Tethered LLC (“Tethered”) providing the Company with a $250,000 revolving line of credit (the “Line of Credit”). The Line of Credit allows the Company to request advances thereunder until December 3, 2022 (the “Maturity Date”). Advances drawn under the Line of Credit bear interest at an annual rate of 6.0%, and each advance will be payable on the Maturity Date with the interest on outstanding advances payable monthly. The Company may, at its option, prepay any borrowings under the Line of Credit, in whole or in part at any time prior to the Maturity Date, without premium or penalty. The Company has not drawn down on the Line of Credit as of the date hereof.
In November 2021, the Company completed the IPO of 3,450,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $5.00 per share, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 450,000 additional shares of common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of $17,250,000 and its shares stared trading on The NASDAQ Capital Market under the ticker symbol “TIVC.” The Company received approximately $14,887,000 in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by the Company. In connection with the closing of the IPO, all of the Company’s outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock at the time of the IPO automatically converted into an aggregate of 2,227,116 shares of common stock and the outstanding convertible notes payable borrowings of $4,384,000 converted into an aggregate of 1,204,160 shares of common stock.
We intend to raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity and debt. If financing is not available at adequate levels, we may need to reevaluate our operating plans. Based on projected activities, management believes the Company has adequate cash and financial resources to operate for at least the next twelve months.
Plan of Operation and Future Funding Requirements
We use our capital resources primarily to fund operating expenses, primarily marketing and advertising for ClearUP and general operating expenses. We plan to increase our marketing and advertising investments to drive sales of ClearUP through existing and new channels. We plan to increase our research and development investments to identify and validate new product candidates, move them through pre-clinical and clinical development, and develop go-to-market strategies that leverage our existing sales channels and call points. At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of research and new product adoption, as well as supply chain constraints that we are currently facing, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs we will incur and the timelines that will be required to complete development, obtain marketing approval and commercialize future product candidates, if at all. For the same reasons, we are also unable to predict how quickly we will ramp-up revenue from ClearUP product sales or whether, or when, if ever, we may achieve profitability from the sales of one or more products. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success, and sell-in costs can differ materially from expectations. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be best developed and/or monetized through future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
We have generated operating losses in each period since inception. We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $19,456,000 through December 31, 2021. We expect to incur additional losses in the future as we expand both our marketing and research and development activities. Based on our current plans, we believe that we have adequate cash and financial resources to operate for at least the next twelve months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, however, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect.
The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
· the availability of electronic parts and other components for our products, as well as our ability to source such parts and components at favorable prices;
· the timing and progress of sales initiatives driving top-line revenue;
· the timing and adoption rate of ClearUP Gen 2 at lower cost of goods;
· the payment terms and timing of commercial contracts entered into for manufacturing and sales of our products to and through online third-party retailers;
· the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
· the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
· the timing and amount of milestone payments we may receive under any future collaboration agreements;
· our ability to source new business opportunities through licenses and research and development programs and to establish new collaboration arrangements;
· the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent and other intellectual property claims;
· the cost and timing of additional regulatory approvals beyond those currently held by us; and
· our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support finance, sales, marketing, operations and development of our product candidates and satisfy our obligations as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to fund our operations and capital funding needs through equity and/or debt financings. We may also consider entering into collaboration arrangements or selectively partnering with third parties for clinical development and commercialization. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of additional debt would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations or our ability to incur additional indebtedness or pay dividends, among other items. If we raise additional funds through governmental funding, collaborations, strategic partnerships and alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the period indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $5,612,000, which consisted primarily of net loss of $8,494,000 decreased by non-cash charges of $3,285,000 and increased by a net change of $403,000 in our net operating assets. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of debt discount amortization of $1,747,000, loss on extinguishment of debt from conversion of convertible notes payable to common stock of $1,636, stock-based compensation of $57,000, accounts receivable allowances of $66 and issuance of warrant for consulting services of $280,000 offset by the change in fair value remeasurement of derivative liabilities of $436,000 and the forgiveness of the PPP loan of $157,000. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventory and prepaid expenses, offset by an increase in accounts payable in 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $3,027,000, which consisted primarily of net loss of $3,639,000 decreased by non-cash charges of $568,000 and decreased by a net change of $44,000 in our net operating assets. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of debt discount amortization of $411,000, stock-based compensation of $78,000, and change in fair value remeasurement of derivative liabilities of $27,000. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventory, accompanied by a decrease in accrued liabilities in 2020.
Investing Activities
We had no investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities provided $17,543,000 of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted primarily of the proceeds from the IPO, net of issuance costs, of $14,887,000, convertible notes payable borrowings of $2,613,000 and from issuance of common stock from exercise of stock options of $62,000 offset by notes payable repayment of $19,000.
Our financing activities provided $1,760,000 of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of convertible notes payable borrowings of $1,573,000, borrowings of $156,000 in the form of the federal Paycheck Protection Program and borrowings of $39,000 to finance our insurance policies.
Known Trends or Uncertainties
As discussed in this Annual Report, the world has been affected due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has negatively impacted our business in various ways over the last two years, including, more recently, as a result of global supply chain constraints at least partially attributable to the pandemic. Until the pandemic has passed, there remains uncertainty as to the effect of COVID-19 on our business in both the short and long-term.
Inflation
Inflation has increased during the periods covered by this Annual Report, and is expected to continue to increase for the near future. Inflationary factors, such as increases in the cost of our products (and components thereof), interest rates, overhead costs and transportation costs may adversely affect our operating results. Although we do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our financial position or results of operations to date, we may experience some effect in the near future (especially if inflation rates continue to rise) due to supply chain constraints, consequences associated with COVID-19 and the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, employee availability and wage increases, trade tariffs imposed on certain products from China and increased product pricing due to semiconductor product shortages.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Convertible Promissory Notes
From June 2020 through December 2020, we issued unsecured convertible promissory notes (the “2020 Bridge Notes”) in the amount of approximately $1.57 million to accredited investors pursuant to the terms of a Note Purchase Agreement dated June 1, 2020, as amended in October 2020. The 2020 Bridge Notes have a maturity date of June 1, 2022, and are generally convertible into the Company’s equity securities at a per share conversion price that will be computed on the basis of a Cap of $40 million or a Discount Rate of 25%, whichever results in the issuance of a greater number of equity securities to the investors. In August 2021, the 2020 Bridge Notes were amended to provide that, in addition to the foregoing conversion terms, in the event that the Company consummates an initial public offering of its common stock prior to the occurrence of a Qualified Financing, a Change of Control or the Maturity (all as defined in the 2020 Bridge Note), then the outstanding principal amount and, at the election of the Company, all accrued but unpaid interest thereon as of the date of conversion shall be converted into shares of common stock as of immediately prior to the consummation of the initial public offering at a per share price equal to the lesser of (i) 75% of the per share public offering price and (ii) the quotient resulting from dividing the $40 million Cap by the Company’s capitalization on a fully diluted basis, as of immediately prior to closing of the initial public offering.
From March 2021 through April 2021, we issued unsecured convertible promissory notes in the amount of approximately $0.4 million to accredited investors. These notes were issued as part of the same offering as the 2020 Bridge Notes, accrue interest at a rate of 3% per annum, and mature on June 1, 2022.
The 2020 Bridge Notes, including those issued from March to April 2021, having aggregate principal amount of approximately $1,987,500, converted into an aggregate of 545,613 shares of our common stock in connection with this offering, based on accrued interest of approximately $58,595 as of November 10, 2021, and a conversion price of $3.75 per share (75% of the initial public offering price per share).
From June 2021 through July 2021, we issued convertible notes payables for total proceeds of approximately $1.86 million to accredited investors. The notes were issued at an original issue discount of approximately $0.24 million with principal outstanding of approximately $2.11 million. The notes are unsecured, have a term of twenty-three months, and accrue interest at a rate of 3% per annum.
In June 2021, we issued a convertible note payable to our Chief Executive Officer for total proceeds of $0.10 million. The note is unsecured, has a term of twenty-three months, and accrues interests at a rate of 3% per annum.
In June 2021, we issued convertible notes payable for total proceeds of approximately $0.23 million. The notes are unsecured, have a term of twenty-three months, and accrue interest at a rate of 3% per annum.
All of the convertible notes payable outstanding at the time of the IPO of $4,384,000 converted to 1,204,160 shares of common stock on November 10, 2021.
Warrants
On July 1, 2021, the Company issued a warrant to purchase 50,000 shares of our common stock to a consultant as partial consideration for services provided to the Company and issued an additional 50,000 warrants to purchase common stock in November 2021. The warrants are exercisable upon issuance, have an exercise price of $1.04 per share and have a term of five years.
In November 2021, the Company issued warrants to purchase 172,680 shares of common stock to employees of Think Equity, the underwriters of the IPO. The warrants may be exercised at any time on or after May 9, 2022, have an exercise price of $6.25 per share and have a term of five years.
Office Lease
The Company leased office space in Newark, California under a cancelable operating lease agreement, which was terminated in December 2021.
The Company executed a noncancelable operating lease for approximately 9,091 square feet of office space in Hayward, California in November 2021 as its headquarters. There lease expires in October 2025 and there is no option to renew for an additional term. The Company is obligated to pay, on a pro-rata basis, real estate taxes and operating costs related to the premises.
Lease cost recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $49,000. Rent expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $55,000.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with our contract manufacturer and other vendors to assist in the manufacturing of our products and performance of our research and development activities and other services for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts and not included in the table of contractual obligations and commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. Although we believe that the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of our operations.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue from product sales in accordance with Financial accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”). The standard applies to all contracts with customers, except contracts that are within scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments.
Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are in within the scope of Topic 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inceptions, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company sells its products direct-to-consumer and third-party online retailers. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to the customers or retailer, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Revenue associated with products holding rights of return are recognized when the Company concludes there is not a risk of significant revenue reversal in the future periods for the expected consideration in the transaction.
Based on the Company’s assessment, it was determined that there were no contract assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 because receivables outstanding are unconditional and only the passage of time is required before payment of that consideration is due. The Company may receive payments at the onset of the contract and before goods have been delivered. In such instances, the Company records a deferred revenue liability. The Company recognizes these contract liabilities as sales after the revenue criteria are met.
The Company relies on third parties to have procedures in place to detect and prevent credit card fraud, as the Company has exposure to losses from fraudulent charges. The Company records the losses related to chargebacks as incurred.
The Company has also elected to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price sales taxes remitted to governmental authorities.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure all stock options and other stock-based awards granted to our employees, directors, consultants and other non-employee service providers based on the fair value on the date of the grant. Compensation expense related to awards to employees and directors with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award, which is typically the vesting term. Compensation expense related to awards to employees with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized based on grant date fair value over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method to the extent achievement of the performance condition is probable. Non-employee option awards are measured at the earlier of the commitment date for performance by the counterparty or the date when the performance is complete, and compensation expense is recognized in the same manner as if we had paid cash for goods or services.
We classify stock-based compensation expense in our statement of operations in the same way the award recipient’s payroll costs are classified or in which the award recipients’ service payments are classified.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock options on the date of grant. Using the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make significant assumptions and judgments. We determined these assumptions for the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as discussed below.
• Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. As we do not have sufficient historical experience for determining the expected term of the stock option awards granted, we based our expected term for awards issued to employees and non-employees using the simplified method which is presumed to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contracted term.
• Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the date of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury constant maturity notes with terms approximately equal to the stock-based awards’ expected term.
• Expected Volatility-Since we do not have a trading history of common stock, the expected volatility was derived from the average historical stock volatilities of the common stock of several public companies within the industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock-based awards.
• Dividend Rate-The expected dividend rate is zero as we have not paid and do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
• Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to our initial public offering (“IPO”), the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying the stock-based awards was determined by our board of directors with input from management. Because there was no public market for our common stock, our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock at the time of grant of the stock-based award by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including having valuations of the common stock performed by a third-party valuation specialist, as further described below.
As of December 31, 2021, the total compensation cost related to nonvested service-based awards not yet recognized is $690,000. The weighted-average period over which the nonvested awards is expected to be recognized is 3.5 years. The aggregate intrinsic value of stock options outstanding as of December 31, 2021 was $1,163,000, of which $902,000 related to vested options and $261,000 related to unvested options.
Common Stock Valuations
The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our stock-based awards prior to our IPO was determined by our board of directors with input from management and contemporaneous third-party valuations. We believe that our board of directors had the relevant experience and expertise to determine the fair value of our common stock prior to our IPO. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors include:
• contemporaneous valuations of our common stock performed by independent third-party specialists;
• the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
• the prices of common or convertible preferred stock sold to third-party investors by us;
• lack of marketability of our common stock;
• our actual operating and financial performance;
• current business conditions and projections;
• hiring of key personnel and the experience of our management;
• the history of the company and notable milestones;
• our stage of development;
• likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a merger or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions;
• the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
• the U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business using the hybrid method with input from management and contemporaneous third-party valuations. The hybrid method is based upon the probability-weighted value across two scenarios, being (i) successfully consummating an initial public offering and (ii) alternative scenarios in which an initial public offering is not consummated. The hybrid method can be a useful alternative to explicitly modeling all probability-weighted expected return scenarios in situations when the company has transparency into one or more near term exits but is unsure about what will occur if current plans do not materialize. In the first scenario, the potential exit date, the probability exit value and the likelihood of interim financings were considered. In the second scenario, which was assigned the residual probability, the potential exit date, the equity volatility, the assumed interest rate, the dividend yield and equity inflection points at which the allocation of proceeds changes were considered. The valuation method considers the total number of shares authorized and outstanding, as well as recent issuances of both preferred and common stock.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding the time to the liquidation event and volatility. Changes in these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between these assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of common stock.
Following our IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock will be based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by the Nasdaq Capital Market, or such other national securities exchange that our common stock is listed on, on the date of grant or as otherwise provided in the proposed 2021 Equity Incentive Plan. Future expense amounts for any particular period could be affected by changes in our assumptions or market conditions.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and may remain an emerging growth company until December 31, 2026. For so long as we remain an emerging growth company, we are permitted and intend to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. These exemptions include:
● reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements;
● no non-binding stockholder advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
● exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting.
We have taken advantage of reduced reporting requirements in this Report and may continue to do so until such time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (b) December 31, 2026, the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (d) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
In addition, we are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as (i) our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Derivative Instruments
The Company issued certain convertible notes in 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021, which notes contained put options. These embedded put options are not considered clearly and closely related to the debt host and result in embedded derivatives that must be bifurcated and accounted for separately from the debt host. Accordingly, the Company has recorded these as a derivative financial liability.
Derivative financial liabilities are initially recorded at fair value, with gains and losses arising for changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations at each period end while such instruments are outstanding. The liability is being valued using a probability weighted expected return model. The derivative financial liability related to convertible notes issued in 2018 and 2019 was derecognized upon conversion of the convertible notes in 2019 to preferred stock. The derivative financial liability related to convertible notes issued in 2020 and 2021 was derecognized upon conversion of the convertible notes to common stock in 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of the notes to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.