Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of Alpha Teknova, Inc.’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect its future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to "the Company," “Teknova,” we,” “us,” and “our” are intended to mean the business and operations of Alpha Teknova, Inc.
Overview
Since our founding in 1996, we have been providing critical reagents that enable the discovery, research, development, and production of biopharmaceutical products such as drug therapies, novel vaccines, and molecular diagnostics. Our more than 3,000 active customers span the entire continuum of the life sciences market, including leading pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, contract development and manufacturing organizations, in vitro diagnostics franchises, and academic and government research institutions. We offer three primary product types: pre-poured media plates for cell growth and cloning, liquid cell culture media and supplements for cellular expansion, and molecular biology reagents for sample manipulation, resuspension, and purification.
In 2017, we achieved ISO 13485:2016 certification, enabling us to manufacture products for use in diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Our certification allows us to offer solutions across the entire customer product development workflow, supporting our customers' need for materials in greater volume and that meet increasingly stringent regulatory requirements as they scale from research to commercialization.
We manufacture our products at our Hollister, California headquarters and stock inventory of raw materials, components, and finished goods at that location. We rely on a limited number of suppliers for certain raw materials, and we have no long-term supply arrangements with our suppliers, as we order on a purchase order basis. We ship our products directly from our warehouses in Hollister, California and Mansfield, Massachusetts to our customers and distributors pursuant to purchase orders. We typically recognize revenue when products are shipped.
We generated revenue of $36.9 million in 2021, which represents an increase of $5.6 million as compared to 2020. In 2021 and 2020, only 2.9% and 3.7%, respectively, of our revenue was generated from customers located outside of the U.S. Our sales outside of the U.S. are denominated in U.S. dollars. Approximately 71% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was generated from sales through direct channels and a limited salesforce, with the remainder generated through distributor sales.
We had an operating loss of $12.0 million in 2021 compared to $4.7 million of operating income in 2020. We expect our expenses will continue to increase in future periods in connection with our ongoing activities as we:
▪attract, hire, and retain qualified personnel;
▪invest in processes and infrastructure to enable manufacturing automation and expand capacity;
▪build research and development (R&D) capacity to introduce new products and services and create intellectual property;
▪build our brand, market, and sell new and existing products and services;
▪potentially acquire businesses or technologies to accelerate the growth of our business; and
▪function as a public company.
Key Developments
•On March 26, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement which provides for loan commitments in an aggregate amount of up to $27.0 million and drew down $12.0 million on the term loan thereunder. See "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Credit Facility” for more information regarding the credit facility.
▪On June 29, 2021, we completed an IPO in which we issued and sold 6,900,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. We received $99.1 million in net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.7 million and offering expenses of $3.6 million.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, business partners, and distribution channels. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, we took proactive action from the earliest signs of the outbreak, which included implementing social distancing policies at our facilities, facilitating remote working arrangements and imposing employee travel restrictions. We are unable to predict the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future financial position and operating results due to numerous uncertainties. These uncertainties include the severity of the virus and any variants, the duration of the outbreak, governmental, business or other actions, impacts on our supply chain, the effect on customer demand, and buying patterns, the health of our workforce and our ability to meet staffing needs throughout the critical functions. Further, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets, consumer spending as well as other unanticipated consequences remain unknown. In addition, we cannot predict the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our customers, vendors, suppliers, and other business partners; however, any material effect on these parties could adversely impact us.
We believe that we have successfully, and will continue to successfully, navigate the uncertain environment associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. This includes implementing enhanced measures focusing on the safety of our customers and employees as well as improved operating discipline across our business. Our overall liquidity is strong, and we believe we are able to meet our operating cash needs and other investing and financing cash requirements at this time, including those necessary to grow the business as economic conditions improve.
The situation surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid, and we are actively managing our response in collaboration with customers, team members, and business partners. For further information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company, please see Item 1A., "Risk Factors" in this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue
Our revenue disaggregated by product category, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Total revenue was $36.9 million in 2021, an increase of $5.6 million, or 17.9%, compared with $31.3 million in 2020.
Lab Essentials revenue was $27.2 million in 2021, an increase of $5.9 million, or 28.0%, compared with $21.2 million in 2020. The increase in Lab Essentials revenue was due in roughly equal measure to a higher average revenue per customer and an increased number of customers.
Clinical Solutions revenue was $6.8 million in 2021, an increase of $2.0 million, or 41.3%, compared with $4.8 million in 2020. The increase in Clinical Solutions revenue was attributable to an increased number of customers somewhat offset by lower average revenue per customer.
Sample Transport revenue was $1.5 million in 2021, a decrease of $2.8 million, or 64.4%, compared with $4.3 million in 2020. The decline in Sample Transport revenue was due to the decline in market demand for COVID-19 testing and an increase in market supply of sample transport products, each of which began in early 2021. Please see Item 1A., “Risk Factors”, for a discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the operations of our business and the uncertainties associated with global epidemics that may have an adverse impact on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition in the future.
Our revenue disaggregated by geographic region, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Revenue from sales to customers in the United States was $35.8 million in 2021, and $30.1 million in 2020. Revenue from U.S. sales represented 97.1% percent and 96.3% of our total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We experienced significant U.S. growth due to higher revenue in all product categories except Sample Transport.
Revenue from sales to customers in markets outside of the U.S. was $1.1 million in 2021, and $1.2 million in 2020. Revenue from international sales represented 2.9% and 3.7% of our total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue from sales to customers in markets outside the U.S. decreased as a percentage of total revenue due to lower international revenue and higher overall revenue in 2021. Our sales to customers outside of the U.S. are denominated in U.S. dollars.
Gross profit
Our gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Gross profit percentage was 47.8% in 2021, and 56.7% in 2020. The decrease in gross profit percentage in 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in manufacturing overhead and higher labor costs as a percentage of revenue as well as a $0.4 million reserve taken against Sample Transport inventory.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $4.3 million in 2021 and $1.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased headcount, depreciation, and various discretionary costs to support our new product and process development efforts.
Sales and marketing expenses were $3.8 million in 2021 and $2.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased headcount to develop our commercial presence and increase customer support, as well as higher levels of promotional spending.
General and administrative expenses were $20.4 million in 2021 and $8.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased headcount as well as professional fees, stock-based compensation, insurance, and information technology expenses, to build the infrastructure necessary to support our growth strategy.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
Our provision for (benefit from) income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Our benefit from income taxes was $2.8 million in 2021, which was primarily due to a federal deferred tax benefit from losses during such period. Our provision for income taxes was $1.2 million in 2020. The decrease in our provision for income taxes was attributable to a decrease in operating income.
Other income (expenses), net
Other income (expenses), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Other expenses, net was $0.6 million in 2021 compared to $0.1 million of total other income, net in 2020. The increase in other expenses, net was primarily driven by interest expense due to debt outstanding in 2021 with no comparable debt balance in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The primary source of financing for our operations was our IPO, which we completed in June 2021 and resulted in net proceeds to us of $99.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $7.7 million and offering expenses of $3.6 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $93.5 million in working capital, which included $87.5 million in cash and cash equivalents.
In addition to our existing cash and cash equivalents balance, another source of liquidity is our credit facility as described below in the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Credit Facility”.
To facilitate our expected growth, we expect to continue to use our sources of liquidity to make investments as we expand our operations and increase capacity. In particular, we are building out new manufacturing, warehouse and distribution facilities in Hollister, California, which we expect to be a significant use of cash over the next 12 to 18 months. We are carrying the majority of these fixed assets as construction in progress on our balance sheet until the facilities and related equipment are put into service. These uses of cash are not reasonably likely to result in material changes in the Company’s liquidity. In addition, we may also lease or purchase additional office, manufacturing, warehouse and/or distribution facilities. See “Notes to Financial Statements-Note 15-Obligations under Operating Leases,” for a discussion of our lease obligations reflected on our balance sheet.
We may also use our liquidity to pursue potential acquisitions that further or accelerate our business strategy.
Credit Facility
On March 26, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement provides for a $27.0 million credit facility (the Facility) consisting of a $22.0 million senior, secured term loan (the Term Loan), and a $5.0 million working capital facility (the Revolving Loan). The Term Loan is staged such that $12.0 million was available immediately, an additional $5.0 million was available on September 30, 2021, and $5.0 million may be available in 2022, contingent upon achieving (i) trailing twelve months of net revenue of $37.0 million if the proposed funding date is on or after January 1, 2022 and before July 1, 2022 or $38.5 million if the proposed funding date is on or after July 1, 2022 and on or before September 30, 2022 and (ii) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) targets (as defined in the Credit Agreement). We opted not to draw down the $5.0 million Term Loan tranche available on September 30, 2021. Borrowings on the Revolving Loan are limited to a borrowing base calculation. As of December 31, 2021, there was no drawdown on the Revolving Loan. The proceeds from the Facility are being used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
The interest on the Term Loan is based on the annual rate of one-month LIBOR plus 6.45%, subject to a LIBOR floor of 1.50%. If any advance under the Term Loan is prepaid at any time, the prepayment fee is based on the amount being prepaid and an applicable percentage amount, such as 3%, 2%, or 1%, based on the date the prepayment is made after the closing date of the Term Loan. The Credit Agreement contains a financial covenant based upon a trailing twelve months of net revenue, including a requirement of $32.0 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with this requirement. The outstanding balance on the Facility will be due in full on March 1, 2026. At the end of the Term Loan, we will pay an exit fee of $0.6 million, which represents 5% of the $12.0 million in borrowings made available immediately on March 26, 2021. Such fee is being accreted to interest expense over the life of the Term Loan. We incurred $0.3 million of debt issuance costs which are recorded in long-term debt, net of current portion in the balance sheets. On March 26, 2021, we drew the full $12.0 million of the Term Loan available. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance on the Term Loan was $12.0 million ($11.9 million net of debt issuance costs), and such balance is presented as long-term debt on the balance sheet (in thousands).
The maximum loan amount under the Revolving Loan (the Revolving Loan Commitment Amount) is $5.0 million, which we may request the Lenders to increase up to $15.0 million. The amount available to us under the Revolving Loan at any one time shall be based upon an amount equal to: (i) 85% of the net collectable value of our domestic accounts receivable; plus (ii) 50% of domestic eligible finished goods inventory that does not exceed $1.0 million. Additionally, availability from finished goods inventory cannot exceed 25% of the total borrowing base availability. Interest on the outstanding balance of the Revolving Loan will be payable monthly in arrears at an annual rate of one-month LIBOR plus 3.75%, subject to a LIBOR floor of 1.50%. There was no outstanding balance on the Revolving Loan as of December 31, 2021.
The Credit Agreement includes a financial covenant that requires us to maintain certain minimum revenue, tested monthly based on trailing 12 months net revenue. Calendar year-end net revenue covenants are a based on the achievement of a minimum revenue of $32.0 million at December 31, 2021, $37.5 million at December 31, 2022, $42.0 million at December 31, 2023, $46.5 million at December 31, 2024 and $51.5 million at December 31, 2025. In connection with the Facility, the Lenders received a perfected first priority security interest in all existing and after-acquired assets of the Company.
We believe these sources of liquidity, in addition to the net proceeds from our IPO, which closed on June 29, 2021, will be sufficient to fund our liquidity requirements for at least the next 24 months. Our principal liquidity requirements are to fund our operations (which includes, but is not limited to, maintaining sufficient levels of inventory to meet the anticipated demand of our customers), and to fund our capital expenditures, including the expansion of our manufacturing operations such as the construction of a new manufacturing, warehouse and distribution facilities in Hollister, California, which we expect to be a significant use of cash over the next 12 months. We may, however, require or elect to secure additional financing as we continue to execute our business strategy. If we require or elect to raise additional funds, we may do so through equity or debt financing, which may or may not be available on favorable terms and could require us to agree to covenants that limit our operating flexibility.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, net cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities, provided by (used in) investing activities and provided by (used in) financing activities (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities consists primarily of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items (including depreciation and amortization, bad debt expense, deferred taxes, loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment, inventory reserve, amortization of debt issuance costs, and stock-based compensation expense), and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $9.1 million in 2021, which primarily consisted of net loss of $9.8 million plus net adjustments for non-cash charges of $2.4 million, offset by net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. The primary non-cash adjustments to net income included $2.9 million of depreciation and amortization, $1.6 million of stock-based compensation, $0.4 million of inventory reserve, partially offset by $2.8 million in deferred taxes. Net cash used in changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a $2.3 million increase in inventories, $1.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a $1.8 million increase in accrued liabilities and $0.3 million increase in accounts payable.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of net income of $3.6 million plus net adjustments for non-cash charges of $4.4 million, partially offset by net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.5 million. The primary non-cash adjustments to net income are $2.0 million of depreciation and amortization and $2.1 million of deferred taxes. The significant impact from changes in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a $2.4 million increase in accounts receivable, $1.2 million increase in income taxes receivable, $0.9 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and $1.0 million increase in inventories.
Investing Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities relates primarily to capital expenditures and purchases of marketable securities, partially offset by proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable investments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of purchases of property, plant and equipment of $20.0 million. This was partially offset by receipt of proceeds from sales and maturities of short-term marketable securities of $1.1 million and $0.7 million, respectively, and proceeds from a loan to a related party of $0.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of purchase of property, plant and equipment of $5.5 million and purchase of short-term marketable securities of $1.8 million. This was partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of short-term marketable securities of $1.7 million and $3.7 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities primarily relates to proceeds from our IPO, net of underwriters’ commissions and discounts, payment of issuance costs of the IPO, and proceeds from long-term debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $110.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to proceeds from the IPO, net of underwriters’ commissions and discounts, of $102.7
million and proceeds from long-term debt pursuant to the Facility of $11.9 million, partially offset by payment of costs related to our IPO of $3.6 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily attributable to pushdown accounting adjustments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and contingencies as of the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. However, future events may cause us to change our assumptions and estimates, which may require adjustment. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies involve significant areas where management applies judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with ASC 606. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, identifying the performance obligations in the contract, determining the transaction price, allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when or as we satisfy performance obligations.
We recognize revenue from the sale of manufactured products and services when control of promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Control is transferred when the customer has the ability to direct the use of and obtain benefits from the goods or services. The majority of our sales agreements contain performance obligations satisfied at a point in time when control is transferred to the customer.
Occasionally, we offer rebates, discounts, and returns on our products, however returns and refunds are an extremely rare occurrence and are not explicitly or implicitly part of the purchase order. We record rebates, discounts, and returns at the time in which they occur. The difference between recording these as they occur and estimating the amount of consideration in exchange for the transfer of promised goods would not have a material impact on the financial statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of the fair value of the company above the fair value accounting basis of the net assets and liabilities of the company under pushdown accounting. Goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for impairment annually as of October 1, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may no longer be recoverable and that an impairment may have occurred. We operate as one segment and one reporting unit, and therefore goodwill is tested for impairment at the entity level.
We first consider qualitative factors that indicate impairment may have occurred. Such indicators may include macro-economic conditions such as adverse industry or market conditions; entity-specific events such as increasing costs, declining financial performance, or loss of key personnel. If the qualitative assessment indicates a reduction in the carrying value is more likely than not to have occurred, we perform a quantitative assessment, comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment has occurred, and an impairment loss is recognized for the difference up to the carrying value of the reporting unit’s goodwill.
The fair value of the reporting unit was determined using a combination of an income approach and market approach. We completed our annual impairment assessment in the fourth quarter of 2021 and determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the entity is less than its carrying amount.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgments, including a qualitative assessment to determine whether there are any impairment indicators, and determining the fair value of the reporting unit. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in a quantitative assessment. In the application of the income approach to forecast future cash flows, revenue and operating income growth rates, discount rates and other factors are used. Additionally, assumptions related to guideline company financial multiples are used in the market approach.
While we believe that our estimates of current value are reasonable, if actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used including such items as future cash flows and the volatility inherent in markets which we serve, impairment charges against the carrying value of those assets could be required in the future.
Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets
We review our definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of our long-lived assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated. Significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of future cash flows and the relative risk of achieving those cash flows. The key assumptions that we use in our discounted cash flow model are the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the asset over an extended period of time and a rate of return that considers the relative risk of achieving the cash flows, the time value of money, and other factors that a willing market participant would consider.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are also subject to an impairment test at least annually, as of October 1, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. If the fair value of the asset is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss would be recognized in an amount equal to the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value. We completed our assessment in the fourth quarter of 2021 and determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets is less than the carrying amount.
Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts.
Income Taxes
The asset and liability method is used in accounting for deferred income taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are provided for differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Accordingly, our tax provision contemplates tax rates currently in effect to determine our current tax provision as well as enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the fiscal years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled to determine our deferred tax provision. Any significant fluctuation in rates or changes in tax laws could lead to either increases or decreases in our effective tax rate.
Our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. Significant judgments and estimates based on interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations are required in determining our provision for income taxes. Changes in tax laws, statutory tax rates, and estimates of our future taxable income could impact the deferred tax assets and liabilities provided for in the financial statements and would require an adjustment to the provision for income taxes.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on the fair value and is expensed on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the award, which generally represents the scheduled vesting period. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. We account for stock-based compensation expense based on the estimated grant date fair value, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which requires us to make a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, the expected risk-free interest rate, the expected term and the expected dividend.
These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation is recognized.
▪Volatility. Since we have limited historical data on volatility of our stock, expected volatility is based on the volatility of the stock of similar publicly traded entities. In evaluating similarity, we consider factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, size, and financial leverage.
▪Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free rate that we use is based on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options.
▪Expected term. As we do not have sufficient historical exercise activity to estimate expected life, the expected life of options granted is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant or for each vesting tranche for awards with graded vesting. The midpoint of the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method.
▪Dividend yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we use an expected dividend yield of zero. In addition, the terms of the Credit Agreement prohibit us from paying dividends, other than dividends payable on our common stock, without the prior consent of the lender.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of our common stock was determined by the board of directors with assistance from management and, in part, on input from an independent third-party valuation firm. The board of directors determined the fair value of common stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including valuations of comparable companies, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of our common stock and the general and industry-specific economic outlook.
Beginning September 30, 2020, in valuing our common stock, the fair value of our business, or enterprise value, was determined using the market approach. The market approach involves identifying and evaluating comparable public companies and acquisition targets that operate in the same industry or which have similar operating characteristics as the subject company. Publicly available information regarding the comparable companies is used to extrapolate market-based valuation multiples that are applied to historical or prospective financial information in order to derive an indication of value.
The resulting equity value is then allocated to each share class using an Option Pricing Model (OPM). The OPM allocates the overall company value to the various share classes based on differences in liquidation preferences, participation rights, dividend policy, and conversion rights, using a series of call options. After the share value of our common stock was determined, a discount for lack of marketability (DLOM) was applied to arrive at the fair value of the common stock shares on a non-marketable, minority basis. A DLOM was applied in order to reflect the lack of a recognized market for a closely held interest.
For valuations after the completion of our IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is determined based on the closing price as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded.
Emerging Growth Company and a Smaller Reporting Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. For as long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements and
other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include, but are not limited to:
▪reduced obligations with respect to financial data, including presenting only two years of audited financial statements;
▪an exemption from compliance with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
▪reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements in our periodic reports, proxy statements, and registration statements; and
▪exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements.
In addition, under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from adopting new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies or that have opted out of using such extended transition period, which may make comparison of our financial statements with those of other public companies more difficult. We may take advantage of these reporting exemptions until we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, or, with respect to adoption of certain new or revised accounting standards, until we irrevocably elect to opt out of using the extended transition period.
Under the JOBS Act, we will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of:
▪the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more;
▪the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the closing of our initial public offering (IPO);
▪the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; and
▪the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the Exchange Act (i.e., the first day of the fiscal year after we have (i) more than $700.0 million in outstanding common equity held by our non-affiliates, measured each year on the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, and (ii) been public for at least 12 months).
Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases and its related interpretations, codified as ASC 842 (ASC 842). The new standard requires lessees to generally recognize operating and financing lease liabilities and corresponding right-of-use assets on the balance sheet. The new standard is effective with respect to Teknova beginning January 1, 2022 on a modified retrospective basis, and early adoption is permitted. We expect that most of the operating lease commitments will be subject to the new standard and will be recognized as operating lease liabilities and right-of-use assets of approximately $20 million upon adoption of ASC 842, which will increase the Company’s total assets and total liabilities.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12). ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in ASC 740 and clarifies and amends certain guidance to promote consistent application. ASU 2019-12 is effective for the Company’s annual and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. Depending on the amendment, adoption may be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective basis. We are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of the standard on the financial statements and do not anticipate the standard to have a significant impact.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326). The standard introduces a new model for recognizing credit losses on financial instruments based on an estimate of
current expected credit losses and will apply to accounts receivable. The new guidance will be effective for Teknova’s annual and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of the standard on the financial statements and do not anticipate the standard to have a significant impact.