ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements and related notes thereto.
Recent Developments
VDA Transaction and Change of Control
As previously reported in our Current Reports on Form 8-K dated August 10, 2021, and January 13, 2022, on August 6, 2021, the Company entered into a stock purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with VDA Group S.p.A., an Italian joint stock company (“VDA”), pursuant to which VDA would, at the Closing (as defined in the Purchase Agreement), contribute $5 million to Telkonet (the “Financing”) and, in exchange, Telkonet would issue to VDA: (i) 162,900,947 shares of Company Common Stock (the “Issuance”); and (ii) a warrant to purchase 105,380,666 additional shares of Common Stock (the “Warrant”) (the Issuance and the Warrant referred to collectively herein as the “VDA Transaction”). The Closing occurred on January 7, 2022.
Following the issuance of 162,900,947 shares of Common Stock to VDA upon the Closing, VDA owns 53% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock on a fully diluted as exercised/converted basis, resulting in a change of control of the Company. VDA could eventually own as much as 65% of the issued and outstanding Common Stock on a fully diluted as exercised/converted basis if it fully exercises the Warrant.
In connection with the VDA Transaction and pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Arthur E. Byrnes, Peter T. Koss and Leland D. Blatt (collectively, the “Former Directors”) resigned from the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) and any respective committees of the Board to which they belonged effective as of the Closing. The vacancies resulting from the resignations of the Former Directors were filled by Piercarlo Gramaglia, Flavio De Paulis and Steven E. Quick, all of whom were appointed by the remaining Board members effective as of the resignations of the Former Directors, resulting in a change of control of the Board. Jason L. Tienor and Tim S. Ledwick, who were Board members prior to the Closing, remained on the Board after the Closing.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed above, the Company’s operations and financial results have also been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Both the health and economic aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly fluid and the future course of each is uncertain. We cannot predict whether the outbreak of COVID-19 will be effectively contained on a sustained basis. Depending on the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for our products, our customers’ ability to meet payment obligations to the Company, our supply chain and production capabilities, and our workforces’ ability to deliver our products and services could be impacted. Management is actively monitoring the impact of the global situation on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. While we expect this disruption to continue to have a material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and liquidity, the Company is unable to reasonably determine the full extent of the impact at this time.
Due to travel restrictions, social distancing edicts and overall fear, the hospitality industry, our largest market that generally accounts for a majority of our revenue, has suffered as much as any since the onset of the pandemic. While the industry is trending toward recovery, the situation remains fragile. The effects of supply-chain issues, inflation and labor shortages, and subsequent rising wages, all present some level of pandemic uncertainty for the foreseeable future. STR and Tourism Economics expect leisure travel to pace the recovery while commercial demand, the dominant segment, will remain significantly below pre-pandemic levels until there is a significant increase in the quantity of large group events, as well as the return of business travel 7 When adjusted for inflation, revenue per available room (RevPAR) will likely remain below 2019 levels until at least 2025. 8
_________________
7 O’Conner, Stefani C. “Industry’s recovery heats up-slowly.” Hotelbusiness.com January 2022:8A
8 O’Conner, Stefani C. “Industry’s recovery heats up-slowly.” Hotelbusiness.com January 2022:14A.
Sipco License Agreement
In addition, on November 30, 2020, the Company entered into the License Agreement with Sipco and IPCO, LLC dba IntusIQ in order to settle a patent infringement lawsuit without the expense of costly litigation. As of December 31, 2021, we had $526,000 in liabilities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet for future royalty fees ($26,000 accounts payable, $140,000 in accrued liabilities and $360,000 long-term liability). The corresponding expense was recorded in 2020 in the selling, general and administrative line of the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The payment of the royalty fees is expected to have a material and adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations and liquidity. See Note M - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 15 of Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the patent infringement lawsuit and the License Agreement.
See Part I, Item 1. “Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below for a discussion of the steps the Company has and is continuing to take to focus on preserving liquidity, managing expenses, and targeted sales and new product growth.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates significant estimates used in preparing its consolidated financial statements including those related to revenue recognition and allowances for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventory obsolescence, recovery of long-lived assets, income tax provisions and related valuation allowance, stock-based compensation, and contingencies. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, underlying run rates and various other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from these estimates. The following are critical judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606, the Standard”) supersedes nearly all legacy revenue recognition guidance. ASC 606, the Standard outlines a comprehensive five-step revenue recognition model based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue based on when it satisfies its performance obligations by transferring control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for said goods or services.
Identify the customer contracts
The Company accounts for a customer contract under ASC 606 when the contract is legally enforceable. A contract is legally enforceable when all of the following criteria are met: (1) the contract has been approved by the Company and the customer and both parties are committed to perform their respective obligations, (2) the Company can identify each party’s rights regarding goods or services transferred, (3) the Company can identify payment terms for goods or services transferred, (4) the contract has commercial substance, and (5) collectability of all the consideration to which the Company is entitled in exchange for the goods or services transferred is probable.
A contract does not exist if each party to the contract has the unilateral right to terminate a wholly unperformed contract without compensating the other party (or parties). Nearly all of the Company’s contracts do not contain such mutual termination rights for convenience. All contracts are in written form.
Identify the performance obligations
The Company will enter into product only contracts that contain a single performance obligation related to the transfer of products to a customer.
The Company will also enter into certain customer contracts that encompass product and installation services, referred to as “turnkey” solutions. These contracts ultimately provide the customer with a solution that enhances the functionality of the customer’s existing equipment. For this reason, the Company has determined that the product and installation services are not separately identifiable performance obligations, but in essence represent one, combined performance obligation (“turnkey”).
The Company also offers post-installation support services to customers. Support services are considered a separate performance obligation.
Determine the transaction price
The Company generally enters into contracts containing fixed prices. It is not customary for the Company to include contract terms that would result in variable consideration. In the rare situation that a contract does include this type of provision, it is not expected to result in a material adjustment to the transaction price. The Company regularly extends pricing discounts; however, they are negotiated up front and adjust the fixed transaction price set out in the contract.
Customer contracts will typically contain upfront deposits that will be applied against future invoices, as well as customer retainage. The intent of any required deposit or retainage is to ensure that the obligations of either party are honored and follow customary industry practices. In addition, the Company will typically be paid in advance at the beginning of any support contracts, consistent with industry practices. None of these payment provisions are intended to represent significant implicit financing. The Company’s standard payment terms are thirty days from invoice date. Products are fully refundable when returned in their original packaging without damage or defacing less a restocking fee. Historical returns have shown to be immaterial. The Company offers a standard one-year assurance warranty. However customers can purchase an extended warranty. Under the revenue standard, extended warranties are accounted for as a service warranty, requiring the revenue to be recognized over the extended service periods. Contracts involving an extended warranty are immaterial and will continue to be combined with support revenue and recognized on a straight-line basis over the support revenue term.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations
Revenues from customer contracts are allocated to the separate performance obligations based on their relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) at contract inception. The SSP is the price at which the Company would sell a promised good or service separately. The best evidence of an SSP is the observable price of a good or service when the entity sells that good or service separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers. However, turnkey solutions are sold for a broad range of amounts resulting from, but not limited to, tiered discounting for value added resellers (“VAR”) based upon committed volumes and other economic factors. Due to the high variability of our pricing, the Company cannot establish a reliable SSP using observable data. Accordingly, the Company uses the residual approach to allocate the transaction price to performance obligations related to its turnkey solutions. When support services are not included within the turnkey solution, the residual method is not utilized and no allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligation is necessary.
All support service agreements, whether single or multi-year terms, automatically renew for one-year terms at a suggested retail price (“SRP”), unless terminated by either party. Support service renewals are consistently priced and therefore would support the use of SRP as the best estimate of an SSP for such performance obligations.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenues from product only sales at a point in time when control over the product has transferred to the customer. As the Company’s principal terms of sale are FOB shipping point, the Company primarily transfers control and records revenue for product only sales upon shipment.
A typical turnkey project involves the installation and integration of 200-300 rooms in a customer-controlled facility and usually takes sixty days to complete. Since control over goods and services transfers to a customer once a room is installed, the Company recognizes revenue for turnkey solutions over time. The Company uses an outputs measure based on the number of rooms installed to recognize revenues from turnkey solutions.
Revenues from support services are recognized over time, in even daily increments over the term of the contract, and are presented as “Recurring Revenue” in the Statements of Operations.
Contracts are billed in accordance with the terms and conditions, either at periodic intervals or upon substantial completion. This can result in billing occurring subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. Contract assets are presented as current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Contract liabilities include monthly support service fees, customer deposits, and billings in advance of revenue recognition. The long term portion of these liability balances represent the amount of revenues that will be recognized after December 31, 2022.
Contract Fulfillment Cost
The Company recognizes related costs of the contract over time in relation to the revenue recognition. Costs included within the projects relate to the cost of material, direct labor and costs of outside services utilized to complete projects. These are presented as “Contract assets” in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are uncollateralized customer obligations due under normal trade terms. The Company records allowances for doubtful accounts based on customer-specific analysis and general matters such as current assessment of past due balances and economic conditions. The Company writes off accounts receivable when they become uncollectible. Management identifies a delinquent customer based upon the delinquent payment status of an outstanding invoice, generally greater than 30 days past due date. The delinquent account designation does not trigger an accounting transaction until such time the account is deemed uncollectible. The allowance for doubtful accounts is determined by examining the reserve history and any outstanding invoices that are over 30 days past due as of the end of the reporting period. Accounts are deemed uncollectible on a case-by-case basis, at management’s discretion based upon an examination of the communication with the delinquent customer and payment history. Typically, accounts are only escalated to “uncollectible” status after multiple attempts at collection have proven unsuccessful.
Inventory Obsolescence
Inventories consist of thermostats, sensors and controllers for Telkonet’s product platforms. These inventories are purchased for resale and do not include manufacturing labor and overhead. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first in, first out (FIFO) method. The Company’s inventories are subject to technological obsolescence. Management evaluates the net realizable value of its inventories on a quarterly basis and when it is determined that the Company’s carrying cost of such excess and obsolete inventories cannot be recovered in full, a charge is taken against income for the difference between the carrying cost and the estimated realizable amount.
Guarantees and Product Warranties
The Company records a liability for potential warranty claims. The amount of the liability is based on the trend in the historical ratio of claims to sales. The products sold are generally covered by a warranty for a period of one year. In the event the Company determines that its current or future product repair and replacement costs exceed its estimates, an adjustment to these reserves would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company experienced approximately between 1% and 3% of returns related to product warranties. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded warranty liabilities in the amount of $46,650 and $45,328, respectively, using this experience factor range.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740-10. Under this method, deferred income taxes (when required) are provided based on the difference between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating losses at the statutory rates enacted for future periods. The Company has a policy of establishing a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that the Company will not realize the benefits of its deferred income tax assets in the future.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for our stock based awards in accordance with ASC 718, which requires a fair value measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to our employees and directors, including employee stock options and restricted stock awards.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes valuation model. This model requires us to make estimates and assumptions including, among other things, estimates regarding the length of time an employee will retain vested stock options before exercising them and the estimated volatility of our common stock price. The fair value is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. Changes in these estimates and assumptions can materially affect the determination of the fair value of stock-based compensation and consequently, the related amount recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Recovery of Long -Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable in accordance with ASC 360-10. Recoverability is measured by comparison of the carrying amount to the future net undiscounted cash flows which the assets are expected to generate. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds its fair value.
Sales Tax
Unless provided with a resale or tax exemption certificate, the Company assesses and collects sales tax on sales transactions and records the amount as a liability. It is recognized as a liability until remitted to the applicable state. Total revenues do not include sales tax as the Company is considered a pass through conduit for collecting and remitting sales taxes.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31,
The Company’s operations and financial results have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, significant uncertainty remains regarding the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic - both in terms of the health and economic aspects - and the timing of any recovery in markets such as hospitality, our largest market that generally accounts for a majority of our revenue.
Revenues
The table below outlines our product versus recurring revenues from operations for comparable periods:
Product Revenue
Product revenue principally arises from the sale and installation of energy management platforms. The suite of products consists of thermostats, sensors, controllers, wireless networking products, switches, outlets and a control platform.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, product revenues decreased by 3% or $0.20 million when compared to the prior year. Hospitality revenues decreased 4% to $4.72 million, government revenues decreased 10% to $0.19 million, education revenues decreased 37% to $0.28 million while MDU revenues increased 106% to $0.30 million and healthcare revenues increased 100% to $0.05 million. Product revenues derived from value-added resellers and distribution partners were $4.56 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 1% compared to the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, international revenues decreased 7% to $0.71 million when compared to the prior year period. The decrease in international revenues was primarily driven by the loss of one customer.
Backlogs were approximately $2.39 million and $2.64 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Beginning in the third quarter, global supply chain disruptions have created delays in our order fulfillment. These disruptions are ongoing and order cancellations could result if these issues persist.
Recurring Revenue
Recurring revenue is attributed to our call center support services. The Company recognizes revenue ratably over the service period for monthly support revenues and defers revenue for annual support services over the term of the service period. Recurring revenue consists of Telkonet’s EcoCare service and support program.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, recurring revenue decreased by 3% or $0.02 million when compared to the prior year period. The decrease was related to decreased unit sales of call center support services.
Cost of Sales
The tables below outline product versus recurring cost of sales, along with respective amounts of those costs as a percentage of revenue for the comparable periods:
Costs of Product Revenue
Costs of product revenue include materials and installation labor related to Telkonet’s platform technology. For the year ended December 31, 2021, product costs decreased 16% compared to the prior year period based upon lower revenues. The variance was primarily attributable to decreases in material costs of $0.43 million, logistical expenses of $0.14 million, inclusive of import tariffs and inventory adjustments of $0.20 million, offset by increases in product surcharges of $0.25 million resulting from global chip shortages, supply chain challenges and inflationary pressures. Material costs as a percentage of product revenues were 39%, a decrease of 1%, compared to the prior year period.
Costs of Recurring Revenue
Recurring revenue costs are comprised primarily of call center support labor. For the year ended December 31, 2021, recurring revenue costs decreased by 35% when compared to the prior year period. The variance was primarily due to decreases in call center staffing.
Gross Profit
The tables below outline product versus recurring gross profit, along with respective actual gross profit percentages for the comparable periods:
Gross Profit on Product Revenue
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 16% or $0.35 million when compared to the prior year period. The variance was primarily attributable to decreases in material costs of $0.43 million, logistical expenses of $0.14 million, inclusive of import tariffs and inventory adjustments of $0.20 million, offset by increases in product surcharges of $0.25 million resulting from global chip shortages, supply chain challenges and inflationary pressures. Material costs as a percentage of product revenues were 39%, a decrease of 1%, compared to the prior year period. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the actual gross profit percentage increased by 7% to 46% compared to the prior year period. Tariffs imposed on Chinese imports resulted in an adverse impact of approximately 4% on the actual gross profit percentage for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit on Recurring Revenue
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 1% when compared to the prior year period. The increase was primarily due to decreases in call center staffing offset by a decline in revenues.
Operating Expenses
The tables below outline operating expenses for the comparable periods, along with percentage change:
The Company’s operating expenses are comprised of research and development, selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization expense. During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses decreased by 9% when compared to the prior year as outlined below.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are related to both present and future products and are expensed in the period incurred. Current research and development costs are associated with product development and integration. For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development costs decreased by 4% when compared to the prior year period. The variance is primarily attributable to decreases in expenses incurred with third-party consultants of $0.58 million.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by 10% compared to the prior year period.
The variance is primarily attributable to decreases in royalty fees of $0.50 million, a 401(k) employer match of $0.05 million and payroll taxes of $0.44 million, partially offset by increased trade shows of $0.10 million, public company fees of $0.14 million and legal fees of $0.30 million. The payroll tax decrease was primarily the result of an Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”), allowed under the CARES Act, which is a refundable payroll tax credit that encouraged businesses to keep employees on the payroll during the COVID-19 pandemic. The royalty fees were made under the License Agreement entered into on November 30, 2020. See Note I - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1 of Part I of this Form 10-Q for summary of the terms of the License Agreement, including future payment obligations.
Operating Loss
Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 improved 28.5% to $2.22 million compared to the prior year of $3.11 million. This improvement is primarily due to an increase in gross profit and a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses discussed above.
Net Loss
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss of $0.41 million compared to a net loss of $3.15 million during the prior year. This net loss variance is primarily due to a $1.84 million non-cash gains on debt extinguishment in connection with full forgiveness of the PPP Loans, an increase in gross profit, and a relatively unchanged selling, general and administrative expenses discussed above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Management believes that certain non-GAAP financial measures may be useful to investors in certain instances to provide additional meaningful comparisons between current results and results in prior operating periods. Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation (“Adjusted EBITDA”) is a metric used by management and frequently used by the financial community. Adjusted EBITDA provides insight into an organization’s operating trends and facilitates comparisons between peer companies, since interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation can differ greatly between organizations as a result of differing capital structures and tax strategies. Adjusted EBITDA is one of the measures used for determining our debt covenant compliance. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain items that are unusual in nature or not comparable from period to period. While management believes that non-GAAP measurements are useful supplemental information, such adjusted results are not intended to replace our GAAP financial results. Adjusted EBITDA is not, and should not be considered, an alternative to net income (loss), operating income (loss), or any other measure for determining operating performance or liquidity, as determined under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). In assessing the overall health of its business for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company excluded items in the following general categories described below:
· Stock-based compensation: The Company believes that because of the variety of equity awards used by companies, varying methodologies for determining stock-based compensation and the assumptions and estimates involved in those determinations, the exclusion of non-cash stock-based compensation enhances the ability of management and investors to understand the impact of non-cash stock-based compensation on our operating results. Further, the Company believes that excluding stock-based compensation expense allows for a more transparent comparison of its financial results to the previous year.
RECONCILIATION OF NET LOSS
TO ADJUSTED EBITDA
FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31,
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As previously reported in our Current Reports on Form 8-K dated August 10, 2021, and January 13, 2022, on August 6, 2021, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement with VDA pursuant to which VDA contributed $5 million to the Company in exchange for the issuance of 162,900,947 shares of Company common stock and a warrant to purchase 105,380,666 additional shares of Company common stock. For a more detailed discussion of the VDA Transaction, please see Item 1 - Description of Business - Recent Developments.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company reported a net loss of $412,785 and had cash used in operating activities of $1,699,615, and ended the year with an accumulated deficit of $128,668,176 and total current assets in excess of current liabilities of $1,209,361. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $2,361,059 of cash and approximately $460,000 of availability on its Credit Facility. The Credit Facility is a $1,000,000 line of credit, which is subject to a borrowing base calculation based on the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and eligible inventory, each multiplied by an applicable advance rate, with an overall limitation tied to the Company’s eligible accounts receivable as well as financial covenants including a requirement to maintain a minimum unrestricted cash balance of $1,000,000. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total borrowing base of approximately $913,000, an outstanding balance of $403,089, and a cash management services reserve of $50,000, resulting in the availability of approximately $460,000 on the Credit Facility.
Since inception through December 31, 2021, we have incurred cumulative losses of $128,668,176 and have never generated enough cash through operations to support our business. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a cash flow deficit from operations of $1,699,615. The Company has made significant investments in the engineering, development and marketing of its intelligent automation platforms, including but not limited to, hardware and software enhancements, support services and applications. The funding for these development efforts has contributed to, and continues to contribute to, the ongoing operating losses and use of cash. Operating losses have been financed by debt and equity transactions, Credit Facility capacity, the sale of a wholly-owned subsidiary, and the management of working capital levels.
As discussed above, the Company’s operations and financial results have also been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Both the health and economic aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly fluid and the future course of each is uncertain. We cannot predict whether the outbreak of COVID-19 will be effectively contained on a sustained basis. Depending on the length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for our products, our customers’ ability to meet payment obligations to the Company, our supply chain and production capabilities, and our workforces’ ability to deliver our products and services could be impacted. Management is actively monitoring the impact of the global situation on the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. While we expect this disruption to continue to have a material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition cash flows, and liquidity, the Company is unable to reasonably determine the full extent of the impact at this time.
The Company’s sales and gross profits have decreased significantly resulting from a contraction in commercial demand for our products, a lower revenue conversion rate in our existing pipeline and significant one-off transactions from customers in 2020 were not repeated in 2021. Due to travel restrictions, social distancing and shelter at home edicts, the hospitality industry, our largest market that generally accounts for a majority of our revenue, has suffered as much as any. For a more detailed discussion of the impact of COVID-19 on the hospitality industry, see Item 1 - Recent Developments - Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic.
The more recent actions described above are in addition to the cost elimination and liquidity management actions that the Company began implementing in the second half of 2019, including reviewing opportunities to decrease spend with third party consultants and providers, strategically reviewing whether or not to fill employee positions in the event of vacancies, and implementing sales campaigns to sell slow-moving inventory and reduce existing inventory volumes. There is no guarantee, however, that these actions, nor any other actions identified, will yield profitable operations in the foreseeable future.
In addition to the actions noted above, on April 21, 2020, the Company entered into an unsecured promissory note, dated April 17, 2020 (“the First PPP Loan”), with Heritage Bank, a California state chartered bank (“Heritage Bank”) for a $913,063 loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). In January 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness of the amount due on the First PPP Loan. On February 16, 2021, the outstanding principal and interest accrued on the First PPP Loan was fully forgiven.
On April 27, 2021, the Company entered into an unsecured promissory note, dated as of April 26, 2021, for a second PPP loan (“the Second PPP Loan” and together with the First PPP Loan, the “PPP Loans”), with Heritage Bank under a second draw of the PPP administered by the SBA and authorized by the Keeping American Workers Employed and Paid Act. In September 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness of the amount due on the Second PPP Loan. On September 15, 2021, Heritage Bank confirmed that the Second PPP Loan granted to the Company, in the original principal amount of $913,063 plus accrued interest of $3,044 thereon, was forgiven in full. See Note G - Debt in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 15 of Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of the terms of the PPP Loan.
Revolving Credit Facility
On September 30, 2014, the Company entered into a loan and security agreement (the “Heritage Bank Loan Agreement”) with Heritage Bank governing a revolving credit facility in a principal amount not to exceed $2,000,000 (the “Credit Facility”). Availability of borrowings under the Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base calculation based on the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and eligible inventory each multiplied by an applicable advance rate, with an overall limitation tied to the Company’s eligible accounts receivable. The Credit Facility is secured by all of the Company’s assets. The Credit Facility is available for working capital and other general business purposes.
The outstanding principal balance of the Credit Facility bears interest at the Prime Rate plus 3.00%, which was 6.25% at December 31, 2021 and 7.75% at December 31, 2020. On October 9, 2014, as part of the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement, Heritage Bank was granted a warrant to purchase 250,000 shares of Telkonet common stock. The warrant has an exercise price of $0.20 and expired October 9, 2021. On November 6, 2019, the Eleventh Amendment to the Credit Facility was executed to extend the maturity date to September 30, 2021, unless earlier accelerated under the terms of the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement, and eliminate the maximum EBITDA loss covenant. The eleventh amendment was effective as of September 30, 2019.
On September 30, 2021, the Company entered into a twelfth amendment to the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement to extend the revolving maturity date to December 31, 2021, unless earlier accelerated under the terms of the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement. In addition, subject to certain conditions as specified in the Twelfth Amendment, Heritage Bank consented to the VDA Transaction (as described above under the “Business and Basis of Presentation” section in Note A - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies) between the Company and VDA, and acknowledged and agreed that certain events occurring in connection with the Transaction, including the change of control of the Company resulting from the Transaction, do not constitute Events of Default as defined in the Loan Agreement.
On December 13, 2021, the Company entered into a thirteenth amendment to the Heritage Bank Loan Amendment to extend the revolving maturity date to March 31, 2022, unless earlier accelerated under the terms of the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement. In addition, the Heritage Bank Loan Amendment reduced the credit extension amount to $1,000,000 and reduced unrestricted cash maintained in the Company’s accounts at Bank to be at least $1,000,000.
On March 10, 2022, the Company entered into a fourteenth amendment to the Heritage Bank Loan Amendment to extend the revolving maturity date to June 30, 2023, unless earlier accelerated under the terms of the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement.
The Heritage Bank Loan Agreement contains covenants that place restrictions on, among other things, the incurrence of debt, granting of liens and sale of assets. The Heritage Bank Loan Agreement also contains financial covenants. As discussed above, the EBITDA loss covenant was eliminated in the eleventh amendment to the Credit Facility. The sole remaining financial covenants are a minimum asset coverage ratio and a minimum unrestricted cash balance of $1 million, both of which are measured at the end of each month. A violation of either of these covenants could result in an event of default under the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement. Upon the occurrence of such an event of default or certain other customary events of defaults, payment of any outstanding amounts under the Credit Facility may be accelerated and Heritage Bank’s commitment to extend credit under the Heritage Bank Loan Agreement may be terminated. The Heritage Bank Loan Agreement contains other representations and warranties, covenants, and other provisions customary to transactions of this nature.
The outstanding balance on the Credit Facility was $403,089 and $267,289 at December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the remaining available borrowing capacity was approximately $460,000 and $442,000, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants.
See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section above for a discussion of a potential default under the Credit Facility.
Paycheck Protection Program
The Company has received two loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) administered by the United States Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) and authorized by the Keeping American Workers Employed and Paid Act, which is part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, enacted on March 27, 2020.
On April 17, 2020, the Company entered into an unsecured promissory note for $913,063 (“the First PPP Loan”). In January 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness of the amount due on the First PPP Loan. On February 16, 2021, Heritage Bank confirmed that the First PPP Loan granted to the Company, in the original principal amount of $913,063 plus accrued interest of $7,610 thereon, was forgiven in full.
On April 27, 2021, the Company entered into an unsecured promissory note, dated as of April 26, 2021, for a second PPP loan (“the Second PPP Loan” and together with the First PPP Loan, the “PPP Loans”), with Heritage Bank under a second draw of the PPP administered by the SBA and authorized by the Keeping American Workers Employed and Paid Act. In September 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness of the amount due on the Second PPP Loan. On September 15, 2021, Heritage Bank confirmed that the Second PPP Loan granted to the Company, in the original principal amount of $913,063 plus accrued interest of $3,044 thereon, was forgiven in full.
See Note G - Debt in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 15 of Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of the terms of the PPP Loans.
Cash Flow from Operations Analysis
Cash used in operating activities of operations was $1,699,615 and $844,794 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, our primary capital needs included costs incurred to increase energy management sales, inventory procurement, and managing current liabilities. The working capital changes during the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily related to an approximate $823,000 increase in accounts payable, a $563,000 decrease in net inventories, a $155,000 net increase in accrued liabilities, which includes an $11,000 decrease for interest forgiven on the PPP Loans, partially offset by an approximate $592,000 increase in prepaid expenses, a $161,000 increase in contract assets, and a $145,000 increase in accounts receivable. The primary working capital change during the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to an approximate $1,418,000 decrease in net accounts receivable, a $235,000 increase in current contract liabilities, partially offset by an approximate $223,000 decrease in accounts payable. Accounts receivable fluctuates based on the negotiated billing terms with customers and collections. We purchase inventory based on forecasts and orders, and when those forecasts and orders change, the amount of inventory may also fluctuate. Accounts payable fluctuates with changes in inventory levels, volume of inventory purchases, and negotiated supplier and vendor terms.
There was no cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1,048,863 and $556,005 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Proceeds from the Second PPP loan were $913,063, proceeds borrowed from the line of credit were $6,764,968 and cash used for payments on the line of credit were $6,629,168 during the year ended December 31, 2021. Proceeds from the First PPP loan were $913,063, proceeds borrowed from the line of credit were $5,835,000 and cash used for payments on the line of credit were $6,192,058 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section above for a discussion of a potential default under the Credit Facility.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note B - New Accounting Pronouncements in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 15 of Part IV of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of new accounting pronouncements.