ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion is intended to assist in understanding our financial performance and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes accompanying those financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including the information under the caption “Summary of Critical Accounting Policies.” In addition to historical financial information, the following management’s discussion and analysis may contain forward-looking statements. These statements reflect our expectations or estimates based on the information we have today but are not guarantees or predictions of future performance. They involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are beyond our control, and which may cause actual results to differ materially from the statements contained here. You are cautioned not to put undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The Company assumes no obligation to update or otherwise revise these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. More discussion of risks can be found under Item 1A, Risk Factors.
Summary
The Business and Strategy
Tandy Leather Factory, Inc. is one of the world’s largest specialty retailers of leather and leathercraft-related items. Founded in 1919 in Fort Worth, Texas, and organized in 2005 as a Delaware corporation, the Company introduced leathercrafting to millions of American and later Canadian and other international customers and has built a track record as the trusted source of quality leather, tools, hardware, supplies, kits and teaching materials for leatherworkers everywhere. Today, our mission remains to build on our legacy of inspiring the timeless art and trade of leatherworking.
What differentiates Tandy from the competition is our high brand awareness and strong brand equity and loyalty, our network of retail stores that provides convenience, a high-touch customer service experience, and a hub for the local leathercrafting community, and our 100-year heritage. We believe that this combination of qualities is unique to Tandy and gives the brand competitive advantages that are difficult for others to replicate.
We sell our products primarily through company-owned stores and through orders generated from our four websites: tandyleather.com, tandyleather.ca, tandyleather.eu and tandyleather.com.au. We also manufacture leather lace, cut leather pieces and most of the do-it-yourself kits that are sold in our stores and on our websites. We also offer production services to our business customers such as cutting (“clicking”), splitting, and some assembly. We maintain our principal offices at 1900 Southeast Loop 820, Fort Worth, Texas 76140.
Currently, the Company operates a total of 106 retail stores. There are 95 stores in the United States (“U.S,”), ten stores in Canada and one store in Spain.
Tandy Leather has been introducing people to leatherworking for over 100 years. Our stores have been and continue to be our competitive advantage: where our consumers learn the craft in classes, open table, and from the expertise of our store staff, where they can touch, feel and test the product, and where they can connect and commune with others passionate about leather. Our website provides inspiration, detailed product descriptions and specifications, educational information and videos, and a convenient place to also purchase product - especially for those who are far from our retail stores, including a growing international customer base. For many of our retail and web customers, leatherworking evolves from a passion to a trade. Our Commercial Division is tailored to the needs of those customers who build businesses around leather. With dedicated direct account representatives, a direct-from-our-warehouse shipping model, bulk and volume-based competitive pricing, customized product development, and production and pre-production services, we are building long-term, strategic relationships with our largest customers.
Our focus over the last three years has been on three broad strategic initiative areas:
1.
Improving our brand proposition, with both Retail and Commercial customers
2.
Rebuilding our foundation - the talent, processes, tools and systems needed to serve these customers
3.
Position us for long-term growth - creating the vision and roadmap for the future
COVID-19
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 temporarily shifted our strategic focus to company survival and cash preservation. We began closing stores on March 18, 2020, and by April 2, 2020, we temporarily closed all stores to the public. While we pivoted to serve customers only online, the Company experienced significant decreases in demand for its products in the second and third quarters of 2020, negatively impacting net sales.
In response, we took immediate action to mitigate the impact of temporary store closures on our cash flows by: (i) furloughing 406 Tandy employees, comprising two-thirds of the Tandy work force, (ii) temporarily cutting corporate salaries, with deeper cuts for the Executive Leadership Team, (iii) negotiating abatements, deferrals and other favorable lease terms with landlords, and (iv) negotiating longer payment terms with our key product vendors.
Due to our size, we were not eligible for the Paycheck Protection Program administered through the Small Business Administration. Also, due to our not being current on financial filings with the SEC, we were not able to obtain loans under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, also known as the CARES Act. However, under the CARES Act we were eligible to participate in the payroll tax deferral program, and we deferred $0.6 million in payroll tax with $0.3 million to be paid by December 31, 2021, and the remaining $0.3 million to be paid by December 31, 2022. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $0.4 million through the Spanish government’s Institute of Official Credit Guarantee for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, a COVID-19 relief program. In Canada, we participated in the Canada Emergency Commercial Rent Assistance (“CECRA”) program for rent relief, receiving total rent abatements under the program of $0.05 million.
During the third quarter of 2020, all of Tandy’s stores reopened to the public, and the store re-openings were well received by our employees and customers. We have continued to manage through the pandemic during intermittent spikes in COVID-19 infections, continued to see varying levels of infection rates, and have at time been forced to temporarily close or move certain stores to “curbside only” operations. We expect that at least some further infections and temporary store shutdowns will continue for the foreseeable future.
While we previously fulfilled our web orders out of our retail stores, during the second quarter of 2020, we built a centralized web fulfillment capability in our Fort Worth distribution center and have been and expect to continue to fulfill web orders primarily through Fort Worth going forward. Both our e-commerce business and stores have been performing above last year sales levels, but the future remains uncertain, and more store closures and/or other ongoing effects of the pandemic on the economy or employment market could cause a material negative impact on future sales.
As part of the Company’s accounting policy for long-lived asset impairments, we believe the COVID-19 impact on the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial position and the ongoing uncertainty the virus has created around future operating results represented a triggering event starting in the first quarter of 2020 which continued throughout the remainder of 2020.
Impairment charges recognized during 2020 totaled $1.1 million and primarily related to property and equipment and operating lease assets for certain stores that are projected to underperform to a level where the cash flows they generate will not be sufficient to cover their respective asset carry values.
Results of Operations
The following table presents selected financial data:
Net Sales
Consolidated net sales increased by $18.6 million, or 29.0%, from 2021 to 2020. This sales growth is a reflection of continued strong demand from customers in all channels of distribution: retail stores, our website and our Commercial Division. While staffing challenges and sporadic store closures due to COVID-19 limited sales upside in some areas, consumers continued to invest COVID-era stimulus payments in their leatherworking interests, especially in our retail stores. At the same time, we believe our improved product quality, broader assortment, improved in-store expertise and service, and focused and efficient marketing communications were continuing to work together to drive sales.
Our store footprint consisted of 106 stores at both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $10.9 million, or 30.3%, from 2021 to 2020 as a result of higher net sales as well as improved gross margin. Our gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 56.9%, versus 56.3% in the same period in 2020. This increase was a result of a combination of factors, including product and customer mix shifts as well as refining the process we use to capitalize cost into our inventory value for freight, warehousing and handling expenditures, updating from a manual, higher-level process to a more automated mechanism using our new ERP system, partially offset by higher costs for warehouse handling and freight costs.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $3.4 million in 2021 as compared to the corresponding prior year. This was mostly as a result of recalling store employees who had been furloughed while stores were closed in 2020 due to the COVID pandemic as well as sales-driven expenses like credit card fees and sales-based incentives, partially offset by $2.3 million in higher costs associated with the restatement of our financial statements and $0.4 million higher CFO transition costs in the prior year period. Adjusted operating expenses, which excludes the non-routine items related to the restatement and CFO turnover, increased $6.1 million or 16.3% for the reasons noted above. Adjusted operating expenses excluding non-routine items as shown above is a non-GAAP measure, included here to provide additional information regarding the Company’s financial performance on a recurring basis. Non-routine items are primarily legal and accounting fees associated with the restatement and recruiting fees, exit costs, interim CFO-related expenses, and expenses for a number of other contract accounting professionals associated with the turnover of our CFO in 2020.
Impairment Expense
During the first quarter of 2020, we determined the economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic created a triggering event for our fleet of stores, and we performed recoverability testing at the store level with 26 stores failing recoverability testing and resulting in impairment expense of $1.1 million during the 2020 year. For the year ended December 31, 2021, no impairment expense was recognized. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies - Impairment of long-lived assets of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K for further detail.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense consists primarily of interest expense, interest income and foreign currency (gain) loss. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized other expense of $0.1 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized other income of $0.1 million. We incurred higher levels of interest expense in 2021 as compared to the prior year as a result of a $0.4 million loan provided for by the Spanish government as part of a COVID-19 relief program.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 38.3% and (21.9%) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For 2021 and 2020, the difference between our statutory rates and our effective rate are primarily due to state income taxes, the difference in tax rates for loss carryback periods, items that are nondeductible for income tax purposes, and the change in valuation allowance against U.S. deferred tax assets and certain foreign net operating losses.
Capital Resources, Liquidity and Financial Condition
We require cash principally for day-to-day operations, to purchase inventory and to finance capital investments. We expect to fund our operating and liquidity needs primarily from a combination of current cash balances and cash generated from operating activities. Any excess cash will be invested as determined by our Board of Directors in accordance with its approved investment policy. Our cash balance as of December 31, 2021 totaled $10.2 million.
Spain Loan
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $0.4 million from Banco Santander S.A. under the Institute of Official Credit Guarantee for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises in order to facilitate the continuation of employment and to attenuate the economic effects of the COVID-19 virus. This loan was provided for by the Spanish government as part of a COVID-19 relief program. The term of the agreement is five years, and the interest rate is fixed at 1.5%. Based on the terms of the loan agreement, we are required to make monthly interest-only payments for the first two years and monthly principal and interest payments for the remainder of the term of the agreement.
Share Repurchase Program
On August 9, 2020, the Board of Directors approved a new program to repurchase up to $5.0 million of our common stock between August 9, 2020 and July 31, 2022. The Company’ s previous share repurchase program expired in August 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the full $5.0 million of our common stock remained available for repurchase under this program.
On January 28, 2021, we entered into an agreement with an institutional shareholder of the Company to repurchase 500,000 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0024 in a private transaction. The purchase price was $3.35 per share for a total of $1.7 million. The closing of the repurchase of these shares took place on February 1, 2021, and these shares were subsequently cancelled. Prior to the repurchase, the shares represented approximately 5.5% of our outstanding common stock.
On December 8, 2021, we entered into an agreement with an institutional shareholder of the Company to repurchase 212,690 shares of our common stock, par value $0.0024 in a private transaction. The purchase price was $5.00 per share for a total of $1.1 million. The closing of the repurchase took place on December 16, 2021, and these shares were subsequently cancelled. Prior to the repurchase, the shares represented approximately 2.4% of our outstanding common stock. These share repurchases were separately authorized by our Board of Directors and did not reduce the remaining amount authorized to be repurchased under the plan described in the previous paragraph.
Cash Flows
For 2021, we generated $3.7 million of cash from operations driven by net income of $1.4 million, non-cash expenses of $5.2 million, including depreciation, amortization, and stock-based compensation, a reduction to income tax receivable of $1.8 million due to a federal income tax refund of $1.0 million related to the 2019 tax year and $0.8 million in income tax expense from expected taxable income generation in 2021, and $1.6 million of other changes in operating assets and liabilities mostly attributable to an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.9 million, and partially offset by the net buildup of inventory of $2.8 million and a reduction in lease liabilities of $3.4 million. We invested $1.0 million in capital expenditures for the purchase of store fixtures and systems implementations. We used cash in financing activities to repurchase 712,690 shares of Tandy common stock in two private purchases totaling $2.7 million at an average price of $3.84 per share. The activities above, in addition to the effect of exchange rate changes, resulted in a net decrease in cash of $0.2 million.
For the year ended 2020, we used $12.6 million of cash from operations driven by our net loss of $4.9 million which was offset by non-cash expenses of $6.7 million, including depreciation and amortization, impairments, and stock-based compensation. Working capital used $14.3 million of cash, primarily from the build-up of inventory. We received $7.5 million from the sale of short-term U.S. Treasuries. We invested $1.3 million in capital expenditures for the purchase of store fixtures and systems implementations. We borrowed $0.4 million as part of a COVID-19 relief program sponsored by the Spanish government. The activities above, in addition to the effect of exchange rate changes, resulted in a net decrease in cash of $5.6 million.
We believe that cash flow from operations and our existing cash reserves will be adequate to fund our operations through 2022, taking into account the current effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and cash flow and our current business performance. In addition, we anticipate that this cash flow and our current cash reserves will enable us to meet our contractual obligations and commercial commitments throughout 2022. There can be no assurance, however, that the COVID-19 pandemic would not result in further restrictions on our business operations in a manner that would more materially impact our cash flow.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during 2021 or 2020, and we do not currently have any such arrangements.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the use of estimates that affect the reported value of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates are based on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for the Company’s conclusions. The Company continually evaluates the information used to make these estimates as the business and the economic environment changes. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and estimates are subject to change due to modifications in the underlying conditions or assumptions. The policies discussed below require estimates that contain a significant degree of judgement. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout the Consolidated Financial Statements, but the accounting policies and estimates considered most critical are as follows.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenue is earned from sales of merchandise and generally occurs via three methods: (1) at the store counter, (2) shipment of product generally via web sales, and (3) sales of product directly to commercial customers. We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligation of transferring control of product merchandise over to a customer. At the store counter, our performance obligation is met and revenue is recognized when a sales transaction occurs with a customer. When merchandise is shipped to a customer, our performance obligation is met and revenue is recognized when control passes to the customer. Shipping terms are normally free on board (“FOB”) shipping point and control passes when the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Sales tax and comparable foreign tax is excluded from net sales, while shipping charged to our customers is included in net sales. Net sales are based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive, reduced by estimates for future merchandise returns. The sales return allowance is based each year on historical customer return behavior and other known factors and reduces net sales and cost of sales, accordingly. Under our sales returns policy, merchandise may be returned, under most circumstances, up to 60 days after date of purchase. As merchandise is returned, the company records the sales return against the sales return allowance. We record a gift card liability for the unfulfilled performance obligation on the date we issue a gift card to a customer. We record revenue and reduce the gift card liability as the customer redeems the gift card. In addition, for gift card breakage, we recognize a proportionate amount for the expected unredeemed gift cards over the expected customer redemption period, which is one year.
Inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out) or net realizable value. Finished goods held for sale includes the cost of merchandise purchases, the costs to bring the merchandise to our Texas distribution center, warehousing and handling expenditures, and distributing and delivering merchandise to our stores. These costs include depreciation of long-lived assets utilized in acquiring, warehousing and distributing inventory. Manufacturing inventory including raw materials and work-in-process is valued on a first-in, first-out basis using full absorption accounting which includes material, labor, and other applicable manufacturing overhead. Carrying values of inventory are analyzed and, to the extent that the cost of inventory exceeds the net realizable value, provisions are made to reduce the carrying amount of the inventory. We regularly review all inventory items to determine if there are (i) damaged goods (e.g., for leather, excessive scars or damage from ultra-violet (“UV”) light), (ii) items that need to be removed from our product line (e.g., slow-moving items, inability of a supplier to provide items of acceptable quality or quantity, and to maintain freshness in the product line) and (iii) pricing actions that need to be taken to adequately value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Since the determination of net realizable value of inventory involves both estimation and judgement with regard to market values and reasonable costs to sell, differences in these estimates could result in ultimate valuations that differ from the recorded asset. The majority of inventory purchases and commitments are made in U.S. dollars in order to limit the Company’s exposure to foreign currency fluctuations. Goods shipped to us are recorded as inventory owned by us when the risk of loss shifts to us from the supplier. Inventory is physically counted twice annually in the Texas distribution center. At the store level, inventory is physically counted each quarter. Inventory is then adjusted in our accounting system to reflect actual count results.
Leases. We lease certain real estate for our retail store locations and warehouse equipment for our Texas distribution center, both under long-term lease agreements. Starting in 2019, with the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), once we have determined an arrangement is a lease, at inception we recognize a lease asset and lease liability at commencement date based on the present value of the lease payments over the lease term. For our operating leases, the present value of our lease payments may include: (1) rental payments adjusted for inflation or market rates, and (2) lease terms with options to renew the lease when it is reasonably certain we will exercise such an option. The exercise of lease renewal options is generally at our discretion. Payments based on a change in an index or market rate are not considered in the determination of lease payments for purposes of measuring the related lease liability. We discount lease payments using our incremental borrowing rate based on information available as of the measurement date. Rent expense is recorded in operating expenses. The net excess of rent expense over the actual cash paid has been recorded as accrued expenses and other liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. For finance leases, our right-of-use assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the earlier of the useful life of the right-of-use asset or the end of the lease term with rent expense recorded to operating expenses. We adjust the lease liability to reflect lease payments made during the period and interest incurred on the lease liability using the effective interest method. The incurred interest expense is recorded in interest expense on the consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss). As of December 31, 2021, we have no sublease agreements and no lease agreements in which we are named as a lessor. Subsequent to the recognition of our operating lease assets and lease liabilities, we recognize lease expense related to our operating leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The depreciable life of related leasehold improvements is based on the shorter of the useful life or the lease term. We also perform interim reviews of our operating lease assets for impairment when evidence exists that the carrying value of an asset group, including a lease asset, may not be recoverable.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We evaluate long-lived assets on a quarterly basis to identify events or changes in circumstances (“triggering events”) that indicate the carrying value of certain assets may not be recoverable. Upon the occurrence of a triggering event, right-of-use (“ROU”) lease assets, property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment and an impairment loss is recorded in the period in which it is determined that the carrying amount of the assets is not recoverable. The determination of recoverability is made based upon the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows of assets grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets with such cash flows to be realized over the estimated remaining useful life of the primary asset within the asset group. The Company determined the lowest level of identifiable cash flows that are independent of other asset groups to be primarily at the individual store level. If the estimated undiscounted future net cash flows for a given store are less than the carrying amount of the related store assets, an impairment loss is determined by comparing the estimated fair value with the carrying value of the related assets. The impairment loss is then allocated across the asset group’s major classifications which in this case are operating lease assets and property and equipment. Triggering events at the store level could include material declines in operational and financial performance or planned changes in the use of assets, such as store relocation or store closure. This evaluation requires management to make judgements relating to future cash flows, growth rates and economic and market conditions. The fair value of an asset group is estimated using a discounted cash flow valuation method.
Stock-based Compensation. The Company’s stock-based compensation relates primarily to restricted stock unit (“RSU”) awards. Accounting guidance requires measurement and recognition of compensation expense at an amount equal to the grant date fair value. Compensation expense is recognized for service-based stock awards on a straight-line basis or ratably over the requisite service period, based on the closing price of the Company’s stock on the date of grant. The service-based awards typically vest ratably over the requisite service period, provided that the participant is employed on the vesting date. The total compensation expense is reduced by actual forfeitures as they occur over the requisite service period of the awards. Performance-based RSUs vest, if at all, upon the Company satisfying certain performance targets. The Company records compensation expense for awards with a performance condition when it is probable that the condition will be achieved. If the Company determines it is not probable a performance condition will be achieved, no compensation expense is recognized. If the Company changes its assessment in a subsequent period and concludes it is probable a performance condition will be achieved, the Company will recognize compensation expense ratably between the period of the change in assessment through the expected date of satisfying the performance condition for vesting. If the Company subsequently assesses that it is no longer probable that a performance condition will be achieved, the accumulated expense that has been previously recognized will be reversed. The compensation expense ultimately recognized, if any, related to performance-based awards will equal the grant date fair value based on the number of shares for which the performance condition has been satisfied. We issue shares from authorized shares upon the lapsing of vesting restrictions on RSUs. We do not use cash to settle equity instruments issued under stock-based compensation awards.
Income Taxes. Income taxes are estimated for each jurisdiction in which we operate. This involves assessing current tax exposure together with temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and financial statement accounting purposes. Any resulting deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability based on estimated future taxable income. To the extent it is more-likely-than-not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded. Our evaluation regarding whether a valuation allowance is required or should be adjusted also considers, among other things, the nature, frequency, and severity of recent losses, forecasts of future profitability and the duration of statutory carryforward periods. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect in the years when those temporary differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred taxes from a change in tax rate is recognized through continuing operations in the period that includes the enactment date of the change. Changes in tax laws and rates could affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more-likely-than-not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. Income tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold to be recognized. We recognize tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions and adjust these liabilities when our judgement changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense and the effective tax rate in the period in which new information becomes available. We may be subject to periodic audits by the Internal Revenue Service and other taxing authorities. These audits may challenge certain of our tax positions, such as the timing and amount of deductions and allocation of taxable income to the various jurisdictions.