Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, ("10-K"). In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events in future periods may differ materially from those anticipated or implied in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Item 1A, "Risk Factors," and elsewhere in this 10-K. See also "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" at the beginning of this 10-K.
General Overview
We offer technologically advanced, software-based security solutions that empower and protect the world’s most security-conscious organizations against rapidly evolving, sophisticated and pervasive threats. Our portfolio of security products, services and expertise empower our customers with capabilities to reach new markets, serve their stakeholders more effectively, and successfully defend the nation or their enterprise. We protect our customers’ people, information, and digital assets so they can pursue their corporate goals and conduct their global missions with confidence in their security and privacy.
For an overview of our operating segments, including a discussion of our major products and services and the reorganization of our segments into two operating segments, see our business segment discussion contained in Item 1. The segment information presented in this management's discussion and analysis for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 has been restated to conform with the changes to our operating structure in fiscal year 2021.
Business Environment
Our business performance continues to be heavily affected by the overall level of U.S. government spending and the alignment of our solutions with the priorities of the U.S. government. U.S. government spending and contracts continue to be affected by the federal budget and appropriations process and related legislation.
In fiscal years 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic dislocation in the United States resulted in an overwhelming federal response, including enactment of multiple significant and comprehensive emergency appropriations and economic stimulus measures. These were in addition to the annual appropriations legislation for FY 2021, which was not enacted into law until late December 2020. This was nearly three months after the beginning of the fiscal year, during which time the government operated under a series of Continuing Resolutions ("CRs"), which strictly limited new spending initiatives.
Due to delays again this year in the passage of FY 2022 appropriations legislation, the federal government had been operating since October 1, 2021 under the terms of another series of CRs, which limited spending to the prior year’s funding levels and generally prohibited new spending initiatives and contract starts. But Congress finally reached agreement in March on FY 2022 appropriations legislation, which will allow our federal customers to finally operate under more normal conditions and with updated funding levels through the remainder of fiscal year 2022. Of note, the final FY 2022 appropriations bill provides $728.5 billion for the Department of Defense and related activities. This amount is $32.5 billion more than the FY 2021 enacted level, and is an increase above the level proposed last spring by President Biden for FY 2022.
This delay in enacting final FY 2022 appropriations legislation has postponed submission to Congress of the President’s FY 2023 budget request, and could delay the congressional budget and appropriations process for the next fiscal year. These delays could, in turn, impact future planning by Telos and its government customers.
In November 2021, Congress gave final approval to and the President signed into law a multi-year, $1.2 trillion infrastructure package, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which contains a number of provisions dealing with cybersecurity and provides funding for state and local government cybersecurity grant. We believe these provisions could ultimately result in an increased need for solutions and services provided by Telos.
At the same time, such large increases in federal spending, following the enormous emergency spending packages during the pandemic and their resulting increases in the budget deficit will necessarily factor into future federal budget planning and spending decisions, affecting to an unknown degree the government contracts that we hold and the federal procurement for which we would otherwise compete.
Despite the pandemic’s resultant massive shift to teleworking by federal employees and contractors, the government has successfully maintained the continuity of services as has Telos. More recently, as the government has proceeded to develop and implement its reopening process, and to make adjustments based on changing circumstances, officials have said they will seek to continue to maximize the use of teleworking by federal employees. This stance has continued during the most recent, renewed surge of COVID-19 variant transmission. As such, with much of the business of government still being conducted by federal employees working remotely through the use of information technology systems, we believe there will continue to be a need on the part of the government for the types of solutions and services provided by Telos.
President Biden’s May 12, 2021 Executive Order on “Improving the Nation’s Cybersecurity” acknowledged the severity and scope of the cybersecurity challenges facing the public and private sectors, the American people and our economy. It gave the following direction for federal departments and agencies to modernize government cybersecurity: move more rapidly to adopt secure cloud services; adopt multi-factor authentication; push for increased use of zero trust architecture; and improve the security and integrity of the software supply chain, with a priority on addressing critical software. The executive order also called for improving communications with cloud service providers through automation and standardization of messages at each stage of the FedRAMP process, and for other changes in an effort to accelerate and improve the process.
Subsequently, federal agencies, including the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency ("CISA") and the TSA, which have specific responsibilities for various aspects of government and private sector cybersecurity, have taken steps to enhance public sector and critical infrastructure cybersecurity and to accelerate adoption of zero trust architecture throughout the federal government.
Pursuant to the cybersecurity executive order, the Biden Administration is putting emphasis on greater use of automation in the FedRAMP process, and on supply chain risk management, which are also focus areas for Telos. NIST is developing a Ransomware profile, based on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, which is specifically intended to help organizations manage ransomware-related risk, and Telos solutions will support this. Finally on FedRAMP, this process is now being adopted at the state level, and we believe this StateRAMP effort will expand the market for Telos’ FedRAMP offerings.
Also to carry out that executive order, CISA last fall issued a draft of its Zero Trust Maturity Model to serve as a road map for agencies as they develop and implement zero trust architecture. Subsequently, the Office of Management and Budget on January 26, 2022 released its final Zero Trust Architecture Strategy for federal agencies, the goals of which are organized using CISA’s Zero Trust Maturity Model. Agencies will be required to meet specific zero trust security goals by the end of FY 2024, and they must develop, within 60 days of the strategy’s issuance, zero trust migration plans that meet the requirements of this strategy and include budget planning for those efforts. Further, CISA has indicated it intends to update its draft Zero Trust Maturity Model in order to better align programs and services, including its Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation ("CDM") program, with government-wide adoption of zero-trust security architectures in 2022.
In addition, a national security memorandum signed by President Biden on January 19, 2022 established guidelines for applying parts of his May 2021 cybersecurity executive order to the national security systems of the Defense Department and Intelligence Community, including pushing for adoption of zero trust architecture and other cybersecurity improvements.
Cybersecurity Landscape
Over the past few years, continued and increasingly damaging ransomware and other cyberattacks against federal, state and local governments, the K-12 and higher education sectors, and private sector enterprises have resulted in intensified efforts to better defend against such attacks. The growing demand for these solutions continues to provide Telos with the privilege of offering our expertise to protect these vitally important organizations.
Ransomware remains arguably the most severe cyber threat to enterprises in the commercial and SLED sectors. Our Xacta offering empowers these organizations and institutions to maintain a strong cyber risk posture to minimize the risk of ransomware gaining a foothold in their IT environment. Should ransomware get loose in the enterprise network, Telos Ghost, our virtual obfuscation network offering, can hide vital resources from view to prevent the payload from reaching them.
Critical infrastructure and industrial IoT are among the categories at greatest risk of cyberattacks. Energy, utilities, transportation, and food supply were among the critical infrastructure sectors that experienced high-profile breaches or ransomware attacks over the past year. Telos Ghost can hide critical IoT and ICS from the public internet to keep them from being compromised. Telos Ghost can also cordon off financial data, medical records, intellectual property, and other crown-jewel assets from visibility or accessibility by adversaries.
Telos Ghost is a complement to zero trust security, creating an additional layer of defense against intruders by hiding critical resources and users in an anonymous undiscoverable network. As noted above, it protects the crown-jewel assets of critical infrastructure from unauthorized access. Xacta streamlines and automates the critical processes of the leading cybersecurity standards and frameworks, in particular FedRAMP, allowing all process participants to collaborate within the same Xacta application to attain a FedRAMP Authority to Operate. Xacta is also a trailblazer in adopting the Open Security Controls Assessment Language, a multi-format framework adopted by FedRAMP to allow security professionals to automate security assessment, auditing, and continuous monitoring processes.
The Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022, which was signed into law March 15, will require critical infrastructure owners and operators as well as federal agencies to report to CISA significant cyber incidents within 72 hours and any ransomware payments made within 24 hours. Telos believes that such threat of having to make such disclosures will make organizations even more sensitive to boosting their cybersecurity posture, and that our Xacta solution will help illuminate their risk profile so that they can better understand the issues and address those issues proactively.
Government mandates and initiatives to assure stronger security in highly regulated industries, as noted above, also lead to opportunities for Xacta. An update to the research study Telos conducted last year reveals that audit fatigue continues to burden these organizations, with automation solutions being recognized as the most effective remedy for the many repetitive and redundant tasks that security compliance requires. Xacta streamlines, harmonizes, and automates the security controls and processes that comprise the leading cybersecurity standards and frameworks, in on-premises, cloud, hybrid, and multi-cloud environments.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has also recently proposed new, mandatory cyber risk management and cybersecurity incident reporting requirements for publicly traded companies. Telos believes this will make sure companies have in place a sound cyber risk management strategy based on recognized best practices, such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework (NIST CSF), and Telos solutions will support this.
Finally, as a whole, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the acceleration of digital transformation and cloud adoption within the government and beyond, which could increase demand for Xacta and Telos Ghost. Xacta is engineered to manage risk and compliance of complex cloud and multi-cloud environments, a key capability for federal agencies and regulated industries that need to gain and maintain compliance with cloud-specific security regulations. Telos Ghost is a cloud-native, as-as-service offering that delivers network obfuscation and managed attribution capabilities on a global scale to support the cloud-enabled enterprise.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 global pandemic has continued to create significant and unprecedented challenges, and during these highly uncertain times, our top priority remains the health and safety of our employees, customers and suppliers, thereby securing the financial well-being of the Company and supporting business continuity. We are continuing to monitor the most recent outbreak of COVID-19, to work with our stakeholders to assess further possible implications to our business, supply chain and customers, and to take actions in an effort to mitigate any adverse consequences.
Despite the pandemic's resultant shift to teleworking by federal employees and contractors, the government has successfully maintained continuity of services. With much of the business of government continuing to be conducted remotely through the use of information technology systems, we believe there will continue to be a need on the part of the government for the types of solutions and services provided by us.
Opportunities, Challenges and Risks
We derive a substantial portion of our revenues from contracts and subcontracts with the U.S. government. Our revenues are generated from a number of contract vehicles and task orders. Over the past several years we have sought to diversify and improve our operating margins through an evolution of our business from an emphasis on product reselling to that of an advanced solutions technologies provider. To that end, although we continue to offer resold products through our contract vehicles, we have focused on selling solutions and outsourcing product sales, as well as designing and delivering Telos manufactured and branded technologies. We believe our contract portfolio is characterized as having low to moderate financial risk due to the limited number of long-term fixed-price development contracts. Our firm fixed-price activities consist principally of contracts for the products and services at established contract prices. Our time-and-material contracts generally allow the pass-through of allowable costs plus a profit margin. For 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company’s revenue derived from firm fixed-price contracts was 87.6%, 84.3%, and 82.7%, respectively; cost-plus contracts revenue was 7.3%, 8.2%, and 8.2%, respectively; and time-and-material contracts was 5.1%, 7.5%, and 9.1%, respectively.
Our business performance is affected by the overall level of U.S. government spending and the alignment of our offerings and capabilities with the budget priorities of the U.S. government. Adverse changes in fiscal and economic conditions could materially impact our business. Some changes that could have an adverse impact our business include the implementation of future spending reductions and government shutdown. Currently, the federal government is operating under the terms of the CR, until the individual appropriations bills are enacted.
Despite the budget and competitive pressure affecting the industry, we believe we are well-positioned to expand existing customer relationships and benefit from opportunities that we have not previously pursued. In fiscal 2021, we reported revenue growth driven by strong demands for our advanced security solutions, and won and retained large-scale and long-term contracts. Further, we continue to grow our sales channel and partner programs.
The U.S. government has increasingly relied on contracts that are subject to a competitive bidding process (including indefinite delivery, IDIQ, GSA schedules, and other multi-award contracts), which has resulted in greater competition and increased pricing pressure. To cite some of our existing contracts, we provide different solutions and are party to contracts of varying revenue types under the Network-Centric Solutions ("NETCENTS")-2 contracts to the U.S. Air Force. NETCENTS-2 are IDIQ and GWAC, therefore any government customer may utilize the NETCENTS-2 vehicles to meet its purchasing needs. Consequently, revenue earned on the underlying NETCENTS-2 delivery orders varies from period to period according to the customer and solution mix for the products and services delivered during a particular period, unlike a standalone contract with one separately identified customer. The contracts themselves do not fund any orders and they state that the contracts are for an indefinite delivery and indefinite quantity. The majority of our task/delivery orders have periods of performance of less than 12 months, which contributes to the variances between interim and annual reporting periods. We have also been awarded other IDIQ/GWACs, including the Department of Homeland Security’s EAGLE II, GSA Alliant 2, and blanket purchase agreements under our GSA schedule. We expect that a majority of the business that we seek in the foreseeable future will be awarded through a competitive bidding process.
Key Performance Measures
The primary financial performance measures we use to manage our business and monitor results of operations are revenue, gross profit, and Adjusted EBITDA. We evaluate our results of operations by considering the drivers causing changes in these measures. We evaluate significant trends and fluctuations on our contract portfolio over time due to contract awards and completions, changes in customer requirements and changes in the volume of product and software sales. Changes in costs of revenue as a percentage of revenue other than from revenue volume or cost mix are driven by changes in the compensation expense and other allocated costs and or cumulative revenue adjustments due to changes in estimates. Changes in operating cash flows are driven by changes in cash generated through delivery of products and services, fluctuations in current assets and liabilities and the impact of changes in the timing of cash receipts or disbursements.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Overview
The following table sets forth the results of operations and certain consolidated financial data as a percentage of sales for the periods indicated:
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Company Results
Revenue increased by $62.5 million or 34.7% in 2021 compared to 2020. Revenue, excluding the contract with the U.S. Census Bureau of $5.4 million in 2021 and $31.0 million in 2020, grew 59.2% year-over-year. Revenue increased by $20.7 million or 13.0% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in revenue is attributable to new awards and net increase in volume on various projects within the business groups. Sales may vary from period to period according to the solution mix and timing of deliverables for a particular period.
Cost of sales increased by $38.9 million or 33.1% in 2021 compared to 2020. Cost of sales increased by $10.6 million or 9.9% in 2020 compared to 2019. The changes in the cost of sales are directly driven by the change in mix and nature of the programs and an increase in stock-based compensation of $2.6 million in 2021 (none in the comparative prior years).
Gross profit increased by 37.8% to $86.0 million for 2021 from $62.4 million for 2020. Gross profit increased by 19.2% to $62.4 million for 2020 from $52.3 million for 2019. Gross margin increased to 35.5% for 2021 from 34.7% for 2020. Gross margin increased due to growth in high margin contracts. Gross margin increased to 34.7% for 2020 from 32.9% for 2019. The change in the gross margin is due to various mix of contracts in all line of business.
Selling, general, and administrative ("SG&A") expenses increased by 105.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. This is primarily attributable to an increase in stock-based compensation of $57.6 million, labor cost of $15.0 million, outside services of $4.4 million, insurance cost of $1.1 million and trade show cost of $1.2 million, offset by the decrease in bonus cost of $12.1 million and capitalization of research and development costs of $3.3 million. SG&A expenses increased by 31.3% in 2020 compared to 2019. Such increase is primarily attributable to increases in bonuses of $6.3 million, outside services of $5.9 million, labor costs of $5.9 million, and $0.6 million in legal fees, offset by capitalization of research and development costs of $4.2 million.
Other expenses of $0.9 million in 2021 was primarily for the settlement of outstanding litigation compared to other income of $13.8 million in 2020 primarily related to the gain on redemption of the public preferred stock upon the closing of our IPO in November 2020.
Interest expense decreased by 89.3% to $0.8 million for 2021 primarily due to the repayment of a senior term loan held by EnCap (as defined under Note 7 - Debt Obligations), subordinated debt, and redemption of public preferred stock upon the closing of our IPO in November 2020. Interest expense decreased by 2.8% to $7.3 million for 2020 from $7.5 million for 2019, primarily due to decreases in public preferred stock interest as a result of such stock redemption, and interest on an equipment purchase arrangement, offset by an increase in interest on the senior term loan with EnCap.
Components of interest expense are as follows:
Income tax benefit was $28,000 for 2021, compared to $46,000 for 2020, primarily due to an increase in state income taxes. Income tax benefit was $46,000 for 2020, compared to $104,000 for 2019, primarily attributable to administrative practice release of certain FIN48 liability.
Segment Results
The accounting policies of each business segment are the same as those followed by the Company as a whole. Management evaluates business segment performance based on gross profit.
Security Solutions Segment:
Revenue increased by 5.3% in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was driven by higher sales of Telos ID and Information Assurance offerings. Revenue, excluding the contract with the U.S. Census Bureau of $5.4 million in 2021 and $31.0 million in 2020, grew 36.9% year-over-year. Gross profit increased by 28.6% to $64.9 million in 2021, with a reported gross margin of 52.5% for 2021. The increase in profitability in 2021 was due to growth in high margin revenues primarily in Telos ID.
Revenue increased by 15.1% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was driven primarily by $8.1 million in sales of offerings in Telos ID on the contract with the U.S. Census and $7.3 million in sales of offerings related to the contract with the U.S. government agency for our Telos Ghost managed intelligence support solution in Secure Communications. Gross profit increased by 20.0% to $50.5 million in 2020, with a reported gross margin of 43.0% in 2020 from 41.3% in 2019, due to various changes in the mix of various contracts.
Secure Networks Segment:
Revenue increased by 89.9% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase resulted from various contracts with the DoD, primarily in our Secure Mobility Solution offerings. Gross profit increased by 76.6% to $21.1 million in 2021, with a reported gross margin of 17.8% in 2021 from 19.1% in 2020, due to various changes in the mix of contracts.
The revenue increased by 9.3% in 2020, compared to 2019, which was the result of various DoD contracts, in both our Secure Mobility and Network Management / Defense Enterprise Solutions offerings. Gross profit increase by 16.3% to $12.0 million in 2020, with a reported gross margin of 19.1% in 2020 from 18.0% in 2019, due to various changes in the mix of various contracts.
Balance Sheet Review
Assets
The Company's total assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $246.1 million and $183.8 million, respectively. The increase in total assets was primarily attributable to an increase in cash and cash equivalents provided by the follow-on offering, an increase in accounts receivables due to higher revenue generation, additional capital expenditures and an increase in intangible assets and goodwill as a result of the acquisition of DFT during 2021.
Liabilities
The Company's total liabilities as of December 31, 2021 were $65.8 million compared to $56.7 million in 2020. The increase in total liabilities was primarily attributable to the increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities as a result of the increase in the cost of sales as of December 31, 2021.
Equity
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total equity of $180.3 million compared to $127.1 million in 2020. The increase in equity is primarily driven by the follow-on offering that raised $64.3 million and stock-based compensation of $60.2 million, offset by the repurchase of the common stock and outstanding warrants held by EnCap for $1.3 million and $26.9 million, respectively. The Company reported a net loss of $43.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the non-GAAP financial measures of Enterprise EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted Earnings Per Share ("EPS") and Free Cash Flow are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that this non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively with our GAAP results, may be helpful to readers of our financial statements because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP.
We use the following non-GAAP financial measures to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, to develop short-term and long-term operating plans, and to evaluate the performance of certain management personnel when determining incentive compensation. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods by excluding certain items that may, or could, have a disproportionate positive or negative impact on our results of operations in any particular period. When viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, these non-GAAP financial measures help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Enterprise EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
Both Enterprise EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not made under GAAP and do not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss as determined by GAAP. We define Enterprise EBITDA as net (loss) income attributable to Telos Corporation, adjusted for net (loss) income attributable to non-controlling interest, non-operating (income) expense, interest expense, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as Enterprise EBITDA, adjusted for transaction gains/losses/expenses related to our IPO and stock-based compensation expense.
A reconciliation of net loss attributable to Telos Corporation to Enterprise EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EPS
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EPS are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not made under GAAP and do not represent, and should not be considered as, alternatives to net income (loss) as determined by GAAP. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss) attributable to Telos Corporation, adjusted for non-operating expense (income), transaction-related gains/losses/expenses, and stock-based compensation expense. We define Adjusted EPS as Adjusted Net Income (Loss) divided by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period.
A reconciliation of net (loss) income attributable to Telos Corporation to Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EPS, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow, as reconciled in the table below, is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as net cash provided by or used in operating activities, less purchases of property and equipment and capitalized software development costs. This non-GAAP financial measure may be a useful measure for investors and other users of our financial statements as a supplemental measure of our cash performance and to assess the quality of our earnings as a key performance measure in evaluating management.
Each of Enterprise EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted EPS and Free Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider any of them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Among other limitations, each of Enterprise EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted EPS and Free Cash Flow does not reflect our future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments, does not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations, and does not reflect income tax expense or benefit. Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted EPS and Free Cash Flow differently than we do, which limits its usefulness as a comparative measure. Because of these limitations, neither Enterprise EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss), Adjusted EPS nor Free Cash Flow should be considered as a replacement for net income (loss), earnings per share or net cash flows provided by operating activities, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
While a variety of factors related to sources and uses of cash, such as timeliness of accounts receivable collections, vendor credit terms, or significant collateral requirements, ultimately impact our liquidity, such factors may or may not have a direct impact on our liquidity. For example, a contractual requirement to post collateral for a duration of several months, depending on the materiality of the amount, could have an immediate negative effect on our liquidity, as such a circumstance would utilize cash resources without a near-term cash inflow back to us. Likewise, the release of such collateral could have a corresponding positive effect on our liquidity, as it would represent an addition to our cash resources without any corresponding near-term cash outflow. Similarly, a slow-down of payments from a customer, group of customers or government payment office would not have an immediate and direct effect on our availability unless the slowdown was material in amount and over an extended period of time. Any of these examples would have an impact on our cash resources and therefore our liquidity.
Upon the closing of the IPO in November 2020, we issued 17.2 million shares of our common stock at a price of $17.00 per share, generating net proceeds of approximately $272.8 million. We used approximately $108.9 million of the net proceeds in connection with the exchangeable redeemable preferred stock conversion (see Note 8 - Exchangeable Redeemable Preferred Stock Conversion), $30.0 million to fund our acquisition of the outstanding Class B Units of Telos ID (see Note 9 - Non-controlling Interests / Purchase of Telos ID), and $21.0 million to repay our outstanding senior term loan and subordinated debt (see Note 7 - Debt Obligations).
On April 6, 2021, we completed our follow-on offering of 9.1 million shares of our common stock at a price of $33.00 per share, including 7.0 million shares of common stock by certain existing stockholders of Telos. The offering generated approximately $64.3 million of net proceeds to Telos. We did not receive any proceeds from the shares of common stock sold by the selling stockholders. On April 19, 2021, we used approximately $1.3 million of the net proceeds to repurchase 39,682 shares of our common stock and $26.9 million to repurchase warrants to purchase 900,970 shares of our common stock owned by EnCap (see Note 7 - Debt Obligations). Further, on July 30, 2021, we used approximately $5.9 million of the net proceeds to acquire the assets of DFT (see Note 4 - Acquisition).
We intend to use the remaining net proceeds of the IPO and the follow-on offering for general corporate purposes. We also may use a portion of the net proceeds to acquire complementary businesses, products, services, or technologies. The amounts and timing of our actual use of the net proceeds will vary depending on numerous factors. Proceeds held by us are invested in short-term investments until needed for the uses described above. We currently anticipate that we will retain all available funds for use in the operations and expansion of our business, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
Our overall financial position and liquidity are strong. Our working capital was $140.8 million and $105.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Although no assurances can be given, we expect that funds generated from operations are sufficient to maintain the liquidity we require to meet our operating, investing and financing needs for the next 12 months.
We ended fiscal year 2021 with a cash and cash equivalent balance of $126.6 million compared to $106.0 million at the end of 2020. We place a strong emphasis on cash flow generation. This focus gives us the flexibility for capital deployment while preserving a strong balance sheet to position us for future opportunities. We believe we have adequate funds on hand to execute our financial and operating strategy.
The following is a discussion of our major operating, investing and financing activities in fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, as classified on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Part II, Item 8.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $7.3 million in 2021 compared to cash used in operating activities of $2.1 million in 2020 and cash provided by operating activities of $11.8 million in 2019. Cash provided by operating activities is primarily driven by our operating income, the timing of receipt of customer payments, the timing of payments to vendors and employees, and the timing of inventory turnover, adjusted for certain non-cash items that do not impact cash flows from operating activities. Additionally, cash used in operating activities also includes dividends from preferred stock recorded as interest expense of $3.4 million and $3.8 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2021, net loss was $43.1 million, which included $60.2 million of stock-based compensation, and $5.6 million of depreciation and amortization ($1.9 million of which was amortization of intangible assets). In 2020, net income was $6.8 million, which included $14.0 million of gain related to the redemption of public preferred stock, and $5.4 million of depreciation and amortization ($1.7 million of which was amortization of intangible assets). In 2019, net loss was $2.1 million, which included $5.0 million of depreciation and amortization ($1.8 million of which was amortization of intangible assets).
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $19.1 million, $7.5 million, and $6.5 million, respectively. Our investing activities include cash paid for capital expenditure and business acquisition. Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, consisted of the capitalization of software development costs of $10.0 million, $6.7 million, and $2.4 million, respectively, and the purchases of property and equipment of $3.2 million, $0.8 million, and $4.1 million, respectively. In 2021, we paid $5.9 million of cash for the acquisition completed in July 2021.
Cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $32.3 million, $108.9 million, and $1.4 million, respectively. The financing activities in 2021 is primarily attributable to the proceeds from the follow-on offering that generated $64.3 million of net proceeds, reduced by $26.9 million used to repurchase the outstanding warrants held by EnCap, $1.3 million to repurchase the common stock held by EnCap, repayments of $1.3 million under finance leases, and $2.4 million final cash distribution to the Class B Member of Telos ID. The financing activities in 2020 consisted of net proceeds of $272.8 million from the initial public offering, offset by $108.9 million redemption of the public preferred stock, $17.4 million payoff of senior term loan, $30.0 million purchase of Telos ID membership interest, distributions of $2.7 million to the Class B Member of Telos ID, $3.7 million payoff of subordinated debt, and repayments of $1.2 million under finance leases. The financing activities in 2019 consisted of net proceeds of $4.9 million from the EnCap senior term loan, distributions of $2.4 million to the Class B Member of Telos ID, and repayments of $1.1 million under finance leases.
Commitments
The Company does not have any other contractual obligations at December 31, 2021, except for the commitments on the existing lease obligations, as described under Note 18 - Commitments, Contingencies and Subsequent Events, to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The following summarizes our obligations at December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(2) Includes operating lease right-of-use obligations and short-term leases with terms of 12 months or less. We have various lease agreements for property and equipment that, pursuant to ASC 842, “Leases,” require us to record the present value of the minimum lease payments for such equipment and property.
In addition, there were no outstanding commitments that were considered material for capital expenditures on December 31, 2021. We presently anticipate capital expenditures of approximately $11.5 million in 2022; however, there can be no assurance that this level of capital expenditures will occur. We believe that the available cash will be sufficient to fund our projected capital expenditures for 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions in certain circumstances that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements. In preparing these financial statements, management has made its best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the consolidated financial statements, giving due consideration to materiality. Management evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates and assumptions have been prepared on the basis of the most current reasonably available information, and may change in the future as more current information is available. Management believes that our critical accounting policies are those that are both material to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management's most difficult, subjective and complex judgments. Typically, the circumstances that make these judgments difficult, subjective and complex have to do with making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain, as a result, actual results could differ from those estimates.
The following is a summary of the most critical accounting policies used and the discussion is intended to bring to the attention of readers of those accounting policies that management believes are critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and other financial disclosures. It is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all significant accounting policies that are more fully described in the notes to consolidated financial statements contained within this report.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” The unit of account in ASC 606 is a performance obligation. Timing of the satisfaction of performance obligations varies across our businesses due to our diverse product and service mix, customer base, and contractual terms. Significant judgment can be required in determining certain performance obligations, and these determinations could change the amount of revenue and profit recorded in a given period. Our contracts may have a single performance obligation or multiple performance obligations. When there are multiple performance obligations within a contract, we allocate the transaction price, net of any discounts, to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling price of the product or service underlying each performance obligation. The standalone selling price is either based on estimated or actual costs plus a reasonable profit margin or the observable price of a good or service when Telos sells that good or service separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers. The transaction price for our contracts represents our best estimate of the consideration we will receive and includes assumptions regarding variable consideration, as applicable. The transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation within the contract and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
Our contracts may also include various types of variable considerations such as claims (i.e., indirect rate or other equitable adjustments) or incentive fees and we include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. The estimated amounts are based on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all other information that is reasonably available to us.
For contracts where revenue is recognized over time, we recognized revenue based on progress towards completion of the performance obligation, using costs incurred to date relative to total estimated cost at completion to measure progress on a proportional performance basis for our contracts. Due to the nature of the work required to be performed on certain contracts, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. Contract estimates are based on various assumptions, including labor and subcontractor costs, materials and other direct costs and the complexity of the work to be performed. A significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts. We review and update our contract-related estimates regularly and recognize adjustments in estimated profit on contracts on a cumulative catch-up basis, which may result in an adjustment increasing or decreasing revenue to date on a contract in a particular period that the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance are recognized using the adjusted estimate.
For contracts where revenue is recognized over time, we recognized changes in estimated contract revenues, costs and profits using the cumulative catch-up method of accounting, wherein we recognize the cumulative effect of changes on current and prior periods with the impact of the change from inception-to-date recorded in the current period. In cases when the total expected costs exceed total estimated revenue for a performance obligation, we recognize the anticipated losses on contracts in full in the period in which the losses become known. The impact of adjustments in contract estimates on our operating income can be reflected in either revenue or operating costs and expenses. The aggregate net changes in contract estimates increased our operating income by $0.2 million in 2021.
Business Combinations
We accounted for the acquisition transaction in accordance with ASC 805, "Business Combination". We recorded all tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at fair value as of the acquisition date, which is determined using the cost, market or income approach. The excess amount of the aggregate purchase consideration paid over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill.
The preliminary valuations are based on the information that exists as of the acquisition date and available to us. During the measurement period that shall not exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation to reflect new information that we subsequently obtained regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date.
Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the impairment of goodwill and other long-lived assets in accordance with ASC 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other.” Management annually reviews goodwill and other long-lived assets for impairment or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If we determine that the carrying value of the goodwill and other long-lived assets may not be recoverable, we will record an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying value of the goodwill and other long-lived assets exceeds its fair value.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather tested for potential impairment as of December 31 each year. The goodwill impairment test is performed at the reporting unit level. Accounting requirements provide that a reporting entity may perform an optional qualitative assessment on an annual basis to determine whether events occurred or circumstances changed that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. If an initial qualitative assessment identifies that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or the optional qualitative assessment is not performed, a quantitative analysis is performed. The Company performs the quantitative goodwill impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing it to its respective carrying value including goodwill. If the fair value is less than the carrying value, the amount of impairment expense is equal to the difference between the reporting unit's fair value and the reporting unit's carrying value.
We measure fair value based on a discounted cash flow method, which requires management's judgment with respect to forecasted revenue, operating margins, capital expenditures, and selection and use of an appropriate discount rate commensurate with the risk inherent in each of our reporting units' current business models. We utilized the weighted average cost of capital as derived by certain assumptions specific to our facts and circumstances as the discount rate. Our estimate of cash flows and discount rate are subject to change due to the economic environment. In addition, the estimate of the total fair value of our reporting units is compared to the market capitalization of the Company.
We amortized intangible assets over their respective estimated useful lives, and reviewed them for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. We completed the required annual impairment test of goodwill for all reporting units and other long-lived assets as of December 31, 2021, resulting in no impairments. Based on our qualitative assessment, we concluded that it was more-likely-than-not that the estimated value of the reporting units exceeded its carrying value and thus, we did not proceed to the two-step goodwill impairment test.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We record net deferred assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. The realizability of net deferred tax assets is based on all available evidence, including future taxable income projections, tax planning strategies, and reversal of taxable temporary differences. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability and establish a valuation allowance when management believes it is more likely than not such asset will not be recovered, taking into consideration historical operating results, expectations of future earnings, tax planning strategies and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.