Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes and the information contained in other sections of this report, particularly under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Business”. This discussion and analysis is based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. The statements in this discussion and analysis concerning expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources, as well as other non-historical statements in this discussion and analysis, are forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements”. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including those described under “Risk Factors”. Our actual results could differ materially from those suggested or implied by any forward-looking statements.
We operate on a fiscal calendar widely used by the retail industry that results in a given fiscal year consisting of a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31 of the following year. References to "fiscal year 2021" or "fiscal 2021" refer to the fiscal year ended January 29, 2022, references to "fiscal year 2020" or "fiscal 2020" refer to the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021 and references to "fiscal year 2019” or "fiscal 2019” refer to the fiscal year ended February 1, 2020. Fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 each consisted of a 52-week period.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 appears below. As permitted by SEC rules, we have omitted the discussion and analysis of our financial condition, cash flows and results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019. See Item 7,“Management’s Discussions and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021, for this discussion.
Overview
Tillys is a leading destination specialty retailer of casual apparel, footwear, accessories and hardgoods for young men, young women, boys and girls. We believe we bring together an unparalleled selection of iconic global, emerging and proprietary brands rooted in an active and outdoor lifestyle. The Tillys concept began in 1982 when our co-founders, Hezy Shaked and Tilly Levine, opened our first store in Orange County, California. As of January 29, 2022, we operated 241 stores in 33 states, averaging approximately 7,300 square feet. We also sell our products through our e-commerce website, www.tillys.com.
Known or Anticipated Trends
COVID-19 Pandemic
As of the date of filing this Report, there remain many uncertainties regarding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (the "pandemic"), including the anticipated duration and severity of the pandemic. To date, the pandemic has had far-reaching impacts on many aspects of the operations of the Company, directly and indirectly, including on consumer behavior, store traffic, operational capabilities and our operations generally, timing of deliveries, demands on our information technology and e-commerce capabilities, inventory and expense management, managing our workforce, our storefront configurations and operations upon reopening, and our people, which have materially disrupted our business and the market generally. The scope and nature of these impacts continue to evolve. With the continued challenges posed by the pandemic, we may experience adverse impacts in the future, including similar impacts to those we have previously experienced during the pandemic, such as regional quarantines, labor stoppages and shortages, changes in consumer purchasing patterns, mandatory or elective shut-downs of retail locations, disruptions to supply chains, including the inability of our suppliers and service providers to deliver materials and services on a timely basis, or at all, severe market volatility, liquidity disruptions, and overall economic instability, which, in many cases, had, and may in the future continue to have, material adverse impacts on our business, financial condition and results of operations. This situation is continually evolving, and additional impacts may arise that we are not aware of currently, or current impacts may become magnified. We believe our operating results for fiscal 2021 were significantly aided by the considerable pent-up consumer demand exiting 2020 pandemic restrictions and the impact of federal stimulus payments. As a result, we cannot reliably predict future business trends relative to fiscal 2021 with any certainty at this time.
Supply Chain Disruptions
We source a significant portion of our merchandise assortment from third parties who manufacture their products in countries that have experienced widespread issues with the pandemic, thereby significantly impacting the global supply chain for merchandise inventories. Additionally, disruptions in the global transportation network remain prevalent, particularly in certain Southern California receiving ports which handle a significant portion of United States merchandise imports. These issues are resulting in shipping delays and increased shipping costs throughout the retail industry, including for us. Any untimely delivery of merchandise could have a negative impact on our ability to serve our customers with the specific merchandise they want in the quantities they wish to purchase in a timely manner, thereby potentially resulting in lost sales. These supply chain issues, and the media attention surrounding them, appear to have changed consumer shopping patterns to some extent, and have caused us to adjust our merchandise planning, allocation and pricing strategies from historical practices, among other impacts. We
have been monitoring the situation very closely and have been in frequent contact with our key brand partners to assess delivery delays. However, we are unable to predict the specific effects these factors will have on our fiscal 2022 net sales, results of operations, and our inventory position at any point in time during fiscal 2022.
Inflationary Cost Pressures
As of the date of this filing, certain geo-political matters and supply chain disruptions have resulted in significant price increases for gasoline, food and other consumables in early 2022. While we do not believe that these price increases have had a material adverse impact on our business to date, we believe that these price increases may have a negative impact on consumer behavior at some point in the future which, by extension, could have a material negative impact on our results of operations and financial condition at any point during fiscal 2022.
Preliminary Fiscal 2022 New Store Openings and Capital Expenditure Plans
During fiscal 2022, we currently plan to open approximately 15 to 20 new stores within existing markets, primarily in California, Texas and the Northeast, assuming we are able to negotiate what we believe to be acceptable lease economics. We expect our total capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 to be in the range of approximately $25 million to $30 million, inclusive of our new store plans, investments in website and mobile app upgrades, distribution efficiencies, and other information technology infrastructure investments. We believe our distribution and fulfillment infrastructure is adequate to support our current business needs and growth strategies over the next few years. However, in order to position ourselves for longer-term anticipated growth, we have begun exploring additional potential distribution investments to support that future growth. These potential additional investments in distribution capacity are not yet determinable and are, therefore, not included in the capital expenditure range noted above.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are net sales, comparable store sales, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses and operating income.
Net Sales
Net sales reflect revenue from the sale of our merchandise at store locations and through e-commerce, net of sales taxes. Store sales are reflected in sales when the merchandise is received by the customer. For e-commerce sales, we recognize revenue, and the related cost of goods sold at the time the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Net sales also include shipping and handling fees for e-commerce shipments that have been shipped to the customer. Net sales are net of returns on sales during the period as well as an estimate of returns expected in the future stemming from current period sales. We recognize revenue from gift cards as they are redeemed for merchandise. Prior to redemption, we maintain a current liability for unredeemed gift card balances. Our gift cards do not have expiration dates and in most cases there is no legal obligation to remit unredeemed gift cards to relevant jurisdictions. Based on actual historical redemption patterns, we determined that a small percentage of gift cards are unlikely to be redeemed (which we refer to as gift card “breakage”). Based on our historical gift card breakage rate, we recognize breakage revenue over the redemption period in proportion to actual gift card redemptions.
Our business is seasonal and as a result our revenues fluctuate from quarter to quarter. In addition, our revenues in any given quarter can be affected by a number of factors including the timing of holidays and weather patterns. The third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, which include the back-to-school and holiday sales seasons, have historically produced stronger sales and disproportionately stronger operating results than have the first two quarters of the fiscal year.
Comparable Store Sales
Comparable store sales is a measure that indicates the change in year-over-year comparable store sales, which allows us to evaluate how our store base is performing. Numerous factors affect our comparable store sales, including:
•overall economic trends;
•our ability to attract traffic to our stores and online platform;
•our ability to identify and respond effectively to consumer preferences and fashion trends;
•competition;
•the timing of our releases of new and seasonal styles;
•changes in our product mix;
•pricing;
•the level of customer service that we provide in stores;
•our ability to source and distribute products efficiently;
•calendar shifts of holiday or seasonal periods;
•the number and timing of store openings and the relative proportion of new stores to mature stores; and
•the timing and success of promotional and advertising efforts.
Historically, our comparable store sales are sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open at least 12 full fiscal months as of the end of the current reporting period. However, as a result of the pandemic, our comparable store sales for fiscal 2020 and 2021 are defined as sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open on a daily basis compared to the same respective fiscal dates of last year in light of the varying periods of pandemic-related store closures that took place during fiscal 2020 and 2021. A remodeled, relocated or refreshed store is included in comparable store sales, both during and after construction, if the square footage of the store used to sell merchandise was not changed by more than 20% and the store was not closed for remodel for more than five days in any fiscal month. We include sales from our e-commerce platform as part of comparable store sales as we manage and analyze our business on a single omni-channel basis and have substantially integrated our investments and operations for our stores and e-commerce platform to give our customers seamless access and increased ease of shopping. Comparable store sales exclude gift card breakage income and e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue. Some of our competitors and other retailers may calculate comparable or “same store” sales differently than we do. As a result, data in this report regarding our comparable store sales may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to our net sales less our cost of goods sold. Cost of goods sold reflects the direct cost of purchased merchandise as well as buying, distribution and occupancy costs. Buying costs include compensation and benefit expense for our internal buying organization. Distribution costs include costs for receiving, processing and warehousing our store merchandise, and shipping of merchandise to or from our distribution and e-commerce fulfillment centers and to our e-commerce customers and between store locations. Occupancy costs include the rent, common area maintenance, utilities, property taxes, security and depreciation costs of all store locations. These costs are significant and can be expected to continue to increase as our company grows. The components of our reported cost of goods sold may not be comparable to those of other retail companies.
We regularly analyze the components of gross profit as well as gross profit as a percentage of net sales. Specifically we look at the initial markup on purchases, markdowns and reserves, shrinkage, buying costs, distribution costs and occupancy costs. Any inability to obtain acceptable levels of initial markups, a significant increase in our use of markdowns or a significant increase in inventory shrinkage or inability to generate sufficient sales leverage on the buying, distribution and occupancy components of cost of goods sold could have an adverse impact on our gross profit and results of operations.
Gross profit is also impacted by shifts in the proportion of sales of proprietary branded products compared to third-party branded products, as well as by sales mix shifts within and between brands and between major product departments such as young men's and women's apparel, footwear or accessories. A substantial shift in the mix of products could have a material impact on our results of operations. In addition, gross profit and gross profit as a percent of sales have historically been higher in the third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, as these periods include the back-to-school and winter holiday selling seasons. This reflects that various costs, including occupancy costs, generally do not increase in proportion to the seasonal sales increase.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses are comprised of store selling expenses and corporate-level general and administrative expenses. Store selling expenses include store and regional support costs, including personnel, advertising and debit and credit card processing costs, e-commerce receiving and processing costs and store supplies costs. General and administrative expenses include the payroll and support costs of corporate functions such as executive management, legal, accounting, information systems, human resources, impairment charges and other centralized services. Store selling expenses generally vary proportionately with net sales and store growth. In contrast, general and administrative expenses are generally not directly proportional to net sales and store growth, but will be expected to increase over time to support the needs of our growing company. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales are usually higher in lower volume periods and lower in higher volume periods.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income (loss) equals gross profit less SG&A expenses. Operating (loss) income excludes interest income, interest expense and income taxes. Operating income (loss) percentage measures operating income as a percentage of our net sales.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of our net sales:
The following table presents store operating data for the periods indicated:
(1)During fiscal 2019, our comparable store sales were sales from our e-commerce platform and stores open at least 12 full fiscal months as of the end of the current period. However, as a result of the pandemic and related periods of store closures during 2020, our comparable store sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020 are defined as sales from our e-commerce and stores open on a daily basis compared to the same respective fiscal dates of the prior year. A remodeled or relocated store is included in comparable store sales, both during and after construction, if the square footage of the store used to sell merchandise was not change by more than 20% and the store was not closed for remodel for more than five days in any fiscal month. Comparable store sales include sales through our e-commerce platform but exclude gift card breakage income, deferred revenue from the loyalty program and e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue.
(2)E-commerce sales, e-commerce shipping and handling fee revenue and gift card breakage income are excluded from net sales in deriving average net sales per brick-and-mortar store.
(3)E-commerce revenues include e-commerce sales and e-commerce shipping fee revenue.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Net Sales
Net sales were $775.7 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $531.3 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $244.4 million, or 46.0%, primarily due to significant pent-up consumer demand coming out of 2020's pandemic restrictions and the impact of federal stimulus payments during fiscal 2021, and the various periods of government-mandated store closures, reduced store operating hours, and restrictions on customer traffic into physical stores resulting from the pandemic during fiscal 2020. The components of our net sales increase were as follows:
◦Net sales from physical stores were $609.7 million, an increase of $251.8 million or 70.4%, compared to $357.9 million last year. Net sales from stores represented 78.6% of total net sales compared to 67.4% of total net sales last year. The significant increase was primarily attributable to physical stores being open for the entirety of fiscal 2021 compared to various periods of government-mandated store closures amid the pandemic during fiscal 2020.
◦Net sales from e-commerce were $165.9 million, a decrease of $(7.5) million or (4.3)%, compared to $173.4 million last year. E-commerce net sales represented 21.4% of total net sales compared to 32.6% last year. We believe the decline in net sales from e-commerce was primarily attributable to a shift in consumer behavior exiting 2020 pandemic-related restrictions that resulted in a shift in consumer preference for shopping in physical stores relative to online.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $276.7 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $142.2 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $134.5 million, or 94.6%. Gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of net sales, increased to 35.7% in fiscal 2021 from 26.8% in fiscal 2020. Product margins improved 130 basis points as a percentage of net sales, primarily due to reduced total markdowns overall compared to last year. Buying, distribution, and occupancy costs improved by 760 basis points, collectively, due to leveraging these costs against higher total net sales. Occupancy costs leveraged 560 basis points as a percentage of net sales despite increasing by $1.2 million and having three more stores open compared to last year. Distribution costs leveraged 180 basis points as a percentage of net sales primarily due to a decrease in e-commerce shipping costs of $0.6 million consistent with the decrease in overall e-commerce net sales. Buying costs leveraged 20 basis points as a percentage of net sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses ("SG&A")
SG&A was $189.1 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $145.2 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $43.8 million. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A was 24.4% for fiscal 2021 compared to 27.3% for fiscal 2020, a decrease of (2.9)%, due to leveraging these expenses against higher total net sales. The components of the changes in SG&A, both in terms of percentage of net sales and total dollars, were as follows:
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating income was $87.6 million in fiscal 2021 compared to an operating loss of $(3.0) million for fiscal 2020, an improvement of $90.6 million. As a percentage of net sales, operating income was 11.3% for fiscal 2021 compared to an
operating loss of (0.6)% for fiscal 2020. The $90.6 million increase in operating income was primarily due to the combined impact of the factors described above.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense was $22.8 million for fiscal 2021 compared to income tax benefit of $(1.3) million for fiscal 2020. Our effective tax rates were 26.2% for fiscal 2021 and 53.5% of pre-tax loss for fiscal 2020. The decrease in the effective income tax rate was primarily due to a normalization of the tax rate after last year’s effective tax rate was distorted by low pre-tax losses for the year.
Net Income (Loss) and Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Net income was $64.2 million for fiscal 2021 compared to a net loss of $(1.1) million for fiscal 2020, an improvement of $65.4 million. Income per diluted share was $2.06 for fiscal 2021 compared to loss per basic share of $(0.04) for fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our business relies on cash flows from operating activities as well as cash on hand as our primary sources of liquidity. We currently expect to finance company operations, store growth and remodels, and all of our planned capital expenditures with existing cash on hand, marketable securities and cash flows from operations.
In addition to cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, the most significant components of our working capital are merchandise inventories, accounts payable and accrued expenses. We believe that cash flows from operating activities, our cash and marketable securities on hand, and credit facility availability will be sufficient to cover our working capital requirements and anticipated capital expenditures for the next 12 months from the filing of this Report. If cash flows from operations are not sufficient or available to meet our capital requirements, then we will be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in the future. There can be no assurance that equity or debt financing will be available to us when we need it or, if available, that the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to our stockholders.
Working Capital
Working capital at January 29, 2022, was $91.8 million compared to $77.5 million at January 30, 2021, an increase of $14.3 million. The changes in our working capital during fiscal 2021 were as follows:
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income adjusted for non-cash items that include depreciation, asset impairment write-downs, deferred income taxes and share-based compensation expense, plus the effect on cash of changes during the year in our assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to higher net sales in fiscal 2021, which was primarily attributable to the closure of all stores from mid-March to mid-May in fiscal 2020 as a result of the pandemic and the varying periods of ongoing store closures for certain stores that continued into October 2020.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Investing activities consist of capital expenditures for growth related to new store openings as well as for remodels and changes in fixtures and equipment at existing stores, investments in information technology, distribution center enhancements, assets at our corporate headquarters and the addition or replacement of company vehicles. Investing activities also consist of the purchase and maturing of marketable securities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $45.3 million in fiscal 2021. Capital expenditures totaled $13.4 million, primarily related to new and remodeled stores and other improvements in our existing stores and information technology systems. We purchased $162.3 million of marketable securities and received proceeds of $130.4 million from the maturing of marketable securities during fiscal 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.2 million in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures totaled $8.5 million, primarily related to new and remodeled stores and other improvements in our existing stores and information technology systems. We purchased $80.9 million of marketable securities and received proceeds of $86.2 million from the maturing of marketable securities during fiscal 2020.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Financing activities consist of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, cash dividends paid, borrowings and repayments of our line of credit, and employee taxes paid as a result of the net settlement of issued restricted stock.
Net cash used in financing activities was $52.1 million in fiscal 2021. This included $61.6 million of cash dividends paid, partially offset by $9.6 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash used in financing activities was $29.7 million in fiscal 2020. This included $29.7 million of cash dividends paid and $23.7 million in both borrowings and repayments under our line of credit.
Line of Credit
On January 20, 2022, we entered into a senior unsecured credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement") and revolving line of credit note (the "Note") with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the “Bank”). The Credit Agreement replaced our previously existing asset-backed credit agreement (the “Prior Credit Agreement”), dated as of November 9, 2020, as amended, with the Bank, which had revolving commitments of up to $65.0 million, a sub-limit on letters of credit of $10.0 million and a sub-limit for swing-line loans of $7.5 million. The Prior Credit Agreement was terminated concurrently with the entry into the Credit Agreement. No borrowings were outstanding under the Prior Credit Agreement as of the closing date.
The Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility (“Revolving Facility”) of up to $25.0 million (“Revolving Commitment”) consisting of revolving loans, letters of credit and swing line loans, with a sub-limit on letters of credit outstanding at any time of $15.0 million. The Revolving Facility matures on January 20, 2024. The payment and performance in full of the secured obligations under the Revolving Facility are secured by a lien on and security interest in all of the assets of our company.
The payment and performance in full of the obligations under the credit agreement are guaranteed by the Company pursuant to a continuing guaranty granted by the Company in favor of the Bank. The payment and performance of the Company’s obligations under the Guaranty are secured by a lien on, and pledge of, all of the equity interests owned by the Company.
Borrowings under the Revolving Facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the daily simple Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") plus 0.75%. Amounts available to be drawn under outstanding letters of credit accrue fees in an amount equal to 1.00% per annum. The unused portion of the Revolving Commitment is not subject to a commitment fee.
Under the Credit Agreement, we are subject to a variety of affirmative and negative covenants of types customary in a cash-flow-based lending facility, including financial covenants that require maintenance of (1) a ratio of total funded debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and annual rent expenses no greater than 4.00 to 1.00 and (2) a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.25 to 1.00 (calculation of which takes into account dividends, distributions, redemptions and repurchases of the equity interests of the Company only if the Company’s cash on hand, net of any amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement, is less than $50.0 million after giving effect to such dividends, distributions, redemptions or repurchases).
Events of default under the Credit Agreement include, among other things, failure to pay principal, interest, fees or other amounts; covenant defaults; material inaccuracy of representations and warranties; bankruptcy events with respect to the Company; actual or asserted invalidity of any of the loan documents; or a change of control of the Company.
In connection with the entry into the Credit Agreement, on January 20, 2022, we entered into certain ancillary agreements,
including (i) a security agreement in favor of the Bank, (ii) a guaranty entered into by the Company, and (iii) a third party pledge agreement entered into by the Company in favor of the Bank. The security agreement, the guaranty and the pledge agreement replaced (i) the guaranty by the Company in favor of the Bank, dated November 9, 2020, and (ii) the security agreement dated as of November 9, 2020, among the Company and the Bank, which were both terminated concurrently with the termination of the Prior Credit Agreement.
As of January 29, 2022, we were in compliance with all of our covenants and had no outstanding borrowings under the New Credit Agreement.
The Prior Credit Agreement was terminated concurrently with the entry into the New Credit Agreement. No borrowings were outstanding under the Prior Credit Agreement as of the closing date. The maximum borrowings permitted under the prior credit agreement was equal to the lesser of (x) the revolving commitment and (y) the borrowing base. The borrowing base was equal to (a) 90% of the borrower's eligible credit card receivables, plus (b) 90% of the cost of the borrower's eligible inventory, less inventory reserves established by the agent, and adjusted by the appraised value of such eligible inventory, plus (c) 90% of the cost of the borrower's eligible in-transit inventory, less inventory reserves established by the agent, and adjusted by the appraised value of such eligible in-transit inventory (not to exceed 10% of the total amount of all eligible inventory included in the borrowing base) less (d) reserves established by the agent. As of the closing date, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement and the only utilization of the letters of credit sub-limit under the Credit Agreement was a $2.025 million irrevocable standby letter of credit, which was previously issued under the Prior Credit Agreement and was transferred on the closing date to the Credit Agreement.
The unused portion of the revolving commitment under the Prior Credit Agreement accrued a commitment fee, which ranged from 0.375% to 0.50% per annum, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the revolving facility over the applicable fiscal quarter. Borrowings under the prior credit agreement bear interest at a rate per annum that ranged from the LIBOR rate plus 2.0% to the LIBOR rate plus 2.25%, or the base rate plus 1.0% to the base rate plus 1.25%, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the prior credit agreement over the applicable fiscal quarter. We were allowed to elect to apply either the LIBOR rate or base rate interest to borrowings at our discretion, other than in the case of swing line loans, to which the base rate shall apply.
Under the Prior Credit Agreement, we were subject to a variety of affirmative and negative covenants of types customary in an asset-based lending facility, including a financial covenant relating to availability, and customary events of default. Prior to the first anniversary of the closing date, we were prohibited from declaring or paying any cash dividends to our respective stockholders or repurchasing of our own common stock. After the first anniversary of the closing date, we were allowed to declare and pay cash dividends to our respective stockholders and repurchase our own common stock, provided, among other things, no default or event of default exists as of the date of any such payment and after giving effect thereto and certain minimum availability and minimum projected availability tests are satisfied.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into long-term contractual obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily non-cancellable operating leases.
We lease approximately 172,000 square feet for our corporate headquarters and distribution center from a company that is owned by the co-founders of Tillys. These buildings are located at 10 and 12 Whatney, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on December 31, 2027.
We lease approximately 26,000 square feet of office and warehouse space with a company that is owned by one of the co-founders of Tillys. This building is located at 11 Whatney, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on June 30, 2022.We expect to have a fully negotiated renewal completed in advance of this lease expiration.
We lease approximately 81,000 square feet for our e-commerce distribution center from a company that is owned by one of the co-founders of Tillys. This building is located at 17 Pasteur, Irvine, California. The lease is accounted for as an operating lease and expires on October 31, 2031.
Our leases are generally non-cancellable operating leases expiring at various dates through fiscal year 2032. Certain leases provide for additional rent based on a percentage of sales and annual rent increases based upon the Consumer Price Index. In addition, many of our store leases contain certain co-tenancy provisions that permit us to pay rent based on a pre-determined percentage of sales when the occupancy of the retail center falls below minimums established in such lease.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the appropriate application of accounting policies, some of which require us to make estimates and assumptions about future events and their impact on amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. Since future events and their impact cannot be determined with absolute certainty, the actual results will inevitably differ from our estimates.
We believe the application of our accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. Our accounting policies and estimates are reevaluated on an ongoing basis and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change.
The policies and estimates discussed below involve the selection or application of alternative accounting policies that are material to our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. However, our historical results for the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements have not been materially impacted by such variances. Our accounting policies are more fully described in "Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with our Board of Directors.
We have certain accounting policies that require more significant management judgment and estimates than others. These include our accounting policies with respect to revenue recognition, loyalty program, merchandise inventories, long-lived assets, operating leases, share-based compensation and accounting for income taxes, which are more fully described below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized for store sales when the customer receives and pays for the merchandise at the register, net of estimated returns. Taxes collected from our customers are recorded on a net basis. For e-commerce sales, we recognize revenue, net of sales taxes and estimated sales returns, and the related cost of goods sold at the time the merchandise is shipped to the customer. Amounts related to shipping and handling that are billed to customers are reflected in net sales, and the related costs are reflected in cost of goods sold in the Consolidated Statements Operations.
Our business is seasonal and as a result our revenues fluctuate from quarter to quarter. In addition, our revenues in any given quarter can be affected by a number of factors including the timing of holidays and weather patterns. The third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year, which include the back-to-school and holiday sales seasons, have historically produced stronger sales and disproportionately stronger operating results than have the first two quarters of the fiscal year.
Gift Cards
We estimate and record breakage revenue in proportion to actual redemptions on unredeemed gift cards based on historical and expected customer redemption trends. Actual customer redemptions may vary from our estimates. Based on actual historical redemption patterns, we determined that a small percentage of gift cards are unlikely to be redeemed.
Loyalty Program
Based on historical redemption patterns, unredeemed awards and accumulated partial points are accrued as deferred revenue with a corresponding impact to net sales. A liability is estimated based on estimated redemptions and the standalone selling price of awards and partial points earned. Actual customer redemptions may vary from our estimates.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, inventory is stated at its current retail selling value and then is converted to a cost basis by applying a cost-to-retail ratio based on beginning inventory and the fiscal year purchase activity. The retail inventory method inherently requires management judgments and estimates, such as the amount and timing of markdowns needed in order to sell through slow-moving inventories.
Markdowns are recorded when the sales value of the inventory has diminished. Factors considered in the determination of markdowns include current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, age of the merchandise and fashion trends. When a decision is made to mark down merchandise, the resulting gross margin reduction is recognized in the period in which the markdown is recorded. During each accounting period we record adjustments to our inventories, which are reflected in cost of goods sold, if the cost of specific inventory items on hand exceeds the amount we expect to realize from the ultimate sale or disposal of the inventory. This adjustment calculation requires us to develop assumptions and estimates, which are based on factors such as merchandise seasonality, historical trends and inventory levels, including estimated sell-through rates of remaining units.
To the extent that management’s estimates differ from actual results, additional markdowns may be required that could reduce our gross margin, operating income and the carrying value of inventories. Our success is largely dependent upon our ability to anticipate the changing fashion tastes of our customers and to respond to those changing tastes in a timely manner. If we fail to anticipate, identify or react appropriately to changing styles, trends or brand preferences of our customers, we may experience lower sales, excessive inventories and more frequent and extensive markdowns, which would adversely affect our operating results.
We also record an inventory shrinkage reserve calculated as a percentage of net sales for estimated merchandise losses for the period between the last physical inventory count and the balance sheet date. These estimates are based on historical percentages and can be affected by changes in merchandise mix and changes in shrinkage trends. We perform physical inventory counts at least once per year for the entire chain of stores and our distribution center and adjust the inventory shrinkage reserve accordingly. If actual physical inventory losses differ significantly from the estimate, our results of operations could be adversely impacted. The inventory shrinkage reserve reduces the value of total inventory and is a component of inventories on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The inventory shrinkage reserve at January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 was not material.
Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of our long-lived assets, consisting largely of leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures and equipment at store, distribution center and corporate office locations, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Factors that are considered important that could result in the necessity to perform an impairment review include a current-period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses and a forecast that indicates continuing losses or insufficient income associated with the realization of a long-lived asset or asset group. Other factors include a significant change in the manner of the use of the asset or a significant negative industry or economic trend. This evaluation is performed based on estimated undiscounted future cash flows from operating activities compared with the carrying value of the related assets. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized, measured by the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value of the assets, based on discounted cash flows using our weighted-average cost of capital, with such estimated fair values determined using the best information available. Quarterly, we assess whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable.
The estimation of future cash flows from operating activities requires significant estimates of factors that include future sales and gross margin performance. Factors used in the valuation of long-lived assets with finite lives include, but are not limited to, discount rates, management’s plans for future operations, recent operating results and projected future cash flows. If our net sales or gross profit performance or other estimated operating results are not achieved at or above our forecasted level, or inflation exceeds our forecast and we are unable to recover such costs through price increases, the carrying value of certain of our retail stores may prove to be unrecoverable and we may incur additional impairment charges in the future.
Operating Leases
During the first quarter of 2019, we adopted ASC 842, Leases (the "Lease Standard"), using the transition method provided in ASU 2018-11 (refer to "Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in Item 8). As a result, reporting periods beginning in the first quarter of 2019 are presented under the Lease Standard.
Upon adoption of the Lease Standard, we recorded our operating leases on the consolidated balance sheet as operating lease assets, current portion of operating lease liabilities and non-current operating lease liabilities. Operating lease liabilities are initially recognized based on the net present value of the fixed portion of our lease components through the lease term. To calculate the net present value, we apply an incremental borrowing rate ("IBR"). The determination of the IBR requires complex judgment, and it involves using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest we would pay to borrow an amount equal to the lease payments on a collateralized basis over a similar term. We recognize operating lease assets based on lease liabilities and initial direct costs, less any tenant allowance incentives. We test operating lease assets for impairment in the same manner as long-lived assets, and include the related operating lease liability and operating lease payments in our analysis.
Share-based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718, which establishes accounting for equity instruments exchanged for employee services. Under the provisions of this standard, share-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant). Changes in these inputs and assumptions can materially affect the measurement of the estimated fair value of the award and related share-based compensation expense.
Determining the fair value of share-based awards at the grant date requires judgment. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The determination of the grant date fair value of options using an option-pricing model is affected by a number of assumptions, such as the fair value of the common stock, our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the options, stock option exercise and cancellation behaviors, risk-free interest rates, and expected dividends, which we estimate as follows:
•Fair Value of Our Common Stock. We use the closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant.
•Expected Term. We have limited historical information regarding expected option term. Accordingly, we determined the expected stock option term of the awards using the latest historical data available from comparable public companies and our expectation of exercise behavior.
•Volatility. Our stock volatility for each grant is measured using the weighted average of historical daily price changes of our common stock over the most recent period equal to the expected option term of the awards.
•Risk-Free Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of United States Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected term of the stock options for each stock option group.
•Dividend Yield. We do not currently have any policy with respect to recurring dividends in place. However, we have declared and paid special cash dividends in each of the prior five years, including $0.70 per share in early 2017 and $1.00 per share in each of early 2018, 2019 and 2020 and in July and December 2021 to all holders of record of issued and outstanding shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock. There can be no guarantee that we will continue to pay special cash dividends in the future. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero in the valuation of our share-based compensation.
If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model change significantly, share-based compensation expense for future awards may differ materially compared with the expense for awards granted previously.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes and the related accounts in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, or ASC 740. Under this method, we accrue income taxes payable or refundable and recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between GAAP and tax bases of assets and liabilities. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse, and recognize the effect of a change in enacted rates in the period of enactment.
We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations.
We establish assets and liabilities for uncertain positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns, using a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold. We include in income tax expense any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, refer to Note 2 to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.