ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. We use words such as anticipate, believe, plan, expect, future, intend and similar expressions to identify such forward-looking statements. You should not place too much reliance on these forward-looking statements. Our actual results are likely to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for many reasons.
Overview
The Marquie Group is a direct-to-consumer sales and marketing company with an exclusive pipeline of innovative health and beauty products. The Company markets these products through its wholly owned subsidiary Music of Your Life, a syndicated radio network heard nationwide on AM, FM and HD terrestrial radio stations, and simulcast over the internet. This is made possible by 30 and 60 second commercials airing every hour which are targeted toward the Music of Your Life listening audience. Broadcasting more than 40 years, Music of Your Life is the longest running music radio format in syndication.
Because we have incurred losses, income tax expenses are immaterial. No tax benefits have been booked related to operating loss carryforwards, given our uncertainty of being able to utilize such loss carryforwards in future years. We anticipate incurring additional losses during the coming year.
Results of Operations
Following is management’s discussion of the relevant items affecting results of operations for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021.
Revenues. The Company generated $-0- in net revenues for the year ended May 31, 2022, as compared to $60 for the year ended May 31, 2021. Revenues were generated from spot sales, from the live radio programming through radio stations around the country and over the Internet.
Cost of Sales. Our cost of sales was $-0- for both years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021. Our cost of sales in the future will consist principally of licensing costs and royalties associated with our syndicated radio network, other related services provided directly or outsourced through our affiliates, as well as operational and staffing costs with respect thereto.
Salaries and Consulting Expenses. Accrued salaries and consulting expenses for the year ended May 31, 2022 were $120,000 as compared to $305,000 for the year ended May 31, 2021. We expect that salaries and consulting expenses, that are cash-based instead of share-based, will increase as we add personnel to build our multi-media entertainment business.
Professional Fees. Professional fees for the year ended May 31, 2022 were $97,162 as compared to $102,924 for the year ended May 31, 2021. We anticipate that professional fees will increase in future periods as we scale up our operations.
Other Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $45,403 for the year ended May 31, 2022 as compared to $63,398 for the year ended May 31, 2021. We anticipate that Other SG&A expenses will increase commensurate with an increase in our operations.
Other Income (Expense). The Company had net other expense of $3,853,387 for the year ended May 31, 2022 as compared to $2,397,922 for the year ended May 31, 2021. For the year ended May 31, 2022, the company recorded a gain on settlement of debt in the amount of $260,032, incurred interest expense of $645,021, expense from derivative liability of $526,690 and loss on conversion of notes payable and accrued interest of $2,941,708. For the year ended May 31, 2021, the company incurred interest expense of $989,810, income from derivative liability of $36,930 and loss on conversion of notes payable and accrued interest of $1,445,042.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of May 31, 2022, our primary source of liquidity consisted of $353 in cash and cash equivalents. We hold most of our cash reserves in local checking accounts with local financial institutions. Since inception, we have financed our operations through a combination of short and long-term loans, and through the private placement of our common stock.
We have sustained significant net losses which have resulted in an accumulated deficit at May 31, 2022 of $15,878,189 and are currently experiencing a substantial shortfall in operating capital which raises doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We generated a net loss for the year ended May 31, 2022 of $4,115,952. Without additional revenues, working capital loans, or equity investment, there is substantial doubt as to our ability to continue operations.
We believe these conditions have resulted from the inherent risks associated with small public companies. Such risks include, but are not limited to, the ability to (i) generate revenues and sales of our products and services at levels sufficient to cover our costs and provide a return for investors, (ii) attract additional capital in order to finance growth, and (iii) successfully compete with other comparable companies having financial, production and marketing resources significantly greater than those of the Company.
We believe that our capital resources are insufficient for ongoing operations, with minimal current cash reserves, particularly given the resources necessary to expand our multi-media entertainment business. We will likely require considerable amounts of financing to make any significant advancement in our business strategy. There is presently no agreement in place that will guarantee financing for our Company, and we cannot assure you that we will be able to raise any additional funds, or that such funds will be available on acceptable terms. Funds raised through future equity financing will likely be substantially dilutive to current shareholders. Lack of additional funds will materially affect our Company and our business and may cause us to substantially curtail or even cease operations. Consequently, you could incur a loss of your entire investment in the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe the following more critical accounting policies are used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On a periodic basis, management reviews those estimates, including those related to valuation allowances, loss contingencies, income taxes, and projection of future cash flows.
Research and Development. Research and development costs are charged to operations when incurred and are included in operating expenses.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There were various accounting standards and interpretations recently issued, none of which are expected to a have a material impact on the Company's consolidated financial position, operations or cash flows.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains or incorporates by reference forward-looking statements within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 concerning our future business plans and strategies, the receipt of working capital, future revenues and other statements that are not historical in nature. In this report, forward-looking statements are often identified by the words “anticipate,” “plan,” “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,” and the like. These forward-looking statements reflect our current beliefs, expectations and opinions with respect to future events, and involve future risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied.
Other uncertainties that could affect the accuracy of forward-looking statements include:
•	the worldwide economic situation;
•	any changes in interest rates or inflation;
• the willingness and ability of third parties to honor their contractual commitments;
• our ability to raise additional capital, as it may be affected by current conditions in the stock market and competition for risk capital;
• our capital expenditures, as they may be affected by delays or cost overruns;
• environmental and other regulations, as the same presently exist or may later be amended;
• our ability to identify, finance and integrate any future acquisitions; and
• the volatility of our common stock price.
This list is not exhaustive of the factors that may affect any of our forward-looking statements. You should read this report completely and with the understanding that our actual future results may be materially different from what we expect. These forward-looking statements represent our beliefs, expectations and opinions only as of the date of this report. We do not intend to update these forward-looking statements except as required by law. We qualify all of our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.