ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General Overview
Our principal business is residential homebuilding and the development of lifestyle communities with operations across 11 states. We provide an assortment of homes across a wide range of price points to appeal to an array of consumer groups. We design, build and sell single and multi-family detached and attached homes in traditionally high growth markets for entry level, move-up, and 55-plus active lifestyle (formerly referred to as active adult) buyers. We operate under various brand names including Taylor Morrison, Darling Homes Collection by Taylor Morrison, and Esplanade. We also have an exclusive partnership with Christopher Todd Communities in our “Build-to-Rent” business. (Refer to Item 1. Business for additional discussion regarding Build-to-Rent.) In addition, we develop and construct multi-use properties consisting of commercial space, retail, and multi-family properties under the Urban Form brand name. We also have operations which provide financial services to customers through our wholly owned mortgage subsidiary, Taylor Morrison Home Funding, Inc. (“TMHF”), title services through our wholly owned title services subsidiary, Inspired Title Services, LLC (“Inspired Title”), and homeowner’s insurance policies through our insurance agency, Taylor Morrison Insurance Services, LLC (“TMIS”). Our business is organized into multiple homebuilding operating components, and a financial services component, all of which are managed as four reportable segments: East, Central, West and Financial Services, as follows:
Annual Overview and Business Strategy
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the national economy, our industry, and various areas within our operations; however, the demand for housing during 2021 remained strong. We believe strong demand is, in part, attributable to an increase in families working and learning from home as well as other economic factors such as low interest rates. There has been an increase in the need for indoor space and outdoor living. Furthermore, we have noted people have left several major cities throughout the United States in search for homes in more suburban areas on the outskirts of cities, which are areas in which we typically build. We experienced price appreciation in our markets and utilized price increases to meter our net sales orders pace. Interest rates have remained low and our buyer profile has remained strong, driving demand even further.
We are still impacted by various economic challenges, such as lingering underemployment concerns, stagnation in real wages and real or perceived personal wealth, inflation, national and global economic uncertainty and uncertainty around the interest rate environment. As it relates to COVID-19, we are also challenged by shortages in the labor supply and supply chain delays. The United States continues to struggle with rolling outbreaks of the virus and its variants and the effects of COVID-19 could continue to impact our financial condition and results of operations. Due to uncertainty surrounding this ongoing public health crisis and its continued impact on the U.S. economy, we cannot fully predict either the near-term or long-term effects that the pandemic will have on our business. Although we experienced strong financial and operational performance during 2021, the duration and magnitude of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown, and could adversely affect our business in future periods.
We continue to allocate capital and manage our land portfolio to acquire assets that have attractive characteristics, including good access to schools, shopping, recreation and transportation facilities. In connection with our overall land inventory management and investment process, our management team reviews these considerations, as well as other financial metrics, in order to decide the highest and best use of our capital.
We intend to maintain a consistent approach to land positioning within our regions, markets and communities in the foreseeable future in an effort to concentrate a greater amount of our land inventory in attractive areas. We also intend to continue to combine our land development expertise with our homebuilding operations to increase the flexibility of our business and to optimize our margin performance. From time to time, we may sell land in our communities if we believe it is best for our overall strategy and operations. We do not expect such sales to have a significant effect on our overall results, but they may impact our overall gross margins.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Results
For the year ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we recognized $127.2 million and $10.7 million of Transaction Expenses, respectively, on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. Transaction expenses relating to the acquisition of WLH were incurred in both 2020 and 2019, while transaction expenses relating to our acquisition of AV Homes, Inc. (“AV Homes”) were only incurred in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not incur such costs.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $10.2 million and $5.8 million of expense relating to losses on extinguishment of debt, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not incur a loss on extinguishment of debt.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $9.6 million and $8.9 million in inventory impairment charges. Impairment charges are recorded to Cost of home closings or Cost of land closings on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, no such impairment charges were incurred.
As of December 31, 2019, our assets in Chicago were held for sale and as a result we adjusted the fair value of the assets within this division to the lower of fair value (less costs to sell) or net book value. In addition, we wrote off other components of the operations in accordance with the guidance set forth in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, total impacts to the Consolidated Statement of Operations include the following: Cost of home closings impact of $0.7 million, Cost of land closings impact of $9.9 million, Sales, commissions and other marketing costs impact of $0.4 million, General and administrative expenses impact of $1.1 million and Other expense, net impact of $1.2 million. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have material fair value adjustments relating to assets reclassified as held for sale.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an incremental $43.1 million of warranty charges and $6.8 million of legal costs related to warranty charges in our Central region, due to a construction defect issue which was isolated to one specific community. Although we believe we have identified substantially all homes impacted by the issue, it is reasonably possible that the estimated liability will change as a result of our evaluation of potential changes in the estimated repair costs and the number of homes impacted. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not incur or recognize any incremental warranty or legal charges relating to this or other defect issues.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies that management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are critical accounting policies and are described below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The standard's core principle requires an entity to recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Home and land closings revenue
Under ASC 606, the following steps are applied to determine the proper home closings revenue and land closings revenue recognition: (1) identify the contract(s) with our customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5)
recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. For our home sales transactions, we have one contract, with one performance obligation, with each customer to build and deliver a home. Based on the application of the five steps, the following summarizes the timing and manner of home and land sales revenue:
•Revenue from closings of residential real estate is recognized when closings have occurred, the buyer has made the required minimum down payment, obtained necessary financing, the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the buyer, and we have no continuing involvement with the property, which is generally upon the close of escrow. Revenue is reported net of any discounts and incentives.
•Revenue from land sales is recognized when a significant down payment is received, title passes and collectability of the receivable is reasonably assured, and we have no continuing involvement with the property, which is generally upon the close of escrow.
Amenity and other revenue
We own and operate certain amenities such as golf courses, club houses, and fitness centers, which require us to provide club members with access to the facilities in exchange for the payment of club dues. We collect club dues and other fees from the club members, which are invoiced on a monthly basis. Revenue from our golf club operations is also included in amenity and other revenue. Amenity and other revenue also includes revenue from the sale of assets which include multi-use properties as part of our Urban Form operations.
Financial services revenue
Mortgage operations and hedging activity related to financial services are not within the scope of Topic 606 and are recognized at the time the related real estate transactions are completed, usually upon the close of escrow. All of the loans TMHF originates are sold to third party investors within a short period of time, on a non-recourse basis. Gains and losses from the sale of mortgages are recognized in accordance with ASC Topic 860-20, Sales of Financial Assets. TMHF generally does not have continuing involvement with the transferred assets; therefore, we derecognize the mortgage loans at time of sale, based on the difference between the selling price and carrying value of the related loans upon sale, recording a gain/loss on sale in the period of sale. Also included in financial services revenue/expenses is the realized and unrealized gains and losses from hedging instruments, which is not material to the consolidated financial results.
Real Estate Inventory Valuation and Costing
Inventory consists of raw land, land under development, homes under construction, completed homes, and model homes, all of which are stated at cost. In addition to direct carrying costs, we also capitalize interest, real estate taxes, and related development costs that benefit the entire community, such as field construction supervision and related direct overhead. Home vertical construction costs are accumulated and charged to cost of sales at the time of home closing using the specific identification method. Land acquisition, development, interest, and real estate taxes are allocated to homes and units generally using the relative sales value method. Generally, all overhead costs relating to our materials procurement process, the vertical construction of a home, and construction utilities are considered overhead costs and are allocated on a per unit basis. These costs are capitalized to inventory from the point development begins to the point construction is completed. Changes in estimated costs to be incurred in a community are generally allocated to the remaining lots on a prospective basis. For those communities that have been temporarily closed or development has been discontinued, we do not allocate interest or other costs to the community’s inventory until activity resumes. Such costs are expensed as incurred.
The life cycle of the community generally ranges from two to five years, commencing with the acquisition of unentitled or entitled land, continuing through the land development phase and concluding with the sale, construction and delivery of homes. Actual community lives will vary based on the size of the community, the sales absorption rate and whether we purchased the property as raw land or as finished lots.
We capitalize qualifying interest costs to inventory during the development and construction periods. Capitalized interest is charged to cost of sales when the related inventory is charged to cost of sales.
We assess the recoverability of our inventory in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment. We review our real estate inventory for indicators of impairment on a community-level basis during each reporting period. If indicators of impairment are present for a community, we first prepare an undiscounted cash flow analysis to determine if the carrying value of the assets in that community exceeds the undiscounted cash flows. Generally, if the carrying value of the assets exceeds their estimated undiscounted cash flows, the assets are deemed to be impaired and are recorded at
fair value as of the assessment date. Our determination of fair value is primarily based on a discounted cash flow model which includes projections and estimates relating to sales prices, construction costs, sales pace, and other factors. However, fair value can be determined through other methods, such as appraisals, contractual purchase offers, and other third party opinions of value. Changes in these expectations may lead to a change in the outcome of our impairment analysis, and actual results may also differ from our assumptions.
In certain cases, we may elect to cease development and/or marketing of an existing community if we believe the economic performance of the community would be maximized by deferring development for a period of time to allow for market conditions to improve. We refer to such communities as long-term strategic assets. The decision may be based on financial and/or operational metrics as determined by us. If we decide to cease development, we will evaluate the project for impairment and then cease future development and marketing activity until such a time when we believe that market conditions have improved and economic performance can be maximized. Our assessment of the carrying value of our long-term strategic assets typically includes subjective estimates of future performance, including the timing of when development will recommence, the type of product to be offered, and the margin to be realized. In the future, some of these inactive communities may be re-opened while others may be sold.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various specific performance agreements to acquire lots. Real estate not owned under these agreements is reflected in Consolidated real estate not owned with a corresponding liability in Liabilities attributable to consolidated real estate not owned in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As a method of acquiring land in staged takedowns, while limiting risk and minimizing the use of funds from our available cash or other financing sources, we may transfer our right under certain specific performance agreements to entities owned by third parties (“land banking arrangements”). These entities use equity contributions from their owners and/or incur debt to finance the acquisition and development of the land. The entities grant us an option to acquire lots in staged takedowns in return for a cash deposit. We are not legally obligated to purchase the balance of the lots, but would forfeit any existing deposits and could be subject to financial and other penalties if the lots are not purchased. We do not have an ownership interest in these entities or title to their assets and do not guarantee their liabilities. These land banking arrangements help us manage the financial and market risk associated with land holdings.
In some locations where we act as a developer, we occasionally purchase land that includes commercially zoned parcels or areas designated for school or government use, which we typically sell to commercial developers or municipalities, as applicable. We also sell residential lots or land parcels to manage our land and lot supply on larger tracts of land. Land is considered held for sale once we intend to actively sell a parcel or the parcel is under contract to sell. Land held for sale is recorded at the lower of cost or fair value less costs to sell. In determining the value of land held for sale, we consider recent offers received, prices for land in recent comparable sales transactions, and other factors. We record fair value adjustments for land held for sale within Cost of land closings on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Insurance Costs, Self-Insurance Reserves and Warranty Reserves
We have certain deductible limits for each of our policies under our workers’ compensation, automobile, and general liability insurance policies, and we record warranty expense and liabilities for the estimated costs of potential claims for construction defects. The excess liability limits are aggregated annually and applied in excess of automobile liability, employer’s liability under workers compensation and general liability policies. We also generally require our subcontractors and design professionals to indemnify us and provide evidence of insurance for liabilities arising from their work, subject to certain limitations. We are the parent of Beneva Indemnity Company (“Beneva”), which provides insurance coverage for construction defects discovered up to ten years following the close of a home, coverage for premise operations risk, and from time to time, property damage. We accrue for the expected costs associated with the deductibles and self-insured amounts under our various insurance policies based on historical claims, estimates for claims incurred but not reported, and potential for recovery of costs from insurance and other sources. The estimates are subject to significant variability due to factors, such as claim settlement patterns, litigation trends, and the extended period of time in which a construction defect claim might be made after the closing of a home.
We offer a one-year limited warranty to cover various defects in workmanship or materials, a two-year limited warranty on certain systems (such as electrical or cooling systems), and a ten-year limited warranty on structural defects. In addition, any outstanding warranties which were offered by our acquired companies are also honored. Warranty reserves are established as homes close in an amount estimated to be adequate to cover expected costs of materials and outside labor during warranty periods. Our warranty is not considered a separate deliverable in the sales arrangement since it is not priced apart from the home; therefore, it is accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 450, Contingencies, which states that warranties that are not separately priced are generally accounted for by accruing the estimated costs to fulfill the warranty obligation. The amount
of revenue related to the product is recognized in full upon the delivery of the home if all other criteria for revenue recognition have been met. As a result, we accrue the estimated costs to fulfill the warranty obligation at the time a home closes, as a component of Cost of home closings on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Our loss reserves for self-insured claims covered under Beneva are based on factors that include an actuarial study for structural, historical and anticipated claims, trends related to similar product types, number of home closings, and geographical areas. We also provide third-party warranty coverage on homes where required by Federal Housing Administration or Veterans Administration lenders. We regularly review the reasonableness and adequacy of our reserves and make adjustments to the balance of the preexisting reserves to reflect changes in trends and historical data as information becomes available. Self-insurance and warranty reserves are included in Accrued expenses and other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We have not made any material changes in our methodology or significant assumptions used to establish our warranty reserves during these periods. In the event of a specific claim such as a construction defect for a community, we adjust our reserves accordingly, taking into consideration items such as the number of homes affected, the costs associated with each repair and the effectiveness of the repairs. Due to the degree of judgment required in making these estimates and the inherent uncertainty in potential outcomes, it is reasonably possible that actual costs could differ from those recorded and such differences could be material, resulting in a change in future estimated reserves.
Investments in Unconsolidated Entities and Variable Interest Entities (VIEs)
We are involved in joint ventures with independent third parties for real estate development, homebuilding and mortgage lending activities. We use the equity method of accounting for entities over which we exercise significant influence but do not have a controlling interest over the operating and financial policies of the investee. For unconsolidated entities in which we function as the managing member, we have evaluated the rights held by our joint venture partners and determined that they have substantive participating rights that preclude the presumption of control. For these unconsolidated joint ventures, our share of net earnings or losses is included in Equity in income of unconsolidated entities when earned and distributions are credited against our investment in the joint venture when received. These joint ventures are recorded in Investments in unconsolidated entities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We evaluate our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures for indicators of impairment. A series of operating losses of an investee or other factors may indicate that a decrease in value of our investment in the unconsolidated entity has occurred which is other-than-temporary. The amount of impairment recognized, if any, is the excess of the investment’s carrying amount over its estimated fair value. Additionally, we consider various qualitative factors to determine if a decrease in the value of the investment is other-than-temporary. These factors include age of the venture, stage in its life cycle, our intent and ability to recover our investment in the unconsolidated entity, financial condition and long-term prospects of the unconsolidated entity, short-term liquidity needs of the unconsolidated entity, trends in the general economic environment of the land, entitlement status of the land held by the unconsolidated entity, overall projected returns on investment, defaults under contracts with third parties (including bank debt), recoverability of the investment through future cash flows and relationships with the other partners. If we believe that the decline in the fair value of the investment is temporary, then no impairment is recorded.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land and lot option purchase contracts in order to procure land or lots for the construction of homes. Lot option contracts enable us to control significant lot positions with a minimal initial capital investment and substantially reduce the risks associated with land ownership and development. In accordance with ASC Topic 810, Consolidation, we have concluded that when we enter into an option or purchase agreement to acquire land or lots and pay a non-refundable deposit, a VIE may be created because we are deemed to have provided subordinated financial support that will absorb some or all of an entity’s expected losses if they occur. If we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, we will consolidate the VIE in our Consolidated Financial Statements and reflect such assets and liabilities as real estate not owned under option agreements within our inventory balance in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized based on future tax consequences of both temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period when the changes are
enacted. Changes in existing federal and state tax laws and corporate income tax rates could affect future tax results and the realization of deferred tax assets over time.
In accordance with ASC Topic 740-10, Income Taxes, we evaluate our deferred tax assets by tax jurisdiction, including the benefit from net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards by tax jurisdiction, to determine if a valuation allowance is required. Companies must assess, using significant judgments, whether a valuation allowance should be established based on the consideration of all available evidence using a “more likely than not” standard with significant weight being given to evidence that can be objectively verified. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the length of statutory carryforward periods, experience with operating losses and experience of utilizing tax credit carryforwards and tax planning alternatives. We have not made any material changes in our methodology used to establish our valuation allowance during these periods. If a specific event or transaction were to occur that impacts our valuation allowance, we would reassess the evidence and adjust the allowance accordingly.
Although management believes our valuation allowance is reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from our current valuation of our deferred tax assets and it is reasonably possible that such differences could be material, resulting in a change in future valuations.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to the results reported in accordance with GAAP, we have provided information in this annual report relating to: (i) adjusted income before income taxes and related margin, (ii) adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share, (iii) net homebuilding debt to capitalization ratio, (iv) adjusted home closings gross margin, and (v) EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted income before income taxes (and related margin) is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects our income before income taxes excluding the impact of inventory impairment charges, transaction expenses and loss on extinguishment of debt, net. Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share are non-GAAP financial measures that reflect the net income available to the Company excluding the impact of inventory impairment charges, transaction expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, net and the tax impact due to such adjustments. Net homebuilding debt to capitalization ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure we calculate by dividing (i) total debt, before unamortized debt issuance premiums/discounts, net, and mortgage warehouse borrowings, net of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents, by (ii) total capitalization (the sum of net homebuilding
debt and total stockholders’ equity). Adjusted home closings gross margin is a non-GAAP financial measure based on GAAP home closings gross margin (which is inclusive of capitalized interest), excluding inventory impairment charges. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures that measure performance by adjusting net income before allocation to non-controlling interests to exclude interest expense/(income), net, amortization of capitalized interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), non-cash compensation expense, transaction expenses, inventory impairment charges, and loss on extinguishment of debt, if any. Beginning with the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we are no longer excluding purchase accounting adjustments from these non-GAAP financial measures, and prior period measures have been recast to remove this adjustment.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our performance on a consolidated basis, as well as the performance of our regions, and to set targets for performance-based compensation. We also use the ratio of net homebuilding debt to total capitalization as an indicator of overall leverage and to evaluate our performance against other companies in the homebuilding industry. In the future, we may include additional adjustments in the above-described non-GAAP financial measures to the extent we deem them appropriate and useful to management and investors.
We believe that adjusted income before income taxes and related margin, adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share, as well as EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, are useful for investors in order to allow them to evaluate our operations without the effects of various items we do not believe are characteristic of our ongoing operations or performance and also because such metrics assist both investors and management in analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. Because we use the ratio of net homebuilding debt to total capitalization to evaluate our performance against other companies in the homebuilding industry, we believe this measure is also relevant and useful to investors for that reason. We believe that adjusted home closings gross margin is useful to investors because it allows investors to evaluate the performance of our homebuilding operations without the varying effects of items or transactions we do not believe are characteristic of our ongoing operations or performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provide an indicator of general economic performance that is not affected by fluctuations in interest expense or effective tax rates, levels of depreciation or amortization, or unusual items.
These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, the comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures of our operating performance or liquidity. Although other companies in the homebuilding industry may report similar information, their definitions may differ. We urge investors to understand the methods used by other companies to calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures before comparing their measures to ours.
The following tables and related discussion set forth key operating and financial data for our operations as of and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For similar operating and financial data and discussion of our fiscal 2020 results compared to our fiscal 2019 results, refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were impacted by various macro economic conditions. During the second half of 2020, demand for housing increased at a nationwide level as uncertainty of the impact of COVID-19 abated. In addition, interest rates declined, offering greater affordability, which added to the increased demand. Throughout 2021, we experienced market-wide supply chain disruptions, trade labor shortages, and increasing costs related to materials. The strong demand for housing has allowed us to put into place pricing strategies that partially mitigated cost increases. The average selling price for net sales orders, backlog, and homes closed increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year. However, the supply chain delays and labor shortages have extended our build cycle times. Additional information for each metric is provided below.
Average Active Selling Communities(1)
(1) Beginning in the first quarter of 2022, we will provide ending active selling communities in lieu of average active selling communities. We believe the revised presentation is better aligned with management of the business and market conditions.
Average active selling communities for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 13.5% when compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to early community close outs resulting from the strong housing demand experienced throughout 2021 compared to 2020 causing active selling communities to sell out.
Net Sales Orders
(1) Net sales orders and sales value represent the number and dollar value, respectively, of new sales contracts executed with customers, net of cancellations.
The number of net sales orders decreased by 4.4% while net sales value increased by 19.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease in net sales orders was primarily a result of decreases in average active selling community count and strategically limiting sales releases to better optimize profitability amid significant supply chain constraints which have extended build cycle times. An increase in average selling price of 24.4% to reflect market appreciation and partially offset rising costs was the primary driver for the increase in sales value.
Sales Order Cancellations
(1) Cancellation rate represents the number of canceled sales orders divided by gross sales orders.
The total company cancellation rate decreased to 6.5% from 12.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decrease in cancellations was due to steady demand to secure housing as a result of low inventory levels, low interest rates and price appreciation.
Sales Order Backlog
(1) Sales order backlog represents homes under contract for which revenue has not yet been recognized at the end of the period (including homes sold but not yet started). Some of the contracts in our sales order backlog are subject to contingencies including mortgage loan approval and buyers selling their existing homes, which can result in future cancellations.
Total backlog units and total sales value increased by 8.5% and 36.2% at December 31, 2021, respectively, compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in backlog units was primarily due to extended build cycle times as a result of significant supply chain constraints and labor shortages throughout 2021. In addition, a steady demand environment combined with a 25.6% increase in average selling price led to the increase in total sales value.
Home Closings Revenue
The number of homes closed and home closings revenue, net increased by 9.4% and 22.3%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The increase in homes closed was primarily due to steady demand for housing in the latter half of 2020 and throughout 2021. In addition, supply chain delays and trade labor shortages during this timeframe extended build cycle times pushing expected fourth quarter 2020 closings into early 2021 and some anticipated fourth quarter 2021 closings into early 2022. Geographical and product mix along with rising sales prices led to an increase in homes closings revenue, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Land Closings Revenue
We generally purchase land and lots with the intent to build and sell homes. However, in some locations where we act as a developer, we occasionally purchase land that includes commercially zoned parcels or areas designated for school or government use, which we typically sell to commercial developers or municipalities, as applicable. We also sell residential lots or land parcels to manage our land and lot supply on larger tracts of land or if we determine certain properties no longer fit our strategic plans. Land and lot sales occur at various intervals and varying degrees of profitability. Therefore, the revenue and gross margin from land closings will fluctuate from period to period, depending on market conditions and opportunities. Land closings revenue was $99.4 million and $65.3 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The increase in land closings revenue in the West for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year was due to the sale of certain projects in our Oregon, Washington and Arizona markets.
Amenity and Other Revenue
Several of our communities operate amenities such as golf courses, club houses, and fitness centers. We provide club members access to the amenity facilities and other services in exchange for club dues and fees. Our Corporate region includes the activity relating to our Urban Form operations which primarily develops and constructs multi-use properties consisting of commercial space, retail, and multi-family units. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Urban Form sold a property in our Oregon market which resulted in the increase in amenity and other revenue for our Corporate region.
Segment Home Closings Gross Margins and Adjusted Gross Margins
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of adjusted home closings gross margin to GAAP home closings gross margin on a segment basis (see “Non-GAAP Measures” above for additional information about our use of non-GAAP measures).
Home closings gross margin increased 370 basis points to 20.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 16.6% in the prior year. The increase is a reflection of operational enhancements, acquisition synergies and pricing power in excess
of inflationary cost pressure. Consumer confidence, low inventory levels, and low interest rates, as well as market appreciation of resale homes, led to the ability to increase average selling prices amid the large cost increases experienced in 2021. We also strategically metered our sales to maximize profits and create margin protection as build cycle times extended due to supply chain disruptions and trade labor shortages.
Financial Services
Our Financial Services segment provides mortgage lending through our subsidiary, TMHF, title services through our subsidiary, Inspired Title, and homeowner's insurance policies through our insurance agency, TMIS. The following is a summary for the periods presented of financial services income before income taxes as well as supplemental data:
Total financial services revenue increased by 5.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The increase in financial services revenue was primarily due to increased home closings and an increase in the capture rate compared to the prior year.
Sales, Commissions and Other Marketing Costs
Sales, commissions and other marketing costs, as a percentage of home closings revenue, net, decreased to 5.6% from 6.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by leverage from an increase in home closings revenue, net as well as sustained leverage in our sales and marketing functions.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses as a percentage of home closings revenue, net, increased to 3.7% from 3.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the normalization in spend in the current year as employees returned to the office, resumed travel, and incurred various expenses that had been reduced in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Equity in Income of Unconsolidated Entities
Equity in income of unconsolidated entities was consistent for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Expense/(Income), net
Interest expense/(income), net was $3.8 million in expense and $1.6 million in income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest expense/(income), net includes interest earned on cash balances offset by interest incurred but not capitalized on our long-term debt and other borrowings, such as the Land Banking transactions entered into in 2021.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $23.8 million and $23.1 million, respectively. In the prior year, this mainly consisted of pre-acquisition costs on projects we are no longer pursuing. In the current year, this mainly consisted of Insurance Loss Expense.
Transaction expenses
We had no transaction expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, while transaction expenses were $127.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Transaction expenses for the prior year consisted of acquisition related costs from the acquisition of WLH, which included investment banking fees, severance, compensation, legal fees, expenses relating to credit facility paydowns and terminations, and other various integration costs.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt, Net
We had no losses on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021, while loss on extinguishment of debt was $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we redeemed the entire principal amount of the 2023 6.00% Senior Notes as well as the 2025 5.875% Senior Notes, and as a result of the early redemption, we recorded a total net loss of $10.2 million.
Income Tax Provision
Our effective tax rate was 20.9% and 23.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Our effective rate for both years was affected by a number of factors including state income taxes, energy tax credits relating to homebuilding activities, and tax benefits from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) which contains a number of economic relief provisions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was favorably impacted by income attributable to non-controlling interests. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was unfavorably impacted by certain expenses related to the acquisition of WLH which were not deductible for tax purposes.
Net Income
Net income before allocation to non-controlling interests and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $682.4 million and $5.18, respectively. Net income before allocation to non-controlling interests and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $249.5 million and $1.88, respectively. The increases in net income and diluted earnings per share in the current year compared to the prior year was primarily attributable to higher home closings revenues, net, and higher gross margin dollars. In addition, 2020 included loss on the extinguishment of debt and transaction expenses related to the acquisition of WLH which negatively impacted net income and earnings per share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
We finance our operations through the following:
•Cash generated from operations;
•Borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facilities;
•Our various series of Senior Notes;
•Mortgage warehouse facilities;
•Project-level real estate financing (including non-recourse loans, land banking, and joint ventures); and
•Performance, payment and completion surety bonds, and letters of credit.
Cash flows for each of our communities depend on the status of the development cycle, and can differ substantially from reported earnings. Early stages of development or expansion require significant cash expenditures for land acquisitions, on and off-site development, construction of model homes, general landscaping and other amenities. Because these costs are a component of our inventory and are not recognized in our statement of operations until a home closes, we incur significant cash outflows prior to recognition of earnings.
The table below summarizes our total cash and liquidity as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
We believe we have adequate capital resources from cash generated from operations and sufficient access to external financing sources from borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facilities to conduct our operations for the next twelve months. Beyond the next twelve months, our primary demand for funds will be for payments of our long-term debt as it becomes due, land purchases, lot development, home and amenity construction, long-term capital investments, investments in our joint ventures, and repurchases of common stock. We believe we will generate sufficient cash from our operations to meet the demands for such payments, however we may also access the capital markets to obtain additional liquidity through debt and equity offerings or refinance debt to secure capital for such long-term demands.
Material Cash Requirements
We have various contractual obligations with commitments to pay third parties, including but not limited to our debt facilities, land purchase and land banking contracts, and leases. These obligations impact our liquidity and capital resource needs and are presented in the table below. Our short-term demands are cash requirements for the next twelve months and long-term demands are cash requirements beyond twelve months.
(1) Estimated interest expense amounts for debt outstanding at the respective contractual interest rates, the weighted average of which was 4.9% as of December 31, 2021.
In addition to our contractual obligations, we also have forecasted operational cash outlays on items such as future land purchases or common stock repurchases, to maintain our strategic growth and returns to our investors. Management expects to
invest over $2.0 billion in land acquisition and development during the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2021 we had approximately $230.4 million remaining on our share repurchase authorization, which expires on June 30, 2024.
Cash Flow Activities
Operating Cash Flow Activities
Our net cash provided by operating activities was $0.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable an increase in real estate inventory and land deposits, mortgages held for sale, prepaid expenses and other assets, which was partially offset by an increase in net income due to additional homes closed and the increase in the accounts payable and accrued expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Investing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $74.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $312.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects the acquisition of WLH which occurred in 2020.
Financing Cash Flow Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $604.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to our repayments of the 2023 6.00% Senior Notes and 2025 5.875% Senior Notes for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, our net borrowings on mortgage warehouse increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Debt Instruments
For information regarding our debt instruments, including the terms governing our Senior Notes and our Revolving Credit Facilities, see Note 8 - Debt in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report.
Financial Guarantees
The following table summarizes our letters of credit and surety bonds as of the dates indicated:
(1) As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was $200.0 million total capacity of letters of credit available under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements as of December 31, 2021
Investments in Land Development and Homebuilding Joint Ventures or Unconsolidated Entities
We participate in strategic land development and homebuilding joint ventures with related and unrelated third parties. The use of these entities, in some instances, enables us to acquire land to which we could not otherwise obtain access, or could not obtain access on terms that are as favorable. Our partners in these joint ventures historically have been land owners/developers, other homebuilders and financial or strategic partners. Joint ventures with land owners/developers have given us access to sites owned or controlled by our partners. Joint ventures with other homebuilders have provided us with the ability to bid jointly with our partners for large or expensive land parcels. Joint ventures with financial partners have allowed us to combine our homebuilding expertise with access to our partners’ capital.
In certain of our unconsolidated joint ventures, we enter into loan agreements, whereby one of our subsidiaries will provide the lenders with customary guarantees, including completion, indemnity and environmental guarantees subject to usual non-recourse terms.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, total cash contributed to unconsolidated joint ventures was $75.0 million and $36.1 million, respectively.
The following is a summary of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures:
Land Option Contracts and Land Banking Agreements
We are subject to the usual obligations associated with entering into contracts (including land option contracts and land banking arrangements) for the purchase, development, and sale of real estate in our routine business. We have a number of land purchase option contracts and land banking agreements, generally through cash deposits, for the right to purchase land or lots at a future point in time with predetermined terms. We do not have title to the property and the creditors generally have no recourse. Our obligations with respect to such contracts are generally limited to the forfeiture of the related non-refundable cash deposits and/or letters of credit provided to obtain the options. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the aggregate purchase price of these contracts was $1.3 billion and $0.8 billion, respectively.