ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a mining company engaged in the business of the acquisition, exploration and development of mineral properties. We currently own a 20% membership interest in Round Top, which entity holds two mineral property leases with the GLO to explore and develop a 950-acre rare earths project located in Hudspeth County, Texas, known as the Round Top Project. The leases, originally signed with primary terms of approximately 19 and 18 years, each currently have remaining terms of approximately nine years and provisions for automatic renewal if Round Top is in production. Round Top also holds prospecting permits covering 9,345 acres adjacent to the Round Top Project. The strategy with Round Top is to develop a metallurgical process to concentrate or otherwise extract the metals from the Round Top Project’s rhyolite, conduct additional engineering, design, geotechnical work, and permitting necessary for a bankable feasibility study and then to extract mineral resources from the Round Top Project. The Round Top Project has not established as of the date hereof that any of the properties contain any probable mineral reserves or proven mineral reserves under Item 1300 of Regulation S-K.
Rare earth elements are a group of chemically similar elements that usually are found together in nature - they are referred to as the “lanthanide series.” These individual elements have a variety of characteristics that are critical in a wide range of technologies, products, and applications and are critical inputs in existing and emerging applications. Without these elements, multiple high-tech technologies would not be possible. These technologies include:
● cell phones,
● computer and television screens,
● battery operated vehicles,
● clean energy technologies, such as hybrid and electric vehicles and wind power turbines,
● fiber optics, lasers and hard disk drives,
● numerous defense applications, such as guidance and control systems and global positioning systems,
● advanced water treatment technology for use in industrial, military and
● outdoor recreation applications
Because of these applications, global demand for REE is projected to steadily increase due to continuing growth in existing applications and increased innovation and development of new end uses. Interest in developing resources domestically has become a strategic necessity as there is limited production of these elements outside of China. Our ability to raise additional funds to continue to fund our participation interest in the Round Top Project may be impacted by future prices for REEs.
History of the Round Top Project
In March 2013, we purchased the 54,990 acre surface lease covering the Round Top Project, known as the West Lease, from the Southwest Wildlife and Range Foundation (“Foundation”) for $500,000 and the issuance of 1,063,830 shares of our Common Stock. We also agreed to support the Foundation through an annual payment of $45,000 for ten years to support conservation efforts within the Rio Grande Basin and in particular engaging in stewardship of Lake Amistad, a large and well-known fishing lake near Del Rio, Texas. The West Lease provides exclusive surface access to the area for the potential development and mining of the Round Top Project.
In October 2014, we executed agreements with the GLO securing the option to purchase the surface rights covering the Round Top Project mine and plant areas and, separately, a lease to develop the water necessary for the potential Round Top Project mine operations. The option to purchase the surface rights covers approximately 5,670 acres over the mining lease and the additional acreage adequate to site all potential heap leaching and processing operations as currently anticipated by the Company. The option may be exercised for all or part of the option acreage at any time during the primary term of the mineral lease as defined above. The “primary term” of the GLO mineral leases and the option is through August 2030. The option can be kept current by an annual payment of $10,000. The purchase price will be the appraised value of the surface at the time of exercising the option. The ground water lease secures the right to develop the ground water within a 13,120-acre lease area located approximately 4 miles from the Round Top Project. The lease area contains five existing water wells. It is anticipated that all potential water needs for the Round Top Project mine operations will be satisfied by the existing wells covered by this water lease. This lease has an annual minimum production payment of $5,000 prior to production of water for the operation. After initiation of production payments of $0.95 per thousand gallons or $20,000 annually, whichever is greater, is required. This lease remains effective as long as the mineral lease is in effect.
In March 2015, we conducted a trial mining test during which we mined 500 tonnes of rhyolite, transported and crushed the ore to 80% passing an approximate one-inch screen. This rock is now stockpiled and is expected to be used in the contemplated pilot plant development.
In May 2021, we contributed our assets to Round Top in exchange for a 20% membership interest in Round Top.
As a part of our ongoing operations, we will occasionally investigate new mining opportunities. We may also incur expenses associated with our investigations. These costs are expensed as incurred until such time when we have agreements in place to purchase such mining rights.
Investment Company Act Exclusion
Section 3(a)(9) of the 1940 Act provides that a company “substantially all of whose business consists of owning or holding oil, gas, or other mineral royalties or leases, or fractional interests therein, or certificates of interest or participation in or investment contracts relative to such royalties, leases, or fractional interests” is not an investment company within the meaning of the 1940 Act. The Company has determined that this exemption applies to it giving consideration to the following four factors:
● the exempted activity (ownership of our certificate of interest in the underlying mineral leases) constitutes “substantially all” of our business;
● we own, and do not trade, in the certificate of interest in the mineral leases or the underlying mineral leases;
● mineral leases qualify as an eligible asset for purposes of the exception; and
● a membership interest in a limited liability company constitutes a “certificate of interest or participation in” or an “investment contract relative to” the eligible assets.
The Company intends to continue to conduct its business operations in order to continue to be excluded from the definition of an “investment company” under the 1940 Act.
Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.
Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company has an accumulated deficit from inception through August 31, 2022, of approximately $39,752,000 and has yet to achieve profitable operations, and projects further losses in the development of its business. At August 31, 2022, the Company had a working capital surplus of approximately $2,352,000; however the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to obtain the necessary financing to meet its obligations and pay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due.
In accordance with our current projected Budget, the Company does not have sufficient capital to fund its (i) total cash calls expected during the fiscal year ending August 31, 2023 (expected to be approximately $15.4 million) and (ii) expected general and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ending August 31, 2023 (expected to be approximately $603,000). Failure of the Company to make required cash calls to Round Top would result in significant dilution to its 20% ownership interest. Accordingly, the Company will be required to raise additional capital to fund its obligations (pursuant to the Budget and to fund general and administrative expenses) during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2023. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise the necessary capital to fund its cash calls and expected general and administrative expenses. We have no firm commitments for equity or debt financing and any financing that may be obtained will be on a best efforts basis. Based on these factors, there is substantial doubt as to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months from the issuance date of these financial statements. The failure to obtain sufficient financing may cause us to curtail or discontinue operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At August 31, 2022, our accumulated deficit was approximately $39,752,000 and our cash position was approximately $1,838,000. We had a working capital surplus of approximately $2,596,000. Round Top has not commenced commercial production on the Round Top Project. We have no revenues from operations and anticipate we will have no operating revenues until we place one or more of our properties into production. All properties are in the exploration stage.
During the fiscal year ending August 31, 2022, we funded approximately $1,937,000 to Round Top pursuant to our funding obligations set forth in the Operating Agreement. Round Top funded approximately $8,402,000 in connection with advancing the Round Top Project.
During the current fiscal year, Round Top is expected to fund the expenditure of approximately $77.1 million to optimize the leaching and developing of the CIX/CIC processing of the Round Top Project. Initial process design work will be carried out at USARE’s facility in Wheat Ridge, Colorado. Pending completion of the initial process development, this facility will either be relocated to or replicated at the Round Top Project where a pilot plant is expected to be established. This work will consist of mining and crushing approximately 40,000 tonnes of rhyolite and setting up and equipping a facility to conduct pilot plant scale heap leaching. It is estimated that the Round Top Project will require additional time and further expenditure to complete a bankable feasibility study. We plan to fund up to approximately $15.4 million of the expected expenditures by Round Top during our current fiscal year.
We do not have sufficient cash on hand to fund our portion of the Round Top Budget during our current fiscal year. Therefore, we will need to raise additional funding to implement our business strategy and to continue to fund our portion of the Round Top Budget, the failure of which could cause us to curtail or cease our operations. The most likely source of future financing presently available to us is through the sale of our securities. Any sale of our shares of Common Stock will result in dilution of equity ownership to existing stockholders. This means that if we sell shares of Common Stock, more shares will be outstanding and each existing stockholder will own a smaller percentage of the shares then outstanding. Alternatively, we may rely on debt financing and assume debt obligations that require us to make substantial interest and capital payments. Also, we may issue or grant warrants or options in the future pursuant to which additional shares of Common Stock may be issued. Exercise of such warrants or options will result in dilution of equity ownership to our existing stockholders. We have no firm commitment with respect to obtaining debt or equity financing and, accordingly, we will be reliant upon a best efforts financing strategy. Accordingly, there is no assurance that we will be able to raise necessary capital to fund our portion of the Round Top Budget and our general administrative expenses during the fiscal year ending August 31, 2023.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021
Grant Income
Grants received from government and other agencies in advance of a specific project’s expenses are deferred and recognized as other income in the statements of operations in the period they are earned and the related project costs are incurred. For the years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, we recognized $561,950 and $712,000, respectively, of grant income which is presented in other income net of grant related expenses totaling approximately $561,860 and $438,000, respectively.
Revenue
During the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, we had no revenues. For the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022, our net loss was approximately $2,904,000. We are not currently profitable. As a result of ongoing operating losses, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $39,752,000 as of August 31, 2022.
Operating expenses and resulting losses from operations.
We incurred exploration costs for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021, in the amount of approximately $1,535,000 and $220,000, respectively. Expenditures during fiscal year 2022 were primarily for our obligation to fund our portion of the cash requirements set forth by our joint venture agreement with USARE. Currently eighty-percent of the expenditures associated with the joint venture are funded by our joint venture partner, USARE.
Our general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 were approximately $1,376,000 of which approximately $503,000 were stock compensation for services. The remaining expenditures were primarily for payroll, professional fees and other general administrative expenses necessary for our operations.
Our general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 were approximately $1,343,000 of which approximately $880,000 were stock compensation for services. The remaining expenditures were primarily for payroll, professional fees and other general administrative expenses necessary for our operations.
We had losses from operations for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2022 and 2021 totaling approximately $2,911,000 and $1,563,000, respectively. We had a net loss for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022 totaling approximately $2,904,000 and net income for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 totaling approximately $2,044,000. We earned interest from our cash balances of approximately $7,000 and $6,000 for the years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In May 2021, USARE met its obligations under the Option Agreement and acquired a 70% interest in Round Top. In addition, USARE exercised its option to acquire an additional 10% interest in Round Top for $3 million. In connection with this transaction, the Company received total consideration of approximately $3,728,000, consisting of the $3 million upon exercise of the option and approximately $728,000 in previous advances from USARE, and derecognized 80% of the carrying amount of mineral properties, or approximately $402,000. The resulting gain on sale of interest in mineral properties in the amount of approximately $3,327,000 is included as its own line item in other income (expense).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company does not expect the adoption of recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial position, or cash flow.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Preparation of financial statements requires management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and the related disclosures of contingencies. Management bases its estimates on various assumptions and historical experience, which are believed to be reasonable; however, due to the inherent nature of estimates, actual results may differ significantly due to changed conditions or assumptions. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are fairly presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. Management believes that the following critical accounting estimates and judgments have a significant impact on our financial statements; Valuation of options granted to directors and officers using the Black-Scholes model, and fair value of mineral properties. The accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2 to our audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2022.