Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the consolidated results of operations and financial condition of The Oncology Institute, Inc. ("TOI") along with its consolidating subsidiaries (the "Company"). The discussion should be read together with the historical audited annual statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related notes that are included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. the Company’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Report. All dollar values are expressed in thousands, unless otherwise noted.
Overview
The Company is a leading value-based oncology company that manages community-based oncology practices that serve patients at 67 clinic locations across 10 markets and four states throughout the United States, which are staffed with 98 oncologists and advanced practice providers. 53 of these clinics are staffed with 86 providers employed by our affiliated physician-owned professional corporations, which management refers to as the "TOI PCs", which have provided care for more than 51,000 patients in 2021 and managed a population of approximately 1.6 million patients under value-based agreements as of December 31, 2021. The Company also provides management services on behalf of 14 clinic locations owned by independent oncology practices. The Company's mission is to heal and empower cancer patients through compassion, innovation, and state-of-the-art medical care.
The Company's managed clinics provide a range of medical oncology services, including physician services, in-house infusion and dispensary, clinical trial services, radiation, innovative programs like outpatient stem cell transplants and transfusions, along with 24/7 patient support. Many of our services, such as managing clinical trials, palliative care programs and stem cell transplants, are traditionally accessed through academic and tertiary care settings, while the TOI PCs bring these services to patients in a community setting. As scientific research progresses and more treatment options become available, cancer care is shifting from acute care episodes to chronic disease management. With this shift, it is increasingly important for high-quality, high-value cancer care to be available in a local community setting to all patients in need.
As a value-based oncology company, the Company seeks to deliver both better quality care and lower cost of care. The Company works to accomplish this goal by reducing wasteful, inefficient or counterproductive care that drives up costs but does not improve outcomes. The Company believes payors and employers are aligned with the value-based model due to its enhanced access, improved outcomes, and lower costs. Patients under the Company's affiliated providers’ care can benefit from evidence-based and personalized care plans, gain access to sub-specialized care in convenient community locations, and lower out-of-pocket costs. The Company believes its affiliated providers enjoy the stability and predictability of a large multi-state practice, are not incentivized or pressured to overtreat when it may be inconsistent with a patient’s goals of care, and can focus on practicing outstanding evidence-based medicine, rather than business building.
The Business Combination
On June 28, 2021, DFP Healthcare Acquisition Corp. ("DFPH"), Orion Merger Sub I, Inc. ("First Merger Sub") and Orion Merger Sub II, LLC ("Second Merger Sub") entered into an agreement and plan of merger ("Merger Agreement") with TOI Parent, Inc. ("TOI Parent") (collectively, the "Business Combination"). In connection with the Business Combination, DFPH entered into subscription agreements with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), whereby it issued 17.5 million shares of common stock at $10.00 per share and 100,000 shares of preferred stock at $1,000.00 per share (“PIPE Shares”) for an aggregate investment of $275,000 (“PIPE Investment”), which closed simultaneously with the consummation of the Business Combination.
The Business Combination closed on November 12, 2021 ("Closing Date"). On the Closing Date, (i) First Merger Sub merged with and into TOI Parent, with TOI Parent being the surviving corporation and (ii) immediately following, TOI Parent merged with and into Second Merger Sub ("Legacy TOI"), with Second Merger Sub being the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of DFPH. DFPH was renamed “The Oncology Institute, Inc.” and TOI Common Stock and Public Warrants continued to be listed on Nasdaq under the ticker symbols “TOI” and “TOIIW,” respectively.
The total merger consideration on the Closing Date was $762,052, consisting of 51.3 million shares of common stock, valued at $10.00 per share (aggregate $595,468, inclusive of shares of DFPH common stock issuable per restricted stock units and the exercise of Legacy TOI stock options), and $166,584 in cash. Legacy TOI also issued 12.5 million shares of common stock pursuant to the terms of an earnout (“Earnout Shares”). The earnout shares are allocable to both Legacy TOI stockholders and Legacy TOI option holders. On the Closing Date, shares of DFPH common stock that were not otherwise redeemed as part of the DFPH public stockholder vote and PIPE Shares automatically converted into shares of TOI stock on a one-for-one basis.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP"). Under this method of accounting, DFPH was treated as the “acquired” company for accounting purposes and the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Legacy TOI issuing stock for the net assets of DFPH, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of DFPH are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Business Combination were those of Legacy TOI.
Public Company Costs
Subsequent to the Business Combination, the Company continues as an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company. The Company expects to hire additional staff and implement new processes and procedures to address public company requirements. The Company also expects to incur substantial additional expenses for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external costs for investor relations, accounting, audit, legal and other functions.
Impact of COVID-19
The measures to contain the spread and impact of COVID-19 and other developments related to COVID-19 have affected the way in which the Company conducts its day-to-day business. The Company has followed U.S. guidance to protect its employees and operations during the pandemic and implemented a partially remote environment for certain business activities. The Company cannot predict the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic or the distribution of vaccines on its business or operations, but will continue to actively monitor the related issues and may take further action that alters its business operations, including as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities or that it determines are in the best interests of its employees, payors, partners and stockholders.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, federal and state governments have passed legislation, promulgated regulations, and taken other administrative actions intended to assist healthcare providers in providing care to COVID-19 and other patients during the public health emergency. Sources of relief include the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which was enacted on March 27, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act (the “PPPHCE Act”), which was enacted on April 24, 2020, and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (the “CAA”), which was enacted on December 27, 2020. In addition, the CARES Act provides for an expansion of the Medicare Accelerated and Advance Payment Program whereby inpatient acute care hospitals and other eligible providers were able to request accelerated payment of up to 100% of their Medicare payment amount for a six-month period to be repaid through withholding of future Medicare fee-for-service payments. Various other state and local programs also exist to provide relief, either independently or through distribution of monies received via the CARES Act. During 2021 and 2020, the Company obtained loans of $4,993 pursuant to the CARES Act; $2,727 under the Accelerated and Advance Payment Program; and $2,001 from Provider Relief Funding under the CARES Act.
Key Factors Affecting Performance
Through the TOI PCs, the Company serves adult and senior cancer patients in markets that have Medicare Advantage (“MA”) plans. The Company plans to leverage its long-established, strong relationships with payors to continue to build out its network and increase access to cancer patients in adjacent markets, while at the same time, decreasing oncology care costs for both patients and payors. The Company seeks to provide high quality and lower cost care delivery through the following capabilities:
•a recruiting process focused on selecting physicians that want to practice evidence-based medicine;
•technology-enabled care pathways ensuring adherence to evidence-based clinical protocols;
•strong clinical culture and physician oversight;
•care management to prevent unnecessary hospitalizations;
•care delivered in community clinics versus hospital setting;
•clinically appropriate integration of palliative care and hospice aligned with patients’ goals for care;
•access to clinical trials providing cutting-edge treatment options at low or no cost to patients or payors; and
•appropriate provider training on clinical documentation to ensure proper risk adjustment and reimbursement for complex patients.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our financial information, the Company's management reviews a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
(1) Includes independent oncology practices to which we provide limited management services, but do not bear the operating costs.
(2) Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by a $1,800 revenue reduction during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to a payor not paying according to their contract.
The Company defines adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding:
•Depreciation and amortization,
•Interest expense,
•Income tax expense,
•Board and management fees,
•Non-cash addbacks,
•Changes in fair value of liabilities,
•Stock-based compensation,
•Practice acquisition-related costs,
•Consulting and legal fees,
•Public company transaction costs, and
•Other specific charges.
The Company includes adjusted EBITDA because it is an important measure upon which our management uses to assess the results of operations, to evaluate factors and trends affecting the business, and to plan and forecast future periods.
Adjusted EBITDA is “non-GAAP” financial measure within the meaning of Item 10 of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC. Management believes that this measure provides an additional way of viewing aspects of the Company's operations that, when viewed with the GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of the Company's results of operations and the factors and trends affecting the business. However, non-GAAP financial measures should be considered a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures used by management may differ from the non-GAAP measures used by other companies, including the Company's competitors. Management encourages investors and others to review the Company's financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2021, non-cash addbacks were primarily comprised of a $4,957 gain on debt extinguishment and bad debt recoveries, net of $417 partially offset by deferred rent of $109 other miscellaneous charges of $149. During the year ended December 31, 2020, non-cash addbacks were primarily comprised of a $7,500 impairment of notes receivable (as described further below), $4,233 of bad debts write-offs, and $239 of other miscellaneous charges.
(2) Practice acquisition-related costs were comprised of consulting and legal fees incurred to perform due diligence, execute, and integrate acquisitions of various oncology practices.
(3) Consulting and legal fees were comprised of a subset of the Company’s total consulting and legal fees during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and related to certain advisory projects, software implementations, and legal fees for debt financing and predecessor litigation matters.
(4) Other, net is comprised of severance expenses resulting from cost rationalization programs of $127 and $278, as well as temporary labor of $1,182 and $1,862 recruiting expenses to build out corporate infrastructure of $1,275 and 1,289 and other miscellaneous charges of $130 and $0 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 such expenses were partially offset by $1,023 and $978, respectively, of stimulus funds received under the CARES Act.
(5) Adjusted EBITDA was impacted by a $1,800 revenue reduction during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to a payor not paying according to their contract.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company receives payments from the following sources for services rendered: (i) commercial insurers; (ii) pharmacy benefit managers (“PBMs”), (iii) the federal government under the Medicare program administered by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”); (iv) state governments under Medicaid and other programs; (v) other third-party payors and managed care organizations (e.g., risk bearing organizations and independent practice associations (“IPAs”)); and (vi) individual patients and clients.
Revenue primarily consists of capitation revenue, fee-for-service (“FFS”) revenue, dispensary revenue, and clinical trials revenue. Capitation and FFS revenue comprise the revenues within the Company’s patient services segment and are presented together in the results of operations. The following paragraphs provide a summary of the principal forms of our billing arrangements and how revenue is recognized for each type of revenue.
Capitation
Capitation revenues consist primarily of fees for medical services provided by the TOI PCs to the Company's patients under a capitated arrangement with various managed care organizations. Capitation revenue is paid monthly based on the number of enrollees by the contracted managed care organization (per member per month or “PMPM”). Capitation contracts generally have a legal term of one year or longer. Payments in capitation contracts are variable since they primarily include PMPM fees associated with unspecified membership that fluctuates throughout the term of the contract; however, based on our
experience, our total underlying membership generally increases over time as penetration of MA products grows. Certain contracts include terms for a capitation deduction where the cost of out-of-network referrals of members are deducted from the future payment. Revenue is recognized in the month services are rendered on the basis of the transaction price established at that time.
Fee-for-service revenue
FFS revenue represents revenue earned under contracts in which we bill and collect for medical services rendered by the TOI PCs’ employed physicians. The terms for FFS contracts are short in duration and only last for the period over which services are rendered (typically, one day). FFS revenue consists of fees for medical services provided to patients. As specialist providers, our FFS revenue is dependent on referrals from other physicians, such as primary care physicians. The Company's affiliated providers build trusted, professional relationships with these physicians and their associated medical groups, which can lead to recurring FFS volume; however, this volume is subject to numerous factors the Company cannot control and can fluctuate over time. The Company also receives FFS revenue for capitated patients that receive medical services which are excluded from the Company's capitation contracts. Under the FFS arrangements, third-party payors and patients are billed for patient care services provided by the TOI PCs. Payments for services provided are generally less than billed charges. The Company records revenue net of an allowance for contractual adjustments, which represents the net revenue expected to be collected from third-party payors (including managed care, commercial, and governmental payors such as Medicare and Medicaid), and patients. These expected collections are based on fees and negotiated payment rates in the case of third-party payors, the specific benefits provided for under each patient’s healthcare plan, mandated payment rates in the case of Medicare and Medicaid programs, and historical cash collections (net of recoveries). The recognition of net revenue (gross charges less contractual allowances) from such services is dependent on certain factors, such as the proper completion of medical charts following a patient visit, the forwarding of such charts to our billing center for medical coding and entering into the Company's billing system, and the verification of each patient’s submission or representation at the time services are rendered as to the payor(s) responsible for payment of such services. Revenue is recorded on the date the services are rendered based on the information known at the time of entering of such information into the Company's billing systems as well as an estimate of the revenue associated with medical services.
Dispensary
Oral prescription drugs prescribed by doctors to their patients are sold directly through the TOI PCs’ dispensaries. Revenue for the prescriptions is based on fee schedules set by various PBMs and other third-party payors. The fee schedule is often subject to direct and indirect remuneration (“DIR”) fees, which are based primarily on pre-established metrics. DIR fees may be assessed in the periods after payments are received against future payments. The Company recognizes revenue, deducted by estimated DIR fees, at the time the patient takes possession of the oral drug.
Clinical trials revenue
The TOI PCs also enter into contracts to perform clinical research trials. The terms for clinical trial contracts last many months as the clinical research is performed. Each contract represents a single, integrated set of research activities that are satisfied over time as the output of results from the trial is captured for the trial sponsor to review. Under the clinical trial contracts, the TOI PCs receive a fixed payment for administrative, set-up, and close-down fees; a fixed amount for each patient site visit; and certain expense reimbursements. The Company recognizes revenue for these arrangements on the fees earned to date based on the state of the trial, as established under contract with the customer.
Operating Expenses
Cost of services
Cost of services primarily includes chemotherapy drug costs, clinician salaries and benefits, and medical supplies. Clinicians include oncologists, advanced practice providers such as physician assistants and nurse practitioners, and registered nurses employed by the TOI PCs.
Dispensary cost
Dispensary cost primarily includes the cost of oral medications dispensed in the TOI PCs’ clinic locations.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including both clinic and field support staff as well as central administrative and corporate staff. These expenses include salaries and related costs and stock-based compensation for our executives and physicians. The Company's selling, general and administrative expenses also includes
occupancy costs, technology infrastructure, operations, clinical and quality support, finance, legal, human resources, and business development. The Company expects its general and administrative expenses to increase over time following the consummation of the Business Combination due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that the Company will incur as a public company, as well as other costs associated with continuing to grow the business. While the Company expects its selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in the foreseeable future. such expenses are on average expected to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated. The Company’s management is not aware of material events or uncertainties that would cause the financial information below to not be indicative of future operating results or results of future financial condition.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Patient services
The increase in patient services revenue was primarily due to a 14.0% increase in revenue related to capitated contracts. This increase in capitated revenue was partially offset by a decline in the Company's FFS revenue of 8.5%, as a result of transitioning several FFS contracts to capitation as well as a $1,800 adjustment to revenue related to a payor not paying according to their contract.
Dispensary
The increase in dispensary revenue was primarily due to a 13.6% increase in the average revenue per fill and increase in the number of fills due to patient volume growth.
Clinical trials & other
The decrease in clinical trials and other revenue was comprised of various miscellaneous sources of revenue, none of which are individually significant.
Operating Expenses
Patient services cost
The increase in patient services cost was primarily due to a 1.5% increase in intravenous drug costs, driven by the Company's patient mix and volume, as well as 1.6% increase in clinical payroll costs due to the growth in clinic count.
Dispensary cost
The increase in dispensary cost was primarily due to a 15.3% increase in the average cost of the prescriptions filled.
Selling, general and administrative expense
The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was primarily driven by an increase in share-based compensation expense of 58.2% and transaction costs of 18.4% due to the Business Combination as well as an increase in salaries and benefits of 14.1%, due to the growth in the Company's management and corporate team. The remainder of the increases were primarily to support the continued growth of our business. These increased costs were offset by bad debt recoveries on our FFS accounts receivable of 11.1% of total selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to better collections than anticipated.
Other Expenses
Interest expense
The decrease in interest expense was due to the pay-off of our term loan balance in Q4 2021.
Change in fair value of liabilities
The increase in non-operating (income) expense was primarily due to a gain of $3,686 and $24,891 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of a reduction in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and derivative earnout liabilities, respectively, which were created as part of the Business Combination.
Gain on debt extinguishment
The increase in gain on debt extinguishment was a result of all CARES Act loans being forgiven during the quarter ended June 30, 2021. The gain includes the loan balance and related accrued interest.
Other, net
The change in other, net was primarily due to a loan provided during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 to an independent oncology practice relating to the management services agreement entered into by the Company, pursuant to which we provide certain management services to the oncology practice, including value-based contracting services. Under the terms of the loan, the loan is to be forgiven in equal installments over five years as long as the management services agreement with the Company remains in effect. Given the probability of forgiveness is likely, we fully impaired the loan during the quarter ended March 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
To date, the Company has financed its operations principally through private placements of its equity securities and payments received from various payors. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $115,174 of cash including $875 of restricted cash.
The Company may incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments management intends to continue to make in expanding operations and sales and marketing and due to additional general and administrative expenses management expects to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, the Company may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow the business.
Management believes that the cash on hand and cash conferred from the Business Combination will be sufficient to fund the Company's operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Management's assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results could vary because of, and its future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to open or acquire new clinics and expand into new markets and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. The Company may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. The Company has based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and the Company could use its available capital resources sooner than management currently expects. The Company may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, the Company may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to management or at all. If unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if the Company cannot expand operations or otherwise capitalize on business opportunities because the Company's lack of sufficient capital, the Company's business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of the Company's consolidated cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Significant changes impacting net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
•net income improved $3,395 for 2021 as compared to 2020, a decrease of $28,577 in fair value of the warrant and earnout liabilities, gain on extinguishment of debt of $4,957, increase of $4,650 in bad debt recovery, net, and an impairment on the note receivable of $7,500 in 2020, offset by an increase of $24,384 in share-based compensation expense;
•cash used by accounts receivable declined $4,568 for 2021 as compared to 2020 due to better collection efforts, offset by the growth in the Company's business;
•cash used by accounts payable, accrued expenses and income taxes payable increased $10,803 for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to accruals related to the financing of the Company's directors and officers insurance policy and payments made for 2020 taxes;
•cash used by inventory increased $1,377 for 2021 as compared to 2020 due to the growth in the Company's business; and
•cash used by prepaid assets increased $7,705 for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to the financing of the Company's directors and officers insurance policy.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to increases in purchases of property and equipment of $1,653 due to new clinic build-outs and existing clinic remodels and cash used for acquisitions of $9,107, offset by the issuance of a $7,500 note receivable in 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash from financing activities primarily relates to cash received in connection with the Business Combination, other capital raises, and principal payments on the Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has borrowed $8,429 in the form of a financing arrangement entered into in conjunction with the directors and officers insurance policy and made principal payments of $409.
Material Cash Requirements
The Company's material cash requirements for the following five years consist of operating leases and other miscellaneous administrative expenses. Additionally, the Company is subject to certain outside claims and litigation arising out of the ordinary course of business, however, no such litigation requires future cash expenditure as of December 31, 2021.
(1) Other is comprised of capital leases and directors and officers insurance premiums.
JOBS Act
The Company qualifies as an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and has elected to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company that is neither an emerging growth company
nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares its financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("U.S. GAAP"), which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company consolidate entities for which it has a variable interest and is determined to be the primary beneficiary. The Company holds variable interests in the TOI PCs, comprised of The Oncology Institute, A Professional Corporation (“TOI CA”) and The Oncology Institute FL, LLC (“TOI FL”), which the Company cannot legally own due to jurisdictional laws governing the corporate practice of medicine. The TOI PCs employ physicians and other clinicians in order to provide professional services to patients of our managed clinics, and under substantially similar MSAs, we serve as the exclusive manager and administrator of the TOI PCs’ non-medical functions and services. The TOI PCs are considered variable interest entities (“VIEs”) as they do not have sufficient equity to finance their activities without additional financial support from the Company. An enterprise having a controlling financial interest in a VIE must consolidate the VIE if it has both power and benefits - that is, it has (1) the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impacts the VIE’s economic performance (power), and (2) the obligation to absorb the losses of the VIE that potentially could be significant to the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that potentially could be significant to the VIE (benefits). The Company has the power to control all financial activities of the TOI PCs, the rights to receive substantially all benefits from the VIEs, and consequently consolidates the TOI PCs. Revenues, expenses, and income from the TOI PCs are included in the consolidated amounts as presented on the consolidated statements of operations.
Segment Reporting
The Company presents the financial statements by segment in accordance with the relevant accounting literature to provide investors with transparency into how the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) manages the business. The Company's CODM is our Chief Executive Officer. The CODM reviews financial information and allocates resources across three operating segments: dispensary, patient care, and clinical trials & other.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes consolidated revenue based upon the principle of the transfer of control of our goods and services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to be entitled. This principle is achieved through applying the following five-step approach:
1.Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer.
2.Identification of the performance obligations in the contract.
3.Determination of the transaction price.
4.Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
5.Recognition of revenue when, or as, the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Consolidated revenue primarily consists of capitation revenue, fee-for-service (FFS) revenue, dispensary revenue, and clinical trials revenue. Revenue is recognized in the period in which services are rendered or the period in which the TOI PCs are obligated to provide services. The form of billing and related risk of collection for such services may vary by type of revenue and the payor. The following paragraphs provide a summary of the principal forms of billing arrangements and how revenue is recognized for each.
Capitation
Capitation contracts have a single performance obligation that is a stand ready obligation to perform specified healthcare services to the population of enrolled members and constitutes a series for the provision of managed healthcare services for the term of the contract, which is deemed to be one month since the mix of patient-customers can and do change month over
month. The transaction price for capitation contracts is variable as it primarily includes PMPM fees associated with unspecified membership that fluctuates throughout the term of the contract. Further, we adjust the transaction price for capitation deductions based on historical experience. Revenue is recognized in the month services are rendered on the basis of the transaction price established at that time. If subsequent information resolves uncertainties related to the transaction price, adjustments will be recognized in the period they are resolved. When payment has been received but services have not yet been rendered, the payment is recognized as a contract liability.
Fee For Service
FFS revenue consists of fees for medical services actually provided to patients. These medical services are distinct since the patient can benefit from the medical services on their own. Each service constitutes a single performance obligation for which the patient accepts and receives the benefit of the medical services as they are performed.
The transaction price from FFS arrangements is variable in nature because fees are based on patient encounters, credits due to patients, and reimbursement of provider costs, all of which can vary from period to period. The Company estimates the transaction price using the most likely methodology and amounts are only included in the net transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur once any uncertainty is resolved. As a practical expedient, the Company adopted a portfolio approach to determine the transaction price for the medical services provided under FFS arrangements. Under this approach, the Company bifurcated the types of services provided and grouped health plans with similar fees and negotiated payment rates.
At these levels, portfolios share the characteristics conducive to ensuring that the results do not materially differ from the standard applied to individual patient contracts related to each medical service provided.
Revenue is recorded on the date the services are rendered based on the information known at the time of entering of such information into our billing systems as well as an estimate of the revenue associated with medical services. When the performance obligation is not satisfied, the billing is recognized as a contract liability.
Dispensary
Dispensed prescriptions that are filled and delivered to the patient are considered a distinct performance obligation. The transaction price for the prescriptions is based on fee schedules set by PBMs and other third-party payors. The fee schedule is often subject to DIR fees, which are based primarily on pre-established metrics. DIR fees may be assessed in periods after payments are received against future payments. The Company estimates DIR fees to arrive at the transaction price for prescriptions. Revenue is recognized based on the transaction at the time the patient takes possession of the oral drug.
Clinical Research
Clinical research contracts represent a single, integrated set of research activities and thus are a single performance obligation. The performance obligation is satisfied over time as the output is captured in data and documentation that is available for the customer to consume over the course of arrangement and furthers progress of the clinical trial. The Company has elected to recognize revenue for clinical trials using the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient. The customer is invoiced periodically based on the progress of the trial such that each invoice captures the revenue earned to date based on the state of the trial as established under contract with the customer.
Direct Costs of Sales
Direct cost of sales primarily consists of wages paid to clinical personnel and other health professionals, oral and IV drug costs, and other medical supplies used to provide patient care. Costs for clinical personnel wages are expensed as incurred and costs for inventory and medical supplies are expensed when used, generally by applying the specific identification method.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but is required to be evaluated for impairment at the same time every year. The Company performs annual testing of impairment for goodwill in the third quarter of each year. When impairment indicators are identified, the Company compares the reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying amount, including goodwill. An impairment loss is recognized as the difference, if any, between the reporting unit’s carrying amount and its fair value to the extent the difference does not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Finite-lived intangible assets are stated at acquisition-date fair value. Intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method. Finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment in the third quarter of each year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. When circumstances indicate
that recoverability may be impaired, the Company assesses its ability to recover the carrying value of the asset group from the expected future pre-tax cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) of the related operations. If these cash flows are less than the carrying value of such asset, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between estimated fair value and carrying value. Fair value is determined based on appropriate valuation techniques.