Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statement Regarding Forward Looking Disclosure
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes, which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” may contain predictive or “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of current or historical fact contained in this annual report, including statements that express our intentions, plans, objectives, beliefs, expectations, strategies, predictions or any other statements relating to our future activities or other future events, or conditions are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “predict,” “project,” “will,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions, as they relate to us, are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations, estimates and projections made by management about our business, our industry and other conditions affecting our financial condition, results of operations or business prospects. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes
and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements due to numerous risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause such outcomes and results to differ include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties arising from:
● our reliance on individual purchase orders, rather than long-term contracts, to generate revenue;
● our ability to balance the composition of our revenues and effectively control operating expenses;
● external factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, high inflation and increasing interest rates, that may be outside of our control;
● the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and government-imposed lockdowns in response thereto;
● the availability of appropriate financing facilities impacting our operations, financial condition and/or liquidity;
● our ability to receive contract awards through competitive bidding processes;
● our ability to maintain standards to enable us to manufacture products to exacting specifications;
● our ability to enter new markets for our services;
● our reliance on a small number of customers for a significant percentage of our business;
● competitive pressures in the markets we serve;
● changes in the availability or cost of raw materials and energy for our production facilities;
● restrictions in our ability to operate our business due to our outstanding indebtedness;
● government regulations and requirements;
● pricing and business development difficulties;
● changes in government spending on national defense;
● our ability to make acquisitions and successfully integrate those acquisitions with our business;
● general industry and market conditions and growth rates;
● unexpected costs, charges or expenses resulting from the recently completed acquisition of Stadco; and
● those risks discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as those described in any other filings which we make with the SEC.
Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances that may arise after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, except as required by applicable law. Investors should evaluate any statements made by us in light of these important factors.
Overview
Through our two wholly-owned subsidiaries, Ranor and Stadco (acquired on August 25, 2021), each of which is a reportable segment, we offer a full range of services required to transform raw materials into precision finished products. Our manufacturing capabilities
include fabrication operations (cutting, press and roll forming, assembly, welding, heat treating, blasting, and painting) and machining operations including CNC (computer numerical controlled) horizontal and vertical milling centers. We also provide support services to our manufacturing capabilities: manufacturing engineering (planning, fixture and tooling development, manufacturing), quality control (inspection and testing), materials procurement, production control (scheduling, project management and expediting) and final assembly.
All manufacturing is done in accordance with our written quality assurance program, which meets specific national and international codes, standards, and specifications. The standards used are specific to the customers’ needs, and our manufacturing operations are conducted in accordance with these standards.
Because our revenues are derived from the sale of goods manufactured pursuant to contracts, and we do not sell from inventory, it is necessary for us to constantly seek new contracts. There may be a time lag between our completion of one contract and commencement of work on another contract. During such periods, we may continue to incur overhead expense but with lower revenue resulting in lower operating margins. Furthermore, changes in either the scope of an existing contract or related delivery schedules may impact the revenue we receive under the contract and the allocation of manpower. Although we provide manufacturing services for large governmental programs, we usually do not work directly for the government or its agencies. Rather, we perform our services for large governmental contractors. Our business is dependent in part on the continuation of governmental programs that require our services and products.
Our contracts are generated both through negotiation with the customer and from bids made pursuant to a request for proposal. Our ability to receive contract awards is dependent upon the contracting party’s perception of such factors as our ability to perform on time, our history of performance, including quality, our financial condition and our ability to price our services competitively. Although some of our contracts contemplate the manufacture of one or a limited number of units, we continue to seek more long-term projects with predictable cost structures.
All the Company’s operations, assets, and customers are located in the U.S.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
At the beginning of calendar year 2020, the novel strain of coronavirus known as COVID-19 spread worldwide, including to U.S jurisdictions where the Company does business, and became a global pandemic. The United States Government declared a national emergency and various state governments imposed “lockdown” and “shelter-in-place” orders intended to reduce the spread of COVID-19 that have severely restricted business, social activities and travel. The Governors of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and state of California, in which jurisdiction the Company’s manufacturing and executive offices are located, issued similar emergency orders in March 2020. As a designated “COVID-19 Essential Service” we continued our operations throughout the pendency of the orders.
Over the course of fiscal year 2021, fiscal 2022, and up to the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the Company’s customers, suppliers and labor force. With respect to customers, management observed impacts from certain of its customers halting operations entirely for a short period of time, shifting to remote work, and suspending on-site inspections - which delays customer acceptance of completed work, the making of milestone payments to us, and delivery of finished goods. With respect to suppliers, the Company had seen lead-times for delivery of certain critical supplies extended. Labor impacts have included a few issues related to employee attendance such as voluntary avoidance of work out of fear of contracting the coronavirus, certain employees becoming ill, and others self-quarantining as a result of potential exposure to other individuals with symptoms of COVID-19. Although regular business activities have returned to normal, the Company believes that the potential exists for other customer shutdowns or slowdowns to occur in the future. Notwithstanding all the above, the impact on the Company’s production levels has been minor. However, if more employees were to become ill in the future, the Company could again experience more disruption.
Nevertheless, our production facilities continue to operate much as they had prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, other than the implementation of enhanced safety measures intended to prevent the spread of the virus. The remote working arrangements and travel restrictions imposed by applicable governmental authorities have not impaired our ability to maintain operations. Our results of operations and cash flows during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 were not materially affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, given the speed and frequency of continuously evolving developments with respect to this pandemic, the extent to which COVID-19 may adversely impact our business depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and unpredictable, including
new information concerning the severity of the outbreak and the effectiveness of actions globally to contain or mitigate its effects, we cannot reasonably estimate the magnitude of future impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)
Considering the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company determined it was necessary to obtain additional funds. In this connection, as previously disclosed, on May 8, 2020, the Company, through Ranor, issued a promissory note payable to Berkshire Bank, or the PPP Note, evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $1,317,100 made to Ranor by Berkshire Bank under the PPP. The PPP was established under the federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or SBA. The loan to Ranor was made through Berkshire Bank. The PPP Note provided for an interest rate of 1.00% per year with maturity two years after the issuance date. Principal and accrued interest were payable monthly in equal installments commencing on the date that is six months after the date funds are first disbursed on the loan and continuing through the maturity date, unless the PPP Note was forgiven. To be available for loan forgiveness, the PPP Note may only be used for payroll costs, costs related to certain group health care benefits and insurance premiums, rent payments, utility payments, mortgage interest payments and interest payments on any other debt obligation that were incurred before February 15, 2020. The Company applied for loan forgiveness within the ten-month period on March 26, 2021.
On May 12, 2021, as authorized by Section 1106 of the CARES Act, the SBA remitted to Berkshire Bank, the lender of record for the PPP loan, a payment of principal and interest in the amounts of $1,317,000 and $13,207, respectively, for forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan. The funds credited to the PPP loan pay this loan off in full.
Strategy
We aim to establish our expertise in program and project management and develop and expand a repeatable customer business model in all of our markets. We concentrate our sales and marketing activities on customers under two main industry groups: defense and precision industrial. Our strategy is to leverage our core competence as a manufacturer of high-precision, large-scale metal fabrications and machined components to optimize profitability of our current business and expand with key customers in markets that have shown increasing demand.
Defense
Our Ranor subsidiary performs precision fabrication and machining for the defense and aerospace industries, delivering defense components meeting our customers’ stringent design specifications, as well as quality and safety manufacturing standards specifically for defense component fabrication and machining. Ranor has in recent years delivered critical components in support of, among other projects, the U.S. Navy’s Virginia-class fast attack submarine program and Columbia-class ballistic missile submarine program. In addition, the team at Ranor has successfully developed new, effective approaches to fabrication that continue to be utilized at our facility and at our customer’s own defense component manufacturing facilities. We have endeavored to increase our business development efforts with large prime defense contractors. Based upon these efforts, we believe there are opportunities to secure additional business with existing and new defense contractors who are actively looking to increase outsourced content on certain defense programs over the next several years, especially in connection with the submarine programs. We believe that the military quality certifications Ranor maintains and its ability to offer fabrication and manufacturing services at a single facility position it as an attractive outsourcing partner for prime contractors looking to increase outsourced production. Sales to defense market customers have generated the largest proportion of our revenues for the last two fiscal years, and we expect sales to defense customers to be our strongest market during fiscal 2023 as well.
Our Stadco subsidiary manufactures large flight-critical components on several high-profile commercial and military aircraft programs, including military helicopters. It has been a critical supplier to a blue-chip customer base that includes some of the largest OEMs and prime contractors in the defense and aerospace industries. Stadco also provides tooling, customized molds, fixtures, jigs and dies used in the production of aircraft components and has one of the largest electron beam welding machines set up in the United States, allowing it to weld thick pieces of titanium and other metals.
Precision Industrial
The customers within this market are impacted primarily by general economic conditions which may include changes in consumer consumption or demand for commercial construction for infrastructure. We serve a number of different customers in our precision industrial group. For example, we build components for customers in the power generation markets. We also manufacture large-scale medical device components for a customer in this group who installs their proprietary systems at certain medical institutions.
The power generation businesses among our energy market customers are impacted by pricing and demand for various forms of energy (e.g., coal, natural gas, oil, and nuclear). Our nuclear customers are typically dependent upon the need for new construction, maintenance, and overhaul and repair by nuclear energy providers. Also, changes in regulation may impact demand and supply. As such, we cannot assure that we will be able to develop any significant business from the nuclear industry. However, because of our manufacturing capabilities required to produce components for new nuclear power plants and our historic relationships with suppliers in the nuclear power industry, we believe that we are positioned to benefit from any increased demand in the nuclear sector.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, recovery of long-lived assets, income taxes. These estimates and assumptions require management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. Actual results may differ under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
We recognize revenue over time based on the transfer of control of the promised goods or services to the customer, or at a point in time. This transfer will occur over time when the Company’s performance does not create an asset that has an alternative use to the Company, and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Otherwise, control to the promised goods or services transfers to customers at a point in time.
The majority of the Company’s contracts have a single performance obligation and provide title to, or grant a security interest in, work-in-process to the customer. In addition, these contracts contain enforceable rights to payment, allowing the Company to recover both its cost and a reasonable margin on performance completed to date. The combination of these factors indicates that the customer controls the asset (and revenue is recognized) as the asset is created or enhanced. The Company measures progress for performance obligations satisfied over time using input methods (e.g., costs incurred, resources consumed, labor hours expended, time elapsed).
Our evaluation of whether revenue should be recognized over time requires significant judgment about whether the asset has an alternative use and whether the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. When any one of these factors is not present, the Company will recognize revenue at the point in time when control over the promised good or service transfers to the customer, i.e., when the customer has accepted the asset and taken physical possession of the product and has legal title, and the Company has a right to payment.
When estimating contract costs, the Company takes into consideration a number of assumptions and estimates regarding risks related to technical requirements and scheduling. Management performs periodic reviews of the contracts to evaluate the underlying risks. Profit margin on any given project could increase if the Company is able to mitigate and retire such risks. Conversely, if the Company is not able to properly manage these risks, cost estimates may increase, resulting in a lower profit margin, or potentially, contract losses.
The cost estimation process requires significant judgment and is based upon the professional knowledge and experience of the Company’s engineers, program managers, and financial professionals. Factors considered in estimating the work to be completed and ultimate contract recovery include the availability, productivity, and cost of labor, the nature and complexity of the work to be performed, the effect of change orders, the availability of materials, the effect of any delays in performance, the availability and timing of funding from the customer, and the recoverability of any claims included in the estimates to complete. Costs allocable to undelivered units are
reported as work in process, a component of inventory, in the consolidated balance sheet. Pre-contract fulfillment costs requiring capitalization are not material.
Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Costs incurred on uncompleted contracts consist of labor, overhead, and materials. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Our provision for losses at March 31, 2022 was $0.3 million, with approximately 85% of that total related to customer projects at our Stadco reportable segment, and the other 15% at our Ranor reportable segment. We assumed approximately $0.4 million in loss provisions at the August 25, 2021 acquisition date, and have since seen a 25% reduction in the provision.
Income Taxes
We provide for federal and state income taxes currently payable, as well as those deferred because of temporary differences between reporting income and expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recoverable. The effect of the change in the tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period of the change. A valuation allowance is established, when necessary, to reduce deferred income taxes to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In assessing the recoverability of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. If we determine that it is more likely than not that certain future tax benefits may not be realized, a valuation allowance will be recorded against deferred tax assets that are unlikely to be realized. Realization of the remaining deferred tax assets will depend on the generation of sufficient taxable income in the appropriate jurisdiction, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities, tax planning strategies and other factors prior to the expiration date of the carryforwards. A change in the estimates used to make this determination could require a reduction in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if they become realizable.
As of March 31, 2022, our federal net operating loss carryforward was approximately $17.1 million. U.S. tax laws limit the time during which these carryforwards may be applied against future taxes.
The Company has recorded a net deferred tax asset of $2.1 million, which includes the benefit of $2.0 million in loss carryforwards. Realization is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income prior to the expiration of the loss carryforwards. Although the realization is not assured, management believes it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be reduced in the near term if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced.
Accounting Pronouncements
New Accounting Standards
See Note 17, Accounting Standards Update, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, for a discussion of recently adopted new accounting guidance and new accounting guidance not yet adopted.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations are affected by a number of external factors including the availability of raw materials, commodity prices (particularly steel), macroeconomic factors, including the availability of capital that may be needed by our customers, and political, regulatory and legal conditions in the United States and in foreign markets. Generally, our product mix is made up of short-term contracts with a production timeline of twelve months, more or less. However, contracts for larger complex components can take up to thirty-six months to complete. Units manufactured under the majority of our customer contracts have historically been delivered on time and with a positive gross margin, with some exceptions. Our results of operations are also affected by our success in booking new contracts, the timing of revenue recognition, delays in customer acceptances of our products, delays in deliveries of ordered products and our rate of progress fulfilling obligations under our contracts. A delay in deliveries or cancellations of orders could have an unfavorable impact
on liquidity, cause us to have inventories in excess of our short-term needs, and delay our ability to recognize, or prevent us from recognizing, revenue on contracts in our order backlog.
We evaluate the performance of our segments based upon, among other things, segment net sales and operating profit. Segment operating profit excludes general corporate costs, which include executive and director compensation, stock-based compensation, certain pension and other retirement benefit costs, and other corporate facilities and administrative expenses not allocated to the segments. Also excluded are items that we consider not representative of ongoing operations, such as the unallocated PPP loan forgiveness.
Key Performance Indicators
While we prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, we also utilize and present certain financial measures that are not based on or included in U.S. GAAP. We refer to these as non-GAAP financial measures. Please see the section titled “EBITDA Non-GAAP financial measure” below for further discussion of these financial measures, including the reasons why we use such financial measures and reconciliations of such financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures.
Percentages in the following tables and throughout this “Results of Operations” section may reflect rounding adjustments.
Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table presents net sales, gross profit and gross margin, consolidated and by reportable segment:
nm - not meaningful
Net Sales
Consolidated - Net sales were $22.3 million for fiscal 2022, or 43% higher when compared to consolidated net sales of $15.6 million for fiscal 2021. Net sales in defense markets increased by $8.1 million when compared to fiscal 2021, due primarily to the new Stadco business acquisition, which made up $7.7 million of the increase.
Ranor - Net sales were $14.6 million for fiscal 2022, or 7% lower when compared to net sales in fiscal 2021. Net sales to industrial markets decreased by $1.5 million when compared with fiscal 2021 due to lower project activity in the precision industrial sector as the Company replenishes backlog following a period of above normal revenue. We have repeat business in this sector, but the order flow can be uneven and difficult to forecast. Our defense backlog for Ranor remains strong as new orders for components related to a variety of programs continue to flow down from our existing customer base of prime defense contractors. Ranor had remaining performance obligations, or backlog, of $24.0 million that is expected to be delivered over the next 36 months.
Stadco - Net sales were $7.8 million for fiscal 2022, with 99% of that total revenue for customers in the defense markets. Our defense backlog for Stadco is strong as new orders for components related to a variety of programs, including components for the Sikorsky
heavy lift helicopters. Stadco had remaining performance obligations, or backlog, of $23.3 million that is expected to be delivered over the next 36 months.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Consolidated - Cost of sales consists primarily of raw materials, parts, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs. Our cost of sales for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 were $6.8 million higher when compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase in cost of sales and lower gross margin was primarily the result of an unfavorable production mix and under-absorbed factory overhead. Gross profit was $3.4 million for fiscal year 2022, compared to $3.5 million in fiscal year 2021. Gross margin was 15.2% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 and 22.1% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
Ranor - The gross margin improved year over year. Through December 31, 2021, Ranor experienced a period of slowly rising labor costs and under absorbed overhead since the first month of the fiscal year which was amplified by an unfavorable production mix as a result of a lower number of available production hours during the third quarter of fiscal 2022. However, this set of unfavorable conditions was more than offset by a productive fourth quarter of accelerating project progress that resulted in better overhead absorption rates on higher revenue recognized over-time. We expect this trend to continue in fiscal 2023.
Stadco - The gross margin turned negative to 1.0% at the end of the fiscal year as new project startups and associated production activities in the fourth quarter resulted in unfavorable throughput and an increase in under-absorbed overhead. We expect improvements in gross margin for fiscal 2023 as the new projects make progress to completion and the Stadco business is fully integrated.
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
nm - not meaningful
Consolidated - Total selling, general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, increased by $2.1 million, or 74% as the Company completed its acquisition of Stadco and business travel returned to pre-pandemic levels.
Ranor - Advisory fees, travel expenses and other office costs increased by a total of $0.6 million due to a return to pre-pandemic travel and business activity.
Stadco - The increase was primarily due to the inclusion of Stadco operations since August 25, 2021.
Corporate and unallocated - Outside advisory fees increased by $0.4 million year over year. While we expect certain of these costs to recur as a normal part of our business, a portion of the outside advisory fees related to the acquisition should not recur in fiscal 2023, absent an additional acquisition.
Operating (loss) income
nm - not meaningful
Consolidated - As a result of the foregoing, the Stadco integration and reduced profitability at Ranor, we reported an operating loss of $1.6 million at the Company compared to operating income of $0.6 million in fiscal 2021.
Ranor - Operating income was $0.6 million lower compared to fiscal 2021, due primarily to higher SG&A costs for outside advisory fees, travel expenses and other office costs in fiscal 2022.
Stadco - New project startups and related production activities resulted in unfavorable throughput, higher unabsorbed overhead and operating losses of $1.1 million. We expect better throughput and overhead absorption in fiscal 2023.
Corporate and unallocated - Corporate expenses were higher in fiscal 2022, primarily from outside advisory fees ($0.7 million) in connection with the Stadco acquisition.
Other (Expense) Income, net
The following table presents other (expense) income for the fiscal years ended March 31:
nm - not meaningful
Interest expense was higher for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. The increase in interest expense was due primarily to borrowings under the new Stadco Term Loan (as defined below) and higher amounts borrowed under the revolver loan. On March 31, 2022, there was $1.3 million outstanding under the revolver loan. On March 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the revolver loan. We expect to see higher interest expense in fiscal 2023 due to the higher levels of debt incurred since the Stadco acquisition.
Amortization of debt issue costs were slightly lower for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. New amortization periods commenced in fiscal 2022 for costs incurred for the extended Ranor loan, and for the new Stadco loan. As a result, we expect to see higher amortization expense in fiscal 2023.
Other expense, net, in the table above, includes an expense accrual for contingent consideration of $63,436 in connection with the Stadco acquisition. This expense was offset in part by other income of $22,011 from the WCMC dissolution, and a return of a retainer fee for $10,000 previously paid for outside advisory fees in connection with a class action litigation settlement in fiscal 2021.
PPP Loan Forgiveness
On May 12, 2021, as authorized by Section 1106 of the CARES Act, the SBA remitted to Berkshire Bank, the lender of record, a payment of principal in the amount of $1,317,100, for forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan. The funds credited to the PPP loan paid this loan off in full.
Income Taxes
For fiscal year 2022 the Company recorded a tax benefit of $192,355, a result of lower taxable income. In fiscal 2021, the Company recorded tax expense of $104,880.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences and carryforwards are expected to be recovered or settled. The valuation allowance on deferred tax assets at March 31, 2022 was approximately $2.0 million. We believe that it is more likely than not that the benefit from certain state NOL carryforwards and other deferred tax assets will not be realized. In recognition of this risk, we continue to provide a valuation allowance on these items. In the event future taxable income is below management’s estimates or is generated in tax jurisdictions different than
projected, the Company could be required to increase the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. This would result in an increase in the Company’s effective tax rate.
Net (Loss) Income
As a result of the foregoing, for fiscal 2022, we recorded net loss of $349,834, or $0.01 per share basic and fully diluted, compared with net income of $320,631, or $0.01 per share basic and fully diluted in fiscal 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 25, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Stadco, closed on a private placement financing and closed on a new loan with Berkshire Bank. In connection with the acquisition, we raised $3.5 million of cash by selling 3,202,727 shares of common stock at $1.10 per share via a private placement financing, sourced $4.0 million in new debt with Berkshire bank, drew down $0.1 million under our existing revolver loan and sourced $1.8 million from available cash. We issued 1.5 million shares of our common stock and warrants to satisfy Stadco’s indebtedness to its shareholders and certain other debt holders and acquired all outstanding shares of Stadco.
In addition, we purchased Stadco’s loan from Sunflower Bank, for a total amount of $7.9 million in cash. Concurrent with the closing of the Stadco acquisition, we entered into an amended and restated loan agreement with Berkshire Bank. Under the amended facility, our term loan in the original principal amount of $2.85 million, of which $2.4 million remains outstanding, will remain, and we will have access to a revolving line of credit of up to $5.0 million, and borrowed $4.0 million under a new term loan with Berkshire bank.
There was a balloon payment of approximately $2.3 million due on June 16, 2022, under the Ranor Term Loan (as defined below) with Berkshire Bank. On June 16, 2022, Ranor and certain affiliates of the Company entered into a Third Amendment to the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement and Third Amendment to Promissory Note to further extend the maturity date of the Ranor Term Loan to September 16, 2022. Until then, the Company will continue to pay down principal and make interest payments in the ordinary course. We expect to commence negotiations of a further amended and restated loan agreement to refinance that debt with Berkshire Bank prior to the new maturity date.
We intend to refinance that Ranor Term Loan on terms similar to the current loan and using the proceeds to pay down certain existing debt obligations to lower our debt service requirements. Under this plan, we expect to reduce the risk of potential noncompliance with our debt covenants. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in negotiating for these terms with Berkshire Bank or any other lender.
In addition to the cash commitments required under our financing arrangements with Berkshire Bank, we also anticipate that we will spend approximately $1.3 million in new factory machinery and equipment during fiscal 2023.
At March 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1.1 million and working capital of $2.8 million, a decrease when compared to March 31, 2021. We believe our available cash, plus cash expected to be provided by operations, Employee Retention Credit cash refunds, and borrowing capacity available under the revolver loan will be sufficient to fund our operations, expected capital expenditures, and principal and interest payments under our lease and debt obligations through the next 12 months from the issuance date of our financial statements. Our revolver loan matures in December 2022 and will not be available to provide liquidity unless it is renewed. The Company intends to renew the revolver loan with Berkshire Bank or another lender. There was $1.3 million outstanding under the revolver loan at March 31, 2022. Unused borrowing capacity at March 31, 2022 was approximately $2.8 million.
In order for us to continue operations beyond the next twelve months and be able to discharge our liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business, we must secure long-term financing on terms consistent with our near-term business plans. In addition, we must change the composition of our revenues at Stadco to focus on recurring profitable projects which efficiently use our manufacturing capacity and reduce our operating expenses to be in line with current business conditions in order to increase profit margins and decrease the amount of cash used in operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If successful in changing the composition of projects and reducing costs, we expect that fiscal 2023 operating results will reflect positive cash flows. We plan to closely monitor our expenses and, if required, will reduce operating costs and capital spending to enhance liquidity.
The table below presents selected liquidity and capital measures at the fiscal years ended:
The next table summarizes changes in cash by primary component in the cash flows statements for the fiscal years ended:
Operating activities
Apart from our loan facilities, our primary sources of cash are from accounts receivable collections. Our customers make advance payments and progress payments under the terms of each manufacturing contract. Our cash flows can fluctuate significantly from period to period as we mark progress with customer projects and the composition of our receivables collections mix changes between advance payments and customer payments made after shipment of finished goods.
Cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 was approximately $258,000, as operating cash inflows exceeded outflows in the fourth quarter as work on new projects commenced and customer cash collections increased. Cash outlays for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 includes a payment of $0.5 million to plaintiffs for a court approved final class action settlement, and $0.7 million of cash used to pay past due rent on the Stadco property and buildings.
Overall, fiscal 2022 was marked by favorable project performance progress and delivery schedules which led to timely customer payments. After a slower third quarter, fourth quarter project activity at Ranor returned to normal levels as customers made advance payments and progress payments for projects started in December 2021.
Cash provided by operations for fiscal 2021 was $0.6 million. Favorable timing with customer advance payments and progress payments resulted in higher amounts of cash generated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
Investing activities
We purchased Stadco’s outstanding debt from Sunflower Bank, for $7.8 million, net of cash acquired. We also invested approximately $0.9 million in new factory machinery and equipment in fiscal 2022, and we estimate that we will spend approximately $1.3 million for new machinery and equipment in fiscal 2023.
We invested approximately $0.6 million in new factory machinery and equipment in fiscal 2021.
Financing activities
We sourced $3.5 million of cash by selling 3,202,727 shares of common stock at $1.10 per share in a private placement financing and $4.0 million in new debt with Berkshire bank. In addition, we drew down $4.6 million under the revolver loan used to fund the acquisition and operating activities since August 25, 2021 and repaid $3.3 million through the end of March 31, 2022.
We used $0.5 million of cash to make periodic lease payments and pay off certain lease and debt obligations, and $0.9 million of cash to pay private placement closing costs, debt issue costs, and repay debt principal.
All of the above activity resulted in a net decrease in cash of $1.1 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 compared with a net increase in cash of $1.2 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we made principal payments of $0.1 million in connection with our term debt and finance lease obligations. On May 8, 2020, we borrowed $1.3 million under the CARES Act payroll protection program. On April 3, 2020 we borrowed $1.0 million under our Revolver loan, then paid down $1.0 million in principal on June 30, 2020.
Berkshire Bank Loans
On August 25, 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated loan agreement with Berkshire Bank, or the “Loan Agreement”. Under the Loan Agreement, Berkshire Bank continues as lender of the original term loan to Ranor in the principal amount of $2.85 million, or the “Ranor Term Loan” and the revolving line of credit, or the “Revolver Loan”. In addition, Berkshire Bank provided to Stadco a term loan in the original amount of $4.0 million, or the “Stadco Term Loan”. The proceeds of the original Ranor Term Loan of $2.85 million were previously used to refinance existing mortgage debt of Ranor. The proceeds of the Revolver Loan are used for working capital and general corporate purposes of the Company. The proceeds of the Stadco Term Loan were to be used to support the acquisition of Stadco and refinance existing indebtedness of Stadco.
Payments for the original Ranor Term Loan began on January 20, 2017 and are made in 60 monthly installments of $19,260 each, inclusive of interest at a fixed rate of 5.21% per annum, with all outstanding principal and accrued interest due and payable on the maturity date. As amended, the Ranor Term Loan matured on June 16, 2022, with a balloon payment of approximately $2.3 million due under the terms of the Loan Agreement with Berkshire Bank.
On June 16, 2022, Ranor and certain affiliates of the Company entered into a Third Amendment to Amended and Restated Loan Agreement and Third Amendment to Promissory Note to further extend the maturity date of the Ranor Term Loan to September 16, 2022. We expect to commence negotiations of a further amended and restated loan agreement to refinance that debt with Berkshire Bank prior to the new maturity date.
Berkshire Bank made available to Ranor a revolving line of credit with, following certain modifications, a maximum principal amount available of $5.0 million. The Company made a total of $4.6 million in drawdowns under the Revolver Loan during fiscal 2022 and repaid $3.3 million of that principal during the same fiscal year period. There was $1.3 million outstanding under the Revolver Loan at March 31, 2022. Interest-only payments on advances made under the Revolver Loan during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 totaled $16,368 at a weighted average interest rate of 2.75%. Unused borrowing capacity at March 31, 2022 was approximately $2.8 million.
On August 25, 2021, Stadco borrowed $4,000,000 from Berkshire Bank under the Stadco Term Loan. Interest on the Stadco Term Loan is due on unpaid balances beginning on August 25, 2021 at a fixed rate per annum equal to the 7 year Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston Classic Advance Rate plus 2.25%. Since September 25, 2021, and on the 25th day of each month thereafter, Stadco has made and will make monthly payments of principal and interest in the amount of $54,390 each, with all outstanding principal and accrued interest due and payable on August 25, 2028.
Small Business Administration Loan
On May 8, 2020, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary Ranor, Inc., issued a promissory note evidencing an unsecured PPP loan in the amount of $1,317,100 made to Ranor under the CARES Act. This PPP loan was made through Berkshire Bank.
Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP, with such forgiveness to be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs, certain group health care benefits and insurance premiums, and any payments of mortgage interest, rent, and utilities.
The Company applied for loan forgiveness with the SBA under the Paycheck Protection Program on March 26, 2021. On May 12, 2021, as authorized by Section 1106 of the CARES Act, the SBA remitted to Berkshire Bank, the lender of record, a payment of principal and interest in the amount of $1,317,100 and $13,207, respectively, for forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan. The funds credited to the PPP loan paid this loan off in full. Loan forgiveness is recorded as a gain under other income and expense in the consolidated statement of operations. The Company applied for loan forgiveness with the SBA under the Paycheck Protection Program on March 26, 2021.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The following contractual obligations associated with our normal business activities are expected to result in cash payments in future periods, and include the following material items at March 31, 2022:
● We enter into various commitments with suppliers for the purchase of raw materials and work supplies. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these purchase obligations are not reflected in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Our outstanding unconditional contractual commitments, including for the purchase of raw materials and supplies goods, totaled $5.8 million, all of it due to be paid in fiscal 2023. These purchase commitments are in the normal course of business.
● Our long-term debt obligations, including fixed and variable-rate debt, totaled $7.4 million, with $4.2 million due in fiscal 2023, $0.5 million due in 2024 and $0.6 million due in 2025.
● Our operating lease obligation of $7.6 million is for land and buildings at our Stadco operation through 2030; $0.8 million is due in fiscal 2023, $0.9 million due in 2024 and $0.9 million due in 2025.
We believe our available cash, plus cash expected to be provided by operations and borrowing capacity available under the revolver loan (until December 2022 when the Company expects to refinance) and Employee Retention Credit cash refunds will be sufficient to fund our operations, expected capital expenditures, and principal and interest payments under our lease and debt obligations through the next 12 months from the issuance date of our financial statements.
EBITDA Non-GAAP Financial Measure
To complement our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income and consolidated statements of cash flows, we use EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure. Net (loss) income is the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP that is most directly comparable to EBITDA. We believe EBITDA provides our board of directors, management and investors with a helpful measure for comparing our operating performance with the performance of other companies that have different financing and capital structures or tax rates. We also believe that EBITDA is a measure frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in our industry, and is a measure contained in our debt covenants. However, while we consider EBITDA to be an important measure of operating performance, EBITDA and other non-GAAP financial measures have limitations, and investors should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP.
We define EBITDA as net income plus interest, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Net loss was $0.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, as compared to net income of $0.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, was $1.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, as compared to $1.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure reported in our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended:
(1) Includes amortization of debt issue costs.