Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following should be read in conjunction with the sections of this annual report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements,” “Selected Financial Data,” “Business” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Legal Proceedings” elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview and Outlook
The homebuilding industry continues to benefit from strong demographics, as well as a renewed emphasis on home ownership, one of many sentiment shifts the U.S. has experienced, at least in part, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that the strong housing fundamentals that helped drive a record-breaking 2021 remain at the outset of 2022, and we expect to retain pricing power notwithstanding the likely implementation of tighter monetary policy and higher interest rates resulting from the current inflationary environment. We anticipate that potential homeowners will continue to seek homeownership in spite of rising home prices, as mortgage rates remain low by historical standards (as well as below current inflationary levels) and increasing rental costs do not offer an attractive alternative. Further, available housing supply remains limited, which provides further support to the overall housing backdrop.
Despite our favorable outlook, we continue to monitor a large number of risks to our business, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this annual repot on Form 10-K. For example, production and supply chain disruptions are impacting our cycle times and, in some cases, extending the timing of our anticipated deliveries. Additionally, the emergence of a growing number of COVID-19 variants threatens further disruptions to our operations. Finally, while we believe current trends will allow us to absorb an increase in mortgage rates without materially impacting the demand for our homes, the rate and magnitude of such increases, in concert with underlying economic conditions, may materially and negatively impact such homebuyer demand.
Highlights of the year include an increase in homebuilding gross margin percentage to 24.9% and a reduction in selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of home sales revenue to 9.6%. Our monthly absorption rate for the year was 4.8, a record high for any year since our inception, and a further improvement to the record of 4.0 that we set in the prior year. These factors, along with an increase in average sales price of homes delivered to $639,000, allowed us to achieve net income of $469.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, our dollar value of backlog increased 17%, to $2.2 billion, compared to the prior year. In addition, we ended 2021 with total liquidity of $1.3 billion, including cash and cash equivalents of $681.5 million and $601.1 million of availability under our Credit Facility.
Our results for the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be indicative of trends that will persist, as uncertainty caused by COVID-19 and government responses to the pandemic have impacted, and will continue to impact, our business and operations.
- 40 -
Consolidated Financial Data (in thousands, except share and per share amounts):
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net New Home Orders, Average Selling Communities and Monthly Absorption Rates by Segment
Net new home orders for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 1% to 6,382, compared to 6,335 for the prior year. The consistent number of net new home orders was due primarily to a 20% increase in monthly absorption rate offset by a 16% decrease in average selling communities. Overall, the markets in which we operate demonstrated very strong demand throughout 2021, aided primarily by historically low mortgage interest rates, in addition to a high level of government stimulus and an evolving home buyer sentiment, both resulting, at least in part, from the COVID-19 pandemic. The combination of these three catalysts helped sustain very strong demand in 2021, similar to the demand environment we experienced during the second half of 2020.
- 41 -
Our West segment reported a 4% decrease in net new home orders due to a 21% decrease in average selling communities, offset by a 21% increase in monthly absorption rates. As noted above, the demand environment during the current year was exceptionally strong, which was consistent across all of our markets in our West segment. The sustained high absorption rates we experienced in the current year contributed to a decline in average selling communities, as our rate of community close outs accelerated beyond our current capacity to open new ones. Our Central segment reported a 15% increase in net new home orders due to a 33% increase in monthly absorption rates, offset by an 14% decrease in average selling communities. We experienced an increase in absorption rates in each of our Texas markets, as Texas continues to benefit from, among other things, in-migration trends. In addition, our Colorado market continues to experience above-average demand compared to our historical levels. Our East segment reported a 3% increase in net new home orders due to a 14% increase in average selling communities, offset by a 9% decrease in monthly absorption rates. While the order pace decreased in our East segment, we continue to experience a healthy level of demand, as evidenced by a monthly absorption rate of 4.0. The increase in average selling communities in our East segment is largely the result of our accelerated operations in North Carolina, as net new home orders for our Carolinas division increased to 149 during the current-year period as compared to 8 during the prior-year period.
Backlog Units, Backlog Dollar Value and Average Sales Price by Segment (dollars in thousands)
Backlog units reflect the number of homes, net of actual cancellations experienced during the period, for which we have entered into a sales contract with a homebuyer but for which we have not yet delivered the home. Homes in backlog are generally delivered within seven to ten months from the time the sales contract is entered into, although we may experience cancellations of sales contracts prior to delivery. Our cancellation rate of homebuyers who contracted to buy a home but did not close escrow (as a percentage of overall orders) was 8% and 13% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The dollar value of backlog was approximately $2.2 billion as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $325.5 million, or 17%, compared to $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020. This increase was due to an increase in backlog units of 194, or 7%, to 3,158 as of December 31, 2021, compared to 2,964 as of December 31, 2020. The strong demand environment in 2021 that resulted in an increase to backlog units similarly allowed us to raise prices, which resulted in an increase to average sales price in backlog of $63,000, or 10%.
Backlog dollar value in our West segment increased 9% compared to the prior year as a result of a 9% increase in average sales price. The increase in average sales price in backlog was due to the very strong demand we experienced, which enabled us to raise prices in all of our markets. Backlog units remained flat due primarily to a decrease in our order activity as a result of a lesser number of average selling communities in the current year. Backlog dollar value in our Central segment increased 55% compared to the prior year due to the combination of a 31% increase in backlog units and an 18% increase in average sales price. Backlog dollar value in our East segment increased by 13% due to a 13% increase in average sales price, which is the result of our ability to raise prices in all of our markets.
- 42 -
New Homes Delivered, Homes Sales Revenue and Average Sales Price by Segment (dollars in thousands)
Home sales revenue increased $722.3 million, or 22%, to $4.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was comprised of: (i) $672.1 million related to a 21% increase in homes delivered to 6,188 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 5,123 in the prior year, and (ii) $50.3 million due to a 1% increase in the average sales price of homes delivered to $639,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $631,000 in the prior year.
Home sales revenue in our West segment increased 22% due to a 21% increase in new homes delivered and a 1% increase in average sales price. The increase in new homes delivered was due to higher backlog units to start the current year compared to the prior year. Home sales revenue in our Central segment increased 23% due to a 16% increase in new homes delivered and a 6% increase in average sales price. The increase in new homes delivered was due to higher backlog units to start the current year compared to the prior year. Home sales revenue in our East segment increased by 26% due to a 29% increase in new homes delivered, offset by a 2% decrease in average sales price. The increase in new homes delivered was due to higher backlog units to start the current year compared to the prior year.
Homebuilding Gross Margins (dollars in thousands)
______________________________________
(1)Non-GAAP financial measure (as discussed below).
Our homebuilding gross margin percentage increased to 24.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 22.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross margin percentage was due to a combination of product mix and the realization of price increases to units that we began selling into backlog beginning in mid-2020, at which time new home demand had begun to materially rebound from the COVID-19-induced slowdown. The strong demand environment has resulted in lower incentives and has allowed us to raise prices in all of our markets. Excluding interest and impairments and lot option abandonments in cost of home sales, adjusted homebuilding gross margin percentage was 27.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 25.0% for the prior year.
Adjusted homebuilding gross margin is a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe this information is meaningful as it isolates the impact that leverage and non-cash charges have on homebuilding gross margin and permits investors to make better comparisons with our competitors, who adjust gross margins in a similar fashion. See the table above reconciling this non-GAAP financial measure to homebuilding gross margin, the nearest GAAP equivalent.
- 43 -
Land and Lot Gross Margins (dollars in thousands)
Land and lot sales gross margin percentage can vary significantly due to the type of land and its related cost basis. Additionally, we expect land and lot sales revenue to vary significantly between reporting periods based on our business decisions to maintain or decrease our land ownership in various markets. Our land and lot sale decisions will be based on a variety of factors, including, without limitation, prevailing market conditions. Our land and lot gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a sale in our West segment of land entitled for the construction of a self-storage facility in San Diego, California. The sale of this land resulted in approximately $11.0 million in land and lot sales revenue and $10.1 million of land and lot gross margin.
Sales and Marketing, General and Administrative Expense (dollars in thousands)
Sales and marketing expense as a percentage of home sales revenue decreased to 4.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due in part to a reduction in advertising costs which benefited from the robust demand environment experienced in the current year, driven by strong homebuilding fundamentals. In addition, the 22% increase in home sales revenue resulted in better utilization of leverage on the fixed components of our sales and marketing costs. Sales and marketing expense decreased to $179.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $183.1 million in the prior year.
General and administrative expense as a percentage of home sales revenue was flat at 5.1% for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. General and administrative expense increased by $33.9 million to $200.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $166.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily related to higher incentive compensation in the current year.
Total sales and marketing and G&A (“SG&A”) expense increased $30.0 million, or 8.6%, to $379.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $349.4 million in the prior year. SG&A decreased to 9.6% of home sales revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 10.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Restructuring Charges
In May 2020, due to the existing and anticipated future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we implemented a workforce reduction plan. As a result of the workforce reduction plan, we incurred $5.7 million of pre-tax restructuring charges consisting of severance and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2020. No similar charges were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest
Interest, which was incurred principally to finance land acquisitions, land development and home construction, totaled $92.8 million and $83.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. All interest incurred in both periods was capitalized.
- 44 -
Other Income (Loss), Net
Other income (loss), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was income of $525,000 and a loss of $9.0 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a $10.2 million charge related to the early extinguishment of a portion of our Senior Notes due 2021.
Income Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we have recorded a tax provision of $156.4 million based on an effective tax rate of 25.0%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a tax provision of $91.2 million based on an effective tax rate of 24.4%.
Financial Services Segment
Income from our financial services operations increased to $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income of $15.7 million in the prior year. The increase in financial services income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year relates to the growth of our mortgage financing, title and escrow services and insurance operations. Our mortgage financing operations continues to experience an increasing capture rate, while our expansion into new markets has further contributed to the increased income from our title and insurance services.
Lots Owned or Controlled by Segment
Lots owned or controlled include our share of lots controlled from our unconsolidated land development joint ventures. Investments in joint ventures are described in Note 6, Investments in Unconsolidated Entities, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. The table below summarizes our lots owned or controlled by segment as of the dates presented:
______________________________________________
(1)As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, lots controlled included lots that were under land option contracts or purchase contracts. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, lots controlled for Central include 2,950 and 2,083 lots, respectively, and lots controlled for East include 179 lots, which represent our expected share of lots owned by our investments in unconsolidated land development joint ventures.
- 45 -
Total lots owned or controlled as of December 31, 2021 increased 17% from the prior year, driven primarily by the 50% increase in lots controlled, as we continue to execute on a strategy of structuring a higher portion of land deals through a variety of land and lot option arrangements, including land bank and joint venture arrangements.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Discussion and analysis of our 2020 fiscal year and the year-over-year comparison of our 2020 financial performance to our 2019 financial performance may be found in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021, which is available in the “investors” portion of our internet website at www.tripointehomes.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. This omitted information is not incorporated by reference and is not a part of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal uses of capital for the year ended December 31, 2021 were operating expenses, share repurchases, land purchases, land development and home construction. We used funds generated by our operations to meet our short-term working capital requirements. We remain focused on generating positive margins in our homebuilding operations and acquiring desirable land positions in order to maintain a strong balance sheet and keep us poised for growth. As of December 31, 2021, we had $681.5 million of cash and cash equivalents. We believe that we have sufficient cash and sources of financing for at least the next twelve months.
Our board of directors will consider a number of factors when evaluating our level of indebtedness and when making decisions regarding the incurrence of new indebtedness, including the purchase price of assets to be acquired with debt financing, the estimated market value of our assets and the ability of particular assets, and our company as a whole, to generate cash flow to cover the expected debt service.
Senior Notes
In June 2020, Tri Pointe issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.700% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”) at 100.00% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds of this issuance were $345.2 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2028 Notes mature on June 15, 2028 and interest is paid semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year until maturity.
In June 2017, Tri Pointe issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.250% Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”) at 100.00% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds of this issuance were $296.3 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2027 Notes mature on June 1, 2027 and interest is paid semiannually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year until maturity.
Tri Pointe and its 100% owned subsidiary Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, Inc. are co-issuers of the $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.875% Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes”). The 2024 Notes were issued at 98.15% of their aggregate principal amount. The net proceeds from the offering of the 2024 Notes was $429.0 million, after debt issuance costs and discounts. The 2024 Notes mature on June 15, 2024, with interest payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15.
Our outstanding senior notes (the “Senior Notes”) contain covenants that restrict our ability to, among other things, create liens or other encumbrances, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, or merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets. These limitations are subject to a number of qualifications and exceptions. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants required by our Senior Notes.
Loans Payable
On June 10, 2021, we entered into a Second Modification Agreement (the “Modification”) to our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of March 29, 2019. The Modification, among other things, (i) increases the maximum amount of the revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) under the Credit Agreement from $600.0 million to $650.0 million and (ii) extends the maturity date of both the Revolving Facility and term loan facility (the “Term Facility”) under the Credit Agreement to June 10, 2026; provided that the maturity date for $45.0 million of commitments under the
- 46 -
Revolving Facility and $30.0 million of loans under the Term Facility, respectively, were not extended and remain scheduled to mature on March 29, 2023. We may increase the Credit Facility to not more than $1 billion in the aggregate, at our request, upon satisfaction of specified conditions. The Revolving Facility contains a sublimit of $100 million for letters of credit. We may borrow under the Revolving Facility in the ordinary course of business to repay senior notes and fund our operations, including our land acquisition, land development and homebuilding activities. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility will be governed by, among other things, a borrowing base. Interest rates on borrowings under the Revolving Facility will be based on either a daily Eurocurrency base rate or a Eurocurrency rate, in either case, plus a spread ranging from 1.25% to 1.90%, depending on the Company’s leverage ratio. Interest rates on borrowings under the Term Facility will be based on either a daily Eurocurrency base rate or a Eurocurrency rate, in either case, plus a spread ranging from 1.10% to 1.85%, depending on the Company’s leverage ratio.
We had no outstanding debt under the Revolving Facility as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had $250 million outstanding debt under the Term Facility with an interest rate of 1.20%. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was $5.4 million and $3.1 million, of capitalized debt financing costs, respectively. These costs related to the Credit Facility will amortize over the remaining term of the Credit Facility and are included in other assets on our consolidated balance sheets. Accrued interest, including loan commitment fees, related to the Credit Facility was $570,000 and $617,000 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit of $48.9 million and $64.1 million, respectively. These letters of credit were issued to secure various financial obligations. We believe it is not probable that any outstanding letters of credit will be drawn upon.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $504,000 outstanding related to one seller financed loan to acquire lots for the construction of homes. Principal on this loan is expected to mature in 2022 provided certain achievements are met. The seller financed loan accrues interest at a weighted average rate of 0.33% per annum.
Covenant Compliance
Under the Credit Facility, we are required to comply with certain financial covenants, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the table below (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of the above financial covenants.
- 47 -
Leverage Ratios
We believe that our leverage ratios provide useful information to the users of our financial statements regarding our financial position and cash and debt management. The ratio of debt-to-capital and the ratio of net debt-to-net capital are calculated as follows (dollars in thousands):
______________________________________________
(1)The ratio of debt-to-capital is computed as the quotient obtained by dividing total debt by the sum of total debt plus stockholders’ equity.
(2)The ratio of net debt-to-net capital is a non-GAAP financial measure and is computed as the quotient obtained by dividing net debt (which is debt less cash and cash equivalents) by the sum of net debt plus stockholders’ equity. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is the ratio of debt-to-capital. We believe the ratio of net debt-to-net capital is a relevant financial measure for investors to understand the leverage employed in our operations and as an indicator of our ability to obtain financing. See the table above reconciling this non-GAAP financial measure to the ratio of debt-to-capital.
Cash Flows-Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The comparison of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
•Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $168.5 million to $419.5 million in 2021 from cash provided of $588.0 million in 2020. The change was primarily composed of (i) an increase in cash outflow related to real estate inventories of $318.1 million in 2021 as we re-accelerated our land acquisition and development spending in 2021 against a decrease in the prior year due primarily to caution resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by (ii) an increase in net income to $469.3 million in 2021 compared to $282.2 million in 2020, and (iii) other offsetting activity, including changes in accounts receivable, other assets, accrued expenses and other liabilities and deferred income taxes.
•Net cash used in investing activities was $72.1 million in 2021 compared to $88.0 million in 2020. The higher cash used in 2021 was due primarily to increased purchases of property and equipment.
•Net cash used in financing activities increased to $287.2 million in 2021 from $207.7 million in 2020. The change was primarily a result of an increase in share repurchases of $25.3 million to $276.0 million in 2021 compared to $250.7 million in 2020, in addition to a decrease in net debt borrowing of $58.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020, due primarily to our net borrowing of $50.2 million in the prior year as we refinanced $300 million of our Senior Notes due 2021 with $350 million in 2028 Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents balance was $681.5 million.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into land option contracts in order to procure lots for the construction of our homes. We are subject to customary obligations associated with entering into contracts for the purchase of land and improved lots. These purchase contracts typically require a cash deposit and the purchase of properties under these contracts is generally contingent upon satisfaction of certain requirements by the sellers, including obtaining applicable property and development entitlements. We also utilize option contracts with land sellers and land banking arrangements as a method of acquiring land in staged takedowns, to help us manage the financial and market risk associated with land holdings, and to reduce the use of funds from our corporate financing sources. These option contracts and land banking arrangements generally require a non-refundable
- 48 -
deposit for the right to acquire lots over a specified period of time at pre-determined prices. We generally have the right at our discretion to terminate our obligations under both purchase contracts and option contracts by forfeiting our cash deposit with no further financial responsibility to the land seller. When market conditions are such that land values are not appreciating, existing option agreements may become less desirable, at which time we may elect to forfeit deposits and pre-acquisition costs and terminate the agreements. In some cases, however, we may be contractually obligated to complete development work even if we terminate the option to procure land or lots. As of December 31, 2021, we had $241.7 million of non-refundable cash deposits pertaining to land option contracts and purchase contracts with an aggregate remaining purchase price of approximately $1.8 billion (net of deposits).
Our utilization of land option contracts and land banking arrangements is dependent on, among other things, the availability of land sellers or land banking firms willing to enter into option takedown arrangements, the availability of capital to finance the development of optioned lots, general housing market conditions, and local market dynamics. Options may be more difficult to procure from land sellers in strong housing markets and are more prevalent in certain geographic regions.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $601.1 million of availability under the Credit Facility after considering the borrowing base provisions and outstanding letters of credit.
Contractual Obligations Table
The following table summarizes our future estimated cash payments under existing contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, including estimated cash payments due by period. Our purchase obligations represent commitments for land purchases under land purchase and land option contracts with non-refundable deposits.
__________________________________________
(1)For a more detailed description of our long-term debt, please see Note 11, Senior Notes and Loans Payable, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(2)Includes fixed interest payments on our senior notes and estimated interest payments on our variable rate term loan.
(3)Includes leases relating to office space, buildings and equipment. For a more detailed description of our operating leases, see Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(4)Ground lease obligations have been fully subleased through 2041. Our lease commitment net of sublease income was $27.6 as of December 31, 2021. For a more detailed description of our ground leases, see Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(5)Includes $1.8 billion (net of deposits) of the remaining purchase price for all land options contracts and purchase contracts as of December 31, 2021. For a more detailed description of our land purchase and option contracts, please see the discussion set forth above in the section entitled “Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.”
- 49 -
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
2027 Notes and 2028 Notes
On June 5, 2017, Tri Pointe issued the 2027 Notes and on June 10, 2020, Tri Pointe issued the 2028 Notes. All of Tri Pointe’s 100% owned subsidiaries that are guarantors (each a “Guarantor” and, collectively, the “Guarantors”) of the Credit Facility, including Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, are party to supplemental indentures pursuant to which they jointly and severally guarantee Tri Pointe’s obligations with respect to these Notes. Each Guarantor of the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes is 100% owned by Tri Pointe, and all guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to customary exceptions pursuant to the indentures governing the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes, as described in the following paragraph. All of our non-Guarantor subsidiaries have nominal assets and operations and are considered minor, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X. In addition, Tri Pointe has no independent assets or operations, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X. There are no significant restrictions upon the ability of Tri Pointe or any Guarantor to obtain funds from any of their respective wholly owned subsidiaries by dividend or loan. None of the assets of our subsidiaries represent restricted net assets pursuant to Rule 4-08(e)(3) of Regulation S-X.
A Guarantor of the 2027 Notes and the 2028 Notes shall be released from all of its obligations under its guarantee if (i) all of the assets of the Guarantor have been sold; (ii) all of the equity interests of the Guarantor held by Tri Pointe or a subsidiary thereof have been sold; (iii) the Guarantor merges with and into Tri Pointe or another Guarantor, with Tri Pointe or such other Guarantor surviving the merger; (iv) the Guarantor is designated “unrestricted” for covenant purposes; (v) the Guarantor ceases to guarantee any indebtedness of Tri Pointe or any other Guarantor which gave rise to such Guarantor guaranteeing the 2027 Notes or the 2028 Notes; (vi) Tri Pointe exercises its legal defeasance or covenant defeasance options; or (vii) all obligations under the applicable supplemental indenture are discharged.
2024 Notes
Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings are co-issuers of the 2024 Notes. All of the Guarantors (other than Tri Pointe Homes Holdings) have entered into supplemental indentures pursuant to which they jointly and severally guarantee the obligations of Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings with respect to the 2024 Notes. Each Guarantor of the 2024 Notes is 100% owned by Tri Pointe and Tri Pointe Homes Holdings, and all guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to customary exceptions pursuant to the indentures governing the 2024 Notes, as described below.
A Guarantor of the 2024 Notes shall be released from all of its obligations under its guarantee if (i) all of the assets of the Guarantor have been sold; (ii) all of the equity interests of the Guarantor held by Tri Pointe or a subsidiary thereof have been sold; (iii) the Guarantor merges with and into Tri Pointe or another Guarantor, with Tri Pointe or such other Guarantor surviving the merger; (iv) the Guarantor is designated “unrestricted” for covenant purposes; (v) the Guarantor ceases to guarantee any indebtedness of Tri Pointe or any other Guarantor which gave rise to such Guarantor guaranteeing the 2024 Notes; (vi) Tri Pointe exercises its legal defeasance or covenant defeasance options; or (vii) all obligations under the applicable indenture are discharged.
Tri Pointe’s non-Guarantor subsidiaries are considered minor, as defined in Rule 3-10(h) of Regulation S-X, therefore the consolidated financial statements represent the full issuer and guarantor subsidiary results.
Inflation
In 2021, the rate of inflation in the United States increased significantly and may continue to increase. Our homebuilding operations can be adversely impacted by inflation, primarily from higher land, financing, labor, material and construction costs. In addition, inflation can lead to higher mortgage rates, which can significantly affect the affordability of mortgage financing to homebuyers. While we attempt to pass on cost increases to homebuyers through increased prices, when weak housing market conditions exist, we are often unable to offset cost increases with higher selling prices.
Seasonality
Historically, the homebuilding industry experiences seasonal fluctuations in quarterly operating results and capital requirements. We typically experience the highest new home order activity during the first and second quarters of our fiscal year, although this activity is also highly dependent on the number of active selling communities, timing of new community openings and other market factors. Since it typically takes four to six months to construct a new home, the number of homes delivered and associated home sales revenue typically increases in the third and fourth quarters of our fiscal year as new home orders sold earlier in the year convert to home deliveries. Due to this seasonality, home starts, construction costs and related cash outflows have historically been highest in the second and third quarters of our fiscal year, and the majority of cash receipts
- 50 -
from home deliveries occur during the second half of the year. We expect this seasonal pattern to continue over the long-term, although it may be affected by volatility in the homebuilding industry (including developments and volatility resulting from COVID-19).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of costs and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, our management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those which impact our most critical accounting policies. Our management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our management believes that the following accounting policies are among the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require among the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Topic 606 (“ASC 606”), Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, we apply the following steps to determine the timing and amount of revenue to recognize: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Following the adoption of ASC 606 on January 1, 2018, the timing of revenue recognition for all of our contracts remained materially consistent with our historical revenue recognition policy due to the nature of our revenue generating activities, with the most common difference under ASC 606 relating to the deferral of revenue due to these uncompleted performance obligations at the time we deliver new homes to our homebuyers.
Home sales revenue
We generate the majority of our total revenues from home sales, which consists of our core business operation of building and delivering completed homes to homebuyers. Home sales revenue and related profit is generally recognized when title to and possession of the home is transferred to the homebuyer at the home closing date. Our performance obligation to deliver the agreed-upon home is generally satisfied in less than one year from the original contract date. Included in home sales revenue are forfeited deposits, which occur when homebuyers cancel home purchase contracts that include a nonrefundable deposit. Both revenue from forfeited deposits and deferred revenue resulting from uncompleted performance obligations existing at the time we deliver new homes to our homebuyers are immaterial.
Land and lot sales revenue
Historically, we have generated land and lot sales revenue from a small number of transactions, although in some years we have realized a significant amount of revenue and gross margin. We do not expect our future land and lot sales revenue to be material, but we still consider these sales to be an ordinary part of our business, thus meeting the definition of contracts with customers. Similar to our home sales, revenue from land and lot sales is typically fully recognized when the land and lot sales transactions are consummated, at which time no further performance obligations are left to be satisfied. Some of our historical land and lot sales have included future profit participation rights. We will recognize future land and lot sales revenue in the periods in which all closing conditions are met, subject to the constraint on variable consideration related to profit participation rights, if such rights exist in the sales contract.
Other operations revenue
The majority of our homebuilding other operations revenue relates to a ground lease in our West reporting segment. We are responsible for making lease payments to the land owner, and we collect sublease payments from the buyers of the buildings. This ground lease is accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases. We do not recognize a material profit on this ground lease.
Financial services revenues
Tri Pointe Solutions is a reportable segment and is comprised of our Tri Pointe Connect mortgage financing operations, Tri Pointe Assurance title and escrow services operations, and Tri Pointe Advantage property and casualty insurance agency operations.
Mortgage financing operations
- 51 -
Tri Pointe Connect was formed as a joint venture with an established mortgage lender and is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. We record a percentage of income earned by Tri Pointe Connect based on our ownership percentage in this joint venture. Tri Pointe Connect activity appears as equity in income of unconsolidated entities under the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Title and escrow services operations
Tri Pointe Assurance provides title examinations for our homebuyers in the Carolinas and Colorado and both title examinations and escrow services for our homebuyers in Arizona, Texas, Maryland, Nevada and Virginia. Tri Pointe Assurance is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tri Pointe and acts as a title agency for First American Title Insurance Company. Revenue from our title and escrow services operations is fully recognized at the time of the consummation of the home sales transaction, at which time no further performance obligations are left to be satisfied. Tri Pointe Assurance revenue is included in the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Property and casualty insurance agency operations
Tri Pointe Advantage is a wholly owned subsidiary of Tri Pointe and provides property and casualty insurance agency services that help facilitate the closing process in all of the markets in which we operate. The total consideration for these services, including renewal options, is estimated upon the issuance of the initial insurance policy, subject to constraint. Tri Pointe Advantage revenue is included in the Financial Services section of our consolidated statements of operations.
Real Estate Inventories and Cost of Sales
Real estate inventories consist of land, land under development, homes under construction, completed homes and model homes and are stated at cost, net of impairment losses. We capitalize direct carrying costs, including interest, property taxes and related development costs to inventories. Field construction supervision and related direct overhead are also included in the capitalized cost of inventories. Direct construction costs are specifically identified and allocated to homes while other common costs, such as land, land improvements and carrying costs, are allocated to homes within a community based upon their anticipated relative sales or fair value. In accordance with ASC Topic 835, Interest (“ASC 835”), homebuilding interest capitalized as a cost of inventories owned is included in costs of sales as related units or lots are sold. To the extent our debt exceeds our qualified assets as defined in ASC 835, we expense a portion of the interest incurred. Qualified assets represent projects that are actively under development. Homebuilding cost of sales is recognized at the same time revenue is recognized and is recorded based upon total estimated costs to be allocated to each home within a community. Any changes to the estimated costs are allocated to the remaining undelivered lots and homes within their respective community. The estimation and allocation of these costs require a substantial degree of judgment by management.
In determining the allocation of costs to a particular land parcel or individual home, we rely on project budgets that are based on a variety of assumptions, including assumptions about construction schedules and future costs to be incurred. It is common that actual results differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including construction delays, increases in costs that have not been committed or unforeseen issues encountered during construction that fall outside the scope of existing contracts, or costs that come in less than originally anticipated. While the actual results for a particular construction project are accurately reported over time, a variance between the budget and actual costs could result in the understatement or overstatement of costs and have a related impact on gross margins between reporting periods. To reduce the potential for such variances, we have procedures that have been applied on a consistent basis, including assessing and revising project budgets on a periodic basis, obtaining commitments from subcontractors and vendors for future costs to be incurred and utilizing the most recent information available to estimate costs.
If there are indications of impairment, we perform a detailed budget and cash flow review of our real estate assets to determine whether the estimated remaining undiscounted future cash flows of the community are more or less than the asset’s carrying value. If the undiscounted cash flows are more than the asset’s carrying value, no impairment adjustment is required. However, if the undiscounted cash flows are less than the asset’s carrying value, the asset is deemed impaired and is written down to fair value. These impairment evaluations require us to make estimates and assumptions regarding future conditions, including timing and amounts of development costs and sales prices of real estate assets, to determine if expected future undiscounted cash flows will be sufficient to recover the asset’s carrying value.
When estimating undiscounted cash flows of a community, we make various assumptions, including: (i) expected sales prices and sales incentives to be offered, including the number of homes available, pricing and incentives being offered by us or other builders in other communities, and future sales price adjustments based on market and economic trends; (ii) expected sales pace and cancellation rates based on local housing market conditions, competition and historical trends; (iii) costs expended to date and expected to be incurred including, but not limited to, land and land development costs, home construction
- 52 -
costs, interest costs, indirect construction and overhead costs, and selling costs; (iv) alternative product offerings that may be offered that could have an impact on sales pace, sales price and/or building costs; and (v) alternative uses for the property.
Many assumptions are interdependent and a change in one may require a corresponding change to other assumptions. For example, increasing or decreasing monthly sales absorption rates has a direct impact on the estimated per unit sales price of a home and the level of time sensitive costs (such as indirect construction, overhead and carrying costs). Depending on the underlying objective of the community, assumptions could have a significant impact on the projected cash flow analysis. For example, if our objective is to preserve operating margins, our cash flow analysis will be different than if the objective is to increase sales. These objectives may vary significantly from community to community and over time.
We perform a quarterly review for indicators of impairment. If assets are considered impaired, impairment is determined by the amount the asset’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined based on estimated future cash flows discounted for inherent risks associated with real estate assets. These discounted cash flows are impacted by expected risk based on estimated land development, construction and delivery timelines; market risk of price erosion; uncertainty of development or construction cost increases; and other risks specific to the asset or market conditions where the asset is located when assessment is made. These factors are specific to each community and may vary among communities. It is reasonably possible that changes in market conditions could change management’s estimates of future cash inflows and outflows, leading to future impairment charges. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded real estate inventory impairment charges of $19.6 million, $1.5 million and $10.1 million, respectively.
Warranty Reserves
In the normal course of business, we incur warranty-related costs associated with homes that have been delivered to homebuyers. Estimated future direct warranty costs are accrued and charged to cost of sales in the period when the related home sales revenues are recognized while indirect warranty overhead salaries and related costs are charged to cost of sales in the period incurred. Factors that affect the warranty accruals include the number of homes delivered, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims and cost per claim. Our primary assumption in estimating the amounts we accrue for warranty costs is that historical claims experience is a strong indicator of future claims experience. In addition, we maintain commercial general liability insurance designed to protect us against a portion of our risk of loss from warranty and construction-related claims, subject to self-insured retentions. We also generally require our subcontractors and design professionals to indemnify us for liabilities arising from their work, subject to various limitations. However, such indemnity is significantly limited with respect to subcontractors that are added to our commercial general liability insurance policy.
Our warranty reserve is based on actuarial analysis that uses our historical claim and expense data, as well as industry data to estimate these overall costs. Key assumptions used in developing these estimates include weighting of industry data claim frequencies, severities and resolution patterns, which can occur over an extended period of time. Our warranty reserve may also include an estimate of future fit and finish warranty claims to the extent not contemplated in the actuarial analysis. These estimates are subject to variability due to the length of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a warranty or construction defect claim is made, and the ultimate resolution of such claim; uncertainties regarding such claims relative to our markets and the types of product we build; and legal or regulatory actions and/or interpretations, among other factors. Due to the degree of judgment involved and the potential for variability in these underlying assumptions, our actual future costs could differ from those estimated. There can be no assurance that the terms and limitations of the limited warranty will be effective against claims made by homebuyers, that we will be able to renew our insurance coverage or renew it at reasonable rates and comparable self-insured retentions, that we will not be liable for damages, cost of repairs, and/or the expense of litigation surrounding possible construction defects, soil subsidence or building related claims, that claims will not exceed our insurance coverage limits, or that claims will not arise out of uninsurable events or circumstances not covered by insurance and not subject to effective indemnification agreements with certain subcontractors.
We also record expected recoveries from insurance carriers based on actual insurance claims made and actuarially determined amounts that depend on various factors, including, the above-described reserve estimates, our insurance policy coverage limits for the applicable policy years and historical recovery rates. Because of the inherent uncertainty and variability in these assumptions, our actual insurance recoveries could differ significantly from amounts currently estimated.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on future tax consequences of both temporary differences between the amounts reported for financial reporting purposes and the amounts deductible for income tax purposes, and are measured using enacted tax rates
- 53 -
expected to apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in earnings in the period when the changes are enacted.
Each quarter we assess our deferred tax assets to determine whether all or any portion of the assets is more likely than not unrealizable under ASC 740. We are required to establish a valuation allowance for any portion of the asset we conclude is more likely than not to be unrealizable. Our assessment considers, among other things, the nature, frequency and severity of our current and cumulative losses, forecasts of our future taxable income, the duration of statutory carryforward periods and tax planning alternatives. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that actual results may vary from estimates.
The enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in December 2017, among other things, reduced the federal corporate tax rate to 21% from 35%, effective January 1, 2018. This resulted in a $22.0 million reduction in our deferred tax asset for the year ended December 31, 2017. For further details, see Note 15, Income Taxes, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
We classify any interest and penalties related to income taxes as part of income tax expense.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
In accordance with ASC Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances between annual tests indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired. We have performed our annual goodwill impairment evaluation as of October 1, 2021. For further details on goodwill, see Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
We performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our goodwill is less than its carrying amount. Upon completion of the October 2021 annual impairment assessment, we determined that no goodwill impairment was indicated. As of December 31, 2021, we are not aware of any significant indicators of impairment that exist for our goodwill that would require additional analysis.
An impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible asset is based on a comparison of its fair value to book value, without consideration of any recoverability due to the indefinite nature of the asset. As of December 31, 2021, we believe that our indefinite-lived intangible asset continues to have an indefinite life and that its fair value exceeds its carrying value. For further details on our indefinite-lived intangible asset, see Note 8, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Significant management judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in our impairment evaluations. Our estimates are consistent with the plans and estimates that we use to manage our business. It is possible, however, that the plans may change and estimates used may prove to be inaccurate. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur future impairment charges.
Related Party Transactions
We had no related party transactions for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1, Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
- 54 -