Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly those under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Our Company
We are the only independent manufacturer of composite wind blades for the wind energy market with a global manufacturing footprint. We deliver high-quality, cost-effective composite solutions through long term relationships with leading original equipment manufacturers in the wind and transportation markets. We also provide field service inspection and repair services to our OEM customers and wind farm owners and operators, and supply high strength, lightweight and durable composite products to the transportation market. We are headquartered in Scottsdale, Arizona and operate factories in the U.S., China, Mexico, Turkey, and India. We operate additional engineering development centers in Denmark and Germany and a services facility in Spain. For a further overview of our Company, refer to the discussion in “Business-Overview” included in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our business operations are defined geographically into five geographic operating segments - (1) the U.S. (U.S.), (2) Asia, (3) Mexico, (4) Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) and (5) India. For further information regarding our operating segments, refer to Note 21 - Segment Reporting of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Trends Affecting our Business
We have identified the following material trends affecting our business:
•The after-effects of the pandemic continue to evolve and affect supply chain performance and underlying assumptions in unpredictable ways - specifically with unprecedented volatility in the commodity and logistics spaces. During 2021, there were both significant price increases and supply constraints with respect to resin and carbon fiber, key raw materials that we use to manufacture our products, as well as increases in logistics costs to obtain raw materials. We expect that carbon fiber and related product supply will remain constrained. Demand for carbon fiber and related products continues to outpace capacity additions while acrylonitrile used in the production of carbon fiber saw an increase in demand of up to 50% in 2021. Production of carbon products is very energy intensive and continued rising energy costs could continue to adversely impact the cost of materials. Resin prices were approximately 150% higher in the fourth quarter of 2021 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. High resin prices in Europe and North America continue to be supported by bullish demand from industries like automotive, infrastructure, construction and new container ship builds. While competitive resin suppliers are available in Asia, the current unreliable logistics environment in Asia and associated costs currently are offsetting any potential savings on price. We expect that the price of carbon fiber and resin will remain at elevated levels in 2022. Approximately 57% of the resin and resin systems we use are purchased under contracts either controlled or borne by two of our customers and therefore these customers receive/bear 100% of any decrease or increase in resin prices. With respect to our other customer supply agreements, our customers typically receive/bear 70% of any raw material price decreases or increases. If the supply of carbon fiber and resin feedstocks continue to be constrained and the prices for these raw materials remain elevated for an extended period of time, such constraints and elevated price levels will have a further material adverse impact on our results of operations.
•We believe there is an increasing demand for composite products for electric vehicles. As part of our diversification strategy, we have made significant investments to expand our transportation business during the last several years. In 2018 through 2021, we experienced significant losses relating to our transportation business and experienced operational challenges as we are expanding this business. From 2018 to 2021, we invested approximately $62 million in our transportation business. We expect our transportation business will continue to operate at a small loss in 2022 and expect to invest between approximately $5 million and $10 million in our transportation business in 2022.
•Although none of our manufacturing facilities are currently operating below normal capacity due to COVID-19, we may be required to reinstate temporary production suspensions or volume reductions at our manufacturing facilities or at our other locations to the extent there is a resurgence of COVID-19 cases in the regions where we operate or there is an outbreak of positive COVID-19 cases in any of our facilities. The COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected our business and operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as we temporarily suspended production at most of our facilities or operated at reduced production levels due primarily to certain applicable government-mandated stay at home orders in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, demands from certain of our labor unions to suspend or reduce production and general safety concerns of our associates. During the third quarter of 2021, our manufacturing facility in Yangzhou, China was required to temporarily suspend production due to a COVID-19 outbreak in Yangzhou City although the COVID-19 pandemic did not materially impact our business and operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
COMPONENTS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
We recognize revenue from manufacturing services over time as our customers control the product as it is produced, and we may not use or sell the product to fulfill other customers’ contracts. Net sales include amounts billed to our customers for our products, including wind blades, precision molding and assembly systems and other products and services, as well as the progress towards the completion of the performance obligation for products in progress, which is determined on a ratio of direct costs incurred to date in fulfillment of the contract to the total estimated direct costs required to complete the performance obligation.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the costs we incur at our production facilities to make products saleable on both products invoiced during the period as well as products in progress towards the completion of each performance obligation. Cost of goods sold includes such items as raw materials, direct and indirect labor and facilities costs, including purchasing and receiving costs, plant management, inspection costs, production process improvement activities, product engineering and internal transfer costs. In addition, all depreciation associated with assets used in the production of our products is also included in cost of goods sold. Direct labor costs consist of salaries, benefits and other personnel related costs for employees engaged in the manufacturing of our products and services.
Startup and transition costs are primarily unallocated fixed overhead costs and underutilized direct labor costs incurred during the period production facilities are transitioning wind blade models and ramping up manufacturing. All direct labor costs are included in the measure of progress towards completion of the relevant performance obligation when determining revenue to be recognized during the period. The cost of sales for the initial wind blades from a new model manufacturing line is generally higher than when the line is operating at optimal production volume levels due to inefficiencies during ramp-up related to labor hours per blade, cycle times per blade and raw material usage. Additionally, these costs as a percentage of net sales are generally higher during the period in which a facility is ramping up to full production capacity due to underutilization of the facility. Manufacturing overhead at each of our facilities includes virtually all indirect costs (including share-based compensation costs) incurred at the plants, including engineering, finance, information technology, human resources and plant management.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily relate to the unallocated portion of costs incurred at our corporate headquarters and our research facilities and include salaries, benefits and other personnel related costs for
employees engaged in research and development, engineering, finance, internal audit, information technology, human resources, business development, global operational excellence, global supply chain, in-house legal and executive management. Other costs include outside legal and accounting fees, risk management (insurance), share-based compensation and certain other administrative and global resources costs.
The unallocated research and development expenses incurred at our Warren, Rhode Island location as well as at our Kolding, Denmark advanced engineering center and our Berlin, Germany engineering center are also included in general and administrative expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, total research and development expenses totaled $1.0 million, $1.0 million and $1.0 million, respectively.
Loss on Sale of Assets and Asset Impairments
Loss on sale of assets represents the losses on the sale of certain receivables, on a non-recourse basis under supply chain financing arrangements with our customers, to financial institutions and losses on the sale of other assets at our corporate and manufacturing facilities. Asset impairments represent the losses on the impairment of our assets at our corporate and manufacturing facilities.
Restructuring Charges
Restructuring charges primarily consist of employee severance, one-time termination benefits and ongoing benefits related to the reduction of our workforce and other costs associated with exit activities, which may include costs related to leased facilities to be abandoned and facility and employee relocation costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists of interest expense on our debt borrowings and the amortization of deferred financing costs on such borrowings, foreign currency income and losses, interest income, losses on extinguishment of debt and miscellaneous income and expense.
Income Taxes
Income taxes consists of federal, state, provincial, local and foreign taxes based on income in jurisdictions in which we operate, including in the U.S., China, Mexico, Turkey and India. The income tax rate, tax provisions, deferred tax assets and liabilities vary according to the jurisdiction in which the income or loss arises. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by management and the respective governmental taxing authorities and require us to exercise judgment in determining our income tax provision, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets.
KEY METRICS USED BY MANAGEMENT TO MEASURE PERFORMANCE
In addition to measures of financial performance presented in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, we use certain other financial measures and operating metrics to analyze our performance. These “non-GAAP” financial measures consist of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, free cash flow and net cash (debt), which help us evaluate growth trends, establish budgets, assess operational efficiencies, oversee our overall liquidity, and evaluate our overall financial performance. The key operating metrics consist of wind blade sets produced, estimated megawatts of energy capacity to be generated by wind blade sets produced, utilization, dedicated manufacturing lines, and manufacturing lines installed, which help us evaluate our operational performance. We believe that these measures are useful to investors in evaluating our performance.
Key Financial Measures
The key financial measures as of and for the years ended December 31 are as follow:
(1)See below for more information and a reconciliation of EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, free cash flow and net debt to net income (loss), net cash provided by (used in) operating activities and total debt, net of debt issuance costs, respectively, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA
We define EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, as net income or loss plus interest expense, income taxes and depreciation and amortization. We define adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA plus any share-based compensation expense, plus or minus any foreign currency losses or income, plus or minus any losses or gains from the sale of assets and asset impairments, plus any restructuring charges. Adjusted EBITDA is the primary metric used by our management and our board of directors to establish budgets and operational goals for managing our business and evaluating our performance. We monitor adjusted EBITDA as a supplement to our GAAP measures, and believe it is useful to present to investors, because we believe that it facilitates evaluation of our period-to-period operating performance by eliminating items that are not operational in nature, allowing comparison of our recurring core business operating results over multiple periods unaffected by differences in capital structure, capital investment cycles and fixed asset base. In addition, we believe adjusted EBITDA and similar measures are widely used by investors, securities analysts, ratings agencies, and other parties in evaluating companies in our industry as a measure of financial performance and debt-service capabilities.
Our use of adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures for capital equipment or other contractual commitments;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our indebtedness;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the dividends to our Series A Preferred Stockholders or accretion of the Series A Preferred Stock;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect losses on extinguishment of debt relating to prepayment penalties, termination fees and the write off of any remaining debt discount and debt issuance costs upon the repayment or refinancing of our debt;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect capital expenditure requirements relating to the future need to augment or replace those assets;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect share-based compensation expense on equity-based incentive awards to our officers, employees, directors and consultants;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the foreign currency income or losses in our operations;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the gains or losses on the sale of assets and asset impairments;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect restructuring charges; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
In evaluating EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future, we will incur expenses similar to the adjustments noted herein. Our presentations of EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as suggesting that our future results will be unaffected by these expenses or any unusual or non-recurring items. When evaluating our performance, you should consider EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net income (loss) and other GAAP measures.
Free cash flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe free cash flow is a useful measure for investors because it portrays our ability to generate cash from our business for purposes such as repaying maturing debt and accrued dividends and redemption obligations relating to our Series A Preferred Stock and funding business acquisitions.
Net cash (debt)
We define net cash (debt) as total unrestricted cash and cash equivalents less the total principal amount of debt outstanding. The total principal amount of debt outstanding is comprised of the long-term debt and current maturities of long-term debt as presented in our consolidated balance sheets adding back any debt issuance costs. We believe that the presentation of net cash (debt) provides useful information to investors because our management reviews net cash (debt) as part of our oversight of overall liquidity, financial flexibility and leverage. Net cash (debt) is important when we consider opening new manufacturing facilities and expanding existing manufacturing facilities, as well as for capital expenditure requirements.
The following table reconciles our non-GAAP key financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures:
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31 are reconciled as follows:
Free cash flow for the years ended December 31 is reconciled as follows:
Net cash (debt) as of December 31 is reconciled as follows:
Key Operating Metrics (1)
The key operating metrics as of and for the year ended December 31 are as follows:
(1)See below for more information on each of our key operating metrics.
Sets represents the number of wind blade sets, consisting of three wind blades each, which we produced worldwide during the period. We monitor sets and believe that presenting sets to investors is helpful because we believe that it is the most direct measurement of our manufacturing output during the period. Sets primarily impact net sales.
Estimated megawatts are the energy capacity to be generated by wind blade sets produced during the period. Our estimate is based solely on name-plate capacity of the wind turbine on which the wind blades we manufacture are expected to be installed. We monitor estimated megawatts and believe that presenting estimated megawatts to investors is helpful because we believe that it is a commonly followed measurement of energy capacity across our industry and provides an indication of our share of the overall wind blade market.
Utilization represents the percentage of the number of wind blades produced during the period compared to the total potential wind blade capacity of the manufacturing lines installed during the period. We monitor utilization because we believe it helps investors to better understand how close we are to operating at maximum production capacity.
Dedicated manufacturing lines are the number of wind blade manufacturing lines that we have dedicated to our customers pursuant to our supply agreements at the end of the period. We monitor dedicated manufacturing lines and believe that presenting this metric to investors is helpful because we believe that the number of dedicated manufacturing lines is the best indicator of demand for the wind blades we manufacture for customers under our supply agreements in any given period. Lines become dedicated upon the execution of a supply agreement; this means that lines are typically dedicated before they are installed.
Manufacturing lines installed represents the number of wind blade manufacturing lines installed and either in operation, startup or transition during the period. We believe that total manufacturing lines installed provides an understanding of the number of manufacturing lines installed and either in operation, startup or transition. From time to time, we have manufacturing lines installed that are not dedicated to our customers pursuant to a supply agreement.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes certain of our operating results as a percentage of net sales for the years ended December 31 that have been derived from our consolidated statements of operations:
Net sales
Consolidated discussion
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the years ended December 31:
The increase in net sales of wind blades was primarily driven by a higher average sales price due to the mix of wind blade models produced and foreign currency fluctuations. Net sales from the manufacturing of precision molding and assembly systems increased, primarily in Asia, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the adverse impact that COVID-19 pandemic had on our net sales in the prior year period. Additionally, there was an increase in our field service, inspection and repair service sales during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 due to an increase in demand for such services. The total increase in net sales was partially offset by a decrease in net sales due to extensions of our customer contracts during the year ended December 31, 2021. These extensions increased the total contract value and contract duration but resulted in less revenue recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021, as the revenue is recognized over the extended terms. The fluctuating U.S. dollar against the Euro in our Turkey operations and the
Chinese Renminbi in our China operations had a favorable impact of 0.1% on consolidated net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. Our net sales for 2021 were adversely impacted by reduced production volumes at one of our Matamoros, Mexico manufacturing facilities due to carbon and other raw material shortages that were sourced by a customer.
Segment discussion
The following table summarizes our net sales by our five geographic operating segments for the years ended December 31:
U.S. Segment
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the U.S. segment for the years ended December 31:
The decrease in the U.S. segment’s net sales of wind blades was primarily due to a 5% decrease in the number of wind blades produced in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, and was partially offset by a higher average sales price of wind blade models produced in the two comparative periods. The increase in the U.S. segment's field service, inspection and repair services sales was primarily due to increases in overall volume and demand for such services for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020.
Asia Segment
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the Asia segment for the years ended December 31:
The decrease in the Asia segment’s net sales of wind blades was primarily due to a 53% net decrease in the number of wind blades produced in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the removal of five contracted manufacturing lines that expired in China at the end of 2020 and a further reduction of contracted manufacturing lines in 2021. This was partially offset by the adverse impact that the COVID-19 pandemic had on our net sales in the prior year period and also by an increase in the average sales price of wind blades due to a change in the mix of wind blades produced in the two comparative periods. The fluctuating U.S. dollar against the Chinese Renminbi in our China operations had a favorable impact of 0.2% on consolidated net sales for the year ended December 30, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
Mexico Segment
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the Mexico segment for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the Mexico segment’s net sales of wind blades reflects an increase in the average sales price of wind blades due to the mix of wind blades produced in the two comparative periods. These net sales increases were partially offset by a 3% net decrease in overall wind blade volume. In addition, during the third quarter of 2021, we experienced production delays at one of our Juarez, Mexico manufacturing facilities related to customer supplied specialized equipment and supply constraints affecting carbon reinforcements in connection with the ongoing transition to a new blade for one of our customers and production delays resulting from one of our customer's challenges in procuring adequate supplies of carbon reinforcements at one of our Matamoros, Mexico manufacturing facilities.
EMEA Segment
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the EMEA segment for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the EMEA segment’s net sales of wind blades was driven by a 25% net increase in wind blade production at our two Turkey plants, primarily due to transitions and the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year period, as well as an increase in the average sales price of wind blades produced in the two comparative periods and foreign currency fluctuations. These net sales increases were partially offset by reduced production volumes due to one of our customer’s challenges in procuring adequate supplies of resin and carbon reinforcements. The fluctuating U.S. dollar relative to the Euro had a favorable impact of 0.1% on net sales during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the 2020 period.
India Segment
The following table summarizes our net sales by product/service for the India segment for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the India segment’s net sales of wind blades during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by the commencement of production for one of our customers in 2020, and the ramp up of such production in 2021.
Total cost of goods sold
The following table summarizes our total cost of goods sold for the years ended December 31:
Total cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales increased by approximately ten percentage points during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, driven primarily by increases in direct
materials costs, direct labor costs and foreign currency fluctuations, partially offset by a decrease in warranty costs. The fluctuating U.S. dollar against the Euro and Turkish Lira had a combined favorable impact of 3.7%, offset by an unfavorable impact against the Chinese Renminbi and Mexican Peso of 3.9% and 0.9%, respectively, on consolidated cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
General and administrative expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31:
The decrease in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by our continued focus on reducing costs.
Loss on sale of assets and asset impairments
The following table summarizes our loss on sale of assets and asset impairments for the years ended December 31:
NM - not meaningful.
The increase in asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by asset impairment charges incurred at our Newton, Iowa blade facility related to the plant’s shutdown at the end of 2021.
Restructuring charges, net
The following table summarizes our restructuring charges, net, for the years ended December 31:
As a result of management’s focus on the optimization of our global footprint and reducing operating costs, the Company incurred significant restructuring charges in 2021. These charges primarily related to severance benefits to terminated employees as a result of the closure of our Newton, Iowa; Taicang City, China; and Dafeng,
China manufacturing facilities and the stop of production in one of our Juarez, Mexico facilities. The restructuring charges incurred in 2020 primarily related to downsizing at our Dafeng, China manufacturing facility.
Income (loss) from operations
Segment discussion
The following table summarizes our income (loss) from operations by our five geographic operating segments for the years ended December 31:
U.S. Segment
The increase in the loss from operations in the U.S. segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in wind blade volume and an increase in direct material and labor costs. In addition, the increase in the loss from operations was due to impairment and restructuring charges incurred at our Newton, Iowa blade facility related to the plant’s shutdown at the end of 2021, partially offset by an increase in the average sales price of wind blades produced.
Asia Segment
The decrease in the income from operations in the Asia segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to the decrease in wind blade volume, an increase in restructuring costs, and foreign currency fluctuations. The fluctuating U.S. dollar against the Chinese Renminbi had an unfavorable impact of 3.9% on cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the 2020 period.
Mexico Segment
The increase in loss from operations in the Mexico segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to an increase in direct material costs, restructuring charges, a decrease in wind blade volume, and startup and transition costs related to the Matamoros and Juarez, Mexico production delays described above, partially offset by an increase in the average sales price of wind blades, and a decrease in warranty costs. The fluctuating U.S. dollar relative to the Mexican Peso had a unfavorable impact of 0.9% on cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the 2020 period.
EMEA Segment
The increase in income from operations in the EMEA segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by increased wind blade production at our two Turkey manufacturing facilities, an increase in the average sales price of wind blades produced, a decrease in startup and transition costs, and a decrease in warranty costs, partially offset by an increase in direct material costs. The fluctuating U.S. dollar relative to the Turkish Lira and Euro had a favorable impact of 3.7% on cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the 2020 period.
India Segment
The decrease in the loss from operations in the India segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was driven by the commencement of production for one of our customers in 2020, and the ramp up of such production in 2021.
Other income (expense)
The following table summarizes our total other income (expense) for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the total other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to increases in interest expense, net, as a result of the settlement of the interest rate swap in 2021, and increases in the foreign currency loss, net, primarily due to net Euro liability exposure against the Turkish Lira in the current year period as compared to the same period in 2020.
Income taxes
The following table summarizes our income taxes for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to a change in the mix of earnings of foreign jurisdictions and U.S. tax on foreign earnings, and an increase in our uncertain tax positions in the current year period.
Net loss
The following table summarizes our net loss for the years ended December 31:
The increase in the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to the reasons set forth above.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021 incorporated herein by reference.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our liquidity and capital resources were adversely affected by certain events that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2021. We experienced significant production delays that occurred at the Matamoros, Mexico manufacturing facility that we took over from Nordex in July 2021, as well as significant production delays in one of our Juarez, Mexico manufacturing facilities in connection with the ongoing transition to a new blade for one of our customers. We also experienced production delays and reduced production volumes in 2021 at our other Matamoros, Mexico and Izmir, Turkey manufacturing facilities due to carbon and other raw materials shortages that were sourced by a customer. Although we continued to stabilize production at our Matamoros manufacturing facility, we expect that this transition will continue to have an adverse impact on our liquidity in 2022 due in large part to increased raw materials costs associated with producing blades at these facilities. We also expect decreased demand for our wind blades from our customers during 2022. We believe this decrease in demand is due to the continued global renewable energy regulatory and policy uncertainty and raw material cost increases and constraints. We believe this decreased demand will also adversely impact our profitability and liquidity for 2022.
We were not in compliance with certain covenants of our senior secured credit facility as of September 30, 2021, primarily due to the Mexico production delays and increased raw material costs and constraints described above. On November 8, 2021 (the Waiver Effective Date), we and the lenders that are parties to the senior secured credit facility executed a limited waiver pursuant to which the lenders agreed to temporarily waive our compliance with this financial covenant from the Waiver Effective Date through December 8, 2021.
Given these near-term liquidity challenges, in November 2021, we entered into a Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which we issued and sold to the Purchasers 350,000 shares of our newly designated Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $350.0 million. In connection with the transaction, we also issued warrants to purchase 4,666,667 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share to the Series A Preferred Stockholders. We used $181.2 million of the net proceeds from the issuance and sale of the Series A Preferred Stock to repay all outstanding indebtedness under our existing senior secured credit facility and terminated this credit facility. We plan to use the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. We also may elect, at our option, to require the Purchasers to purchase an additional $50.0 million of Series A Preferred Stock upon the same terms and conditions as the initial issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock during the two-year period following the closing date of the issuance and sale of the Series A Preferred Stock. See Note 14 Mezzanine Equity, to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further discussion on Series A Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement.
Our primary needs for liquidity have been, and in the future will continue to be, capital expenditures, purchases of raw materials, new facility startup costs, the impact of transitions, working capital, debt service costs, warranty costs and restructuring costs associated with the optimization of our global footprint. Our capital expenditures have been primarily related to machinery and equipment for new facilities or facility expansions. Historically, we have funded our working capital needs through cash flows from operations, the proceeds received from our credit facilities and from proceeds received from the issuance of stock. We had net repayments under our financing arrangements of $145.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net borrowings of $75.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $74.6 million and $217.9 million in outstanding indebtedness, excluding debt issuance costs, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an aggregate of $65.9 million of remaining capacity and $43.4 million of remaining availability under our various credit facilities. Working capital requirements have increased as a result of our overall growth and the need to fund higher accounts receivable and inventory levels as our business volumes have increased. Based upon current and anticipated levels of operations, we believe that cash on hand, available credit facilities and cash flow from operations will be adequate to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements and to make required payments of principal and interest on our indebtedness over the next twelve months.
We anticipate that any new facilities and future facility expansions will be funded through cash flows from operations, the incurrence of other indebtedness and other potential sources of liquidity. The Certificate of Designations for the Series A Preferred Stock contains certain covenants and consent rights including, but not limited to, obtaining approval from the Purchasers to incur indebtedness above certain specified levels, a cash on hand balance requirement of $50.0 million in the U.S., an individual limit of $10.0 million for any single capital expenditure project, and an annual total capital expenditure limit of $30.0 million in the event of non-compliance
with a fixed charge coverage ratio target. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $242.2 million and $129.9 million, respectively. The December 31, 2021 balance includes $76.8 million of cash located outside of the U.S., including $25.9 million in China, $42.6 million in Turkey, $5.7 million in India, $2.1 million in Mexico and $0.5 million in other countries.
Our ability to repatriate funds from China to the U.S. is subject to a number of restrictions imposed by the Chinese government. We repatriate funds through several technology license and corporate/administrative service agreements. We are compensated quarterly based on agreed upon royalty rates for such IP licenses and quarterly fees for those services. Certain of our subsidiaries are limited in their ability to declare dividends without first meeting statutory restrictions of China, including retained earnings as determined under Chinese-statutory accounting requirements. Until 50% ($26.7 million) of registered capital is contributed to a surplus reserve, our China operations can only pay dividends equal to 90% of after-tax profits (10% must be contributed to the surplus reserve). Once the surplus reserve fund requirement is met, our China operations can pay dividends equal to 100% of after-tax profit assuming other conditions are met. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amount of the surplus reserve fund was $10.0 million and $7.0 million, respectively. In July 2021, our subsidiary in China paid a dividend of approximately $19.5 million, net of withholding taxes, to our subsidiary in Switzerland.
We are not presently involved in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including transactions with unconsolidated special-purpose or other entities that would materially affect our financial position, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources, other than our accounts receivable assignment agreements described below. Furthermore, we do not have any relationships with special-purpose or other entities that provide off-balance sheet financing; liquidity, market risk or credit risk support; or engage in leasing or other services that may expose us to liability or risks of loss that are not reflected in the consolidated financial statements and related notes.
Our segments enter into accounts receivable assignment agreements with various financial institutions. Under these agreements, the financial institution buys, on a non-recourse basis, the accounts receivable amounts related to our segment’s customers at an agreed-upon discount rate.
The following table summarizes certain key details of each of the accounts receivable assignment agreements in place as of December 31, 2021:
As the receivables are purchased by the financial institutions under the agreements noted above, the receivables are removed from our consolidated balance sheet. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, $1,347.8 million and $1,251.5 million, respectively, of receivables were sold under the accounts receivable assignment agreements described above.
Cash Flow Discussion
The following table summarizes our key cash flow activity for the years ended December 31:
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $63.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily as the result of decreased operating results and certain changes in our working capital.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily as the result of a decrease in capital expenditures.
We anticipate fiscal year 2022 capital expenditures of approximately $30 million plus we estimate that the cost that we will incur after December 31, 2021 to complete our current projects in process will be approximately $9.4 million. We have used, and will continue to use, cash flows from operations, the proceeds received from our credit facilities and the proceeds received from the issuance of stock for major projects currently being undertaken, which include building improvements and additional storage space to our manufacturing facility in Chennai, India and the continued investment in our existing Turkey, Mexico, and U.S. facilities.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $110.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily as the result of proceeds from the issuance of Series A Preferred Stock, offset by repayment of the outstanding senior revolving credit facility.
Our Indebtedness
For a discussion of our indebtedness, refer to Note 11 - Long-Term Debt, Net of Current Maturities of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Contingencies
For a discussion of our legal proceedings, refer to Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies - (b) Legal Proceedings of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The wind blades and other composite structures that we produce are subject to warranties against defects in workmanship and materials, generally for a period of two to five years. We are not responsible for the fitness for use of the wind blade or the overall wind turbine system. If a wind blade is found to be defective during the warranty period as a result of a defect in workmanship or materials, among other potential remedies, we may need to repair or replace the wind blade (which could include significant transportation and installation costs) at our sole expense. At
December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had accrued warranty reserves totaling $42.0 million and $50.9 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no material operating expenditures for environmental matters, including government imposed remedial or corrective actions, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of our assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to income taxes and warranty expense. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making the judgments we make about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because these estimates can vary depending on the situation, actual results may differ from the estimates.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. The majority of our revenue is generated from supply agreements associated with manufacturing of wind blades and related services. We account for a supply agreement when it has the approval from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are established, the contract has commercial substance and the collectability of consideration is probable. Our manufacturing services are customer specific and involve production of items that cannot be sold to other customers due to the customers’ protected IP.
Revenue is primarily recognized over time as we have an enforceable right to payment upon termination and we may not use or sell the product to fulfill other customers’ supply agreements. Because control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards the completion of the performance obligation under the cost-to-cost input measure of progress as this method provides the best representation of the production progress towards satisfaction of the performance obligation. Under the cost-to-cost method, progress and the related revenue recognition is determined by a ratio of direct costs incurred to date in fulfillment of the performance obligation to the total estimated direct costs required to complete the performance obligation.
Determining the revenue to be recognized for services performed under our supply agreements involves judgments and estimates relating to the total consideration to be received and the expected direct costs to complete the performance obligation. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information available to us at the time of the estimate and may materially change as additional information becomes known.
Under the cost-to-cost method, contract assets established primarily relate to our rights to consideration for work completed but not billed at the reporting date on our supply agreements. The contract assets are transferred to accounts receivable when the rights become unconditional, which generally occurs when customers are invoiced upon the determination that a product conforms to the contract specifications.
See Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - (c) Revenue Recognition of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further discussion of our accounting policies related to revenue recognition, including accounting policies surrounding our non-manufacturing related services.
Income Taxes. In connection with preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves our assessment of any net operating loss carryforwards, as well as estimating our actual current tax liability together with assessing temporary
differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as reserves and accrued liabilities, for tax and accounting purposes. We also have to assess whether any portion of our earnings generated in one taxing jurisdiction might be claimed as earned by income tax authorities in a differing tax jurisdiction. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax rate, the allocation of earnings to various jurisdictions and the evaluation of our tax positions.
In the normal course of business, we establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets when the realization of the assets is not more likely than not. We intend to maintain such valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of the allowances. In 2019 a full valuation allowance was recorded in Taicang and India. Given our anticipated future earnings in India after becoming fully operational in 2020, we reversed the valuation allowance in that jurisdiction in 2020. In 2021 we determined that a valuation allowance for all of our U.S. deferred tax assets was appropriate. The effect of a change in judgment concerning the realizability of deferred tax assets is included in our income tax provision.
As of December 31, 2021, we have U.S. federal net operating losses (NOLs) of approximately $167.0 million, state NOLs of approximately $211.7 million, foreign NOLs of approximately $31.0 million and foreign tax credits of approximately $1.9 million available to offset future taxable income in the U.S., China and India. Income tax expense or benefit, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which we operate, principally, China, Mexico, India and Turkey. Significant judgements and estimates are required in determining our consolidated income tax expense. The statutory federal corporate income tax rate in the U. S. is 21% and the tax rates in China, Mexico, India and Turkey are 25%, 30%, 17% and 25%, respectively. Our second Turkey facility is located in a tax-free zone and is not subject to income taxes on earnings recognized from its manufacturing activities.
Warranty Expense. The wind blades we manufacture are subject to warranties against defects in workmanship and materials, generally for a period of two to five years. We are not responsible for the fitness for use of the wind blade in the overall wind turbine system. If a wind blade is found to be defective during the warranty period as a result of a defect in workmanship or materials, among other potential remedies, we may need to repair or replace the wind blade at our sole expense. We provide warranties for all of our products with terms and conditions that vary depending on the product sold. We record warranty expense based upon our estimate of future repairs using a probability-based methodology that considers previous warranty claims, identified quality issues and industry practices. Once the warranty period has expired, any remaining unused warranty accrual for the specific products is reversed against the current year warranty expense amount.
Our estimate of warranty expense requires us to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain, including future rates of product failure, repair costs, availability of materials, shipping and handling, and de-installation and re-installation costs at customers’ sites, among others. When a potential or actual warranty claim arises, we may accrue additional warranty reserves for the estimated cost of remediation or proposed settlement. We did not experience any material warranty expenses beyond the provision described above in the year ended December 31, 2021. In 2020, we accrued additional warranty expenses of approximately $12.9 million beyond the normal warranty expense describe above related to a remediation campaign for a specific wind blade model for one of our customers. We did not experience any material warranty expenses beyond the provision described above in the year ended December 31, 2019. However, changes in warranty reserves could have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 - Summary of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.