ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Report. Unless otherwise noted, all of the financial information in this Report is consolidated financial information for the Company. The forward-looking statements in this discussion regarding the mattress and pillow industries, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements in this discussion are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties. See "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, ITEM 1A of this Report. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. For results of operations comparisons relating to years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to our annual report on Form 10-K, Part II, ITEM 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 19, 2021.
In this discussion and analysis, we discuss and explain the consolidated financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including the following topics:
•an overview of our business and strategy;
•results of operations, including our net sales and costs in the periods presented as well as changes between periods;
•expected sources of liquidity for future operations; and
•our use of certain non-GAAP financial measures.
Business Overview
General
We are committed to improving the sleep of more people, every night, all around the world. As a leading designer, manufacturer, distributor and retailer of bedding products worldwide, we know how crucial a good night of sleep is to overall health and wellness. Utilizing over a century of knowledge and industry-leading innovation, we deliver award-winning products that provide breakthrough sleep solutions to consumers in over 100 countries.
We operate in two segments: North America and International. These segments are strategic business units that are managed separately based on geography. Our North America segment consists of manufacturing and distribution subsidiaries, joint ventures and licensees located in the U.S., Canada and Mexico. Our International segment consists of manufacturing and distribution subsidiaries, joint ventures and licensees located in Europe, Asia-Pacific and Latin America (other than Mexico). On August 2, 2021, we acquired Dreams Topco Limited and its direct and indirect subsidiaries ("Dreams"). Dreams is also included in the International segment. Corporate operating expenses are not included in either of the segments and are presented separately as a reconciling item to consolidated results. We evaluate segment performance based on net sales, gross profit and operating income. For additional information refer to Note 15, "Business Segment Information," included in Part II, ITEM 8 "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data", of this Report.
Our highly recognized brands include Tempur-Pedic®, Sealy® and Stearns & Foster® and our non-branded offerings consist of value-focused private label and OEM products. Our products allow for complementary merchandising strategies and are sold through third-party retailers, our more than 650 company-owned and joint venture operated retail stores worldwide and our e-commerce channel.
Our distribution model operates through an omni-channel strategy. We distribute through two channels in each operating business segment: Wholesale and Direct. Our Wholesale channel consists of third-party retailers, including third-party distribution, hospitality and healthcare. Our Direct channel includes company-owned stores, online and call centers.
Full year net income for 2021 increased 79.0% and full year diluted earnings per share ("EPS") increased 86.6% to $3.06. We also maintain a strong competitive position within the industry. We believe the investments that we have made over the past several years have strengthened the long-term foundation of our company and enhanced our competitive position. The combination of our product superiority, brand strength, manufacturing efficiency and quality, powerful omni-channel distribution platform, substantial cash flow and fortified balance sheet continue to drive market share gains and solid financial performance.
General Business and Economic Conditions
We believe the bedding industry is structured for sustained growth, driven by product innovation, sleep technology advancements, consumer confidence, housing formations and population growth. The industry is no longer engaged in uneconomical retail store expansion, startups have shifted from uneconomical strategies to becoming profitable and legacy retailers and manufacturers have become skilled in producing profitable online sales.
Over the past several years and accelerating during the COVID-19 global pandemic, consumers have shifted their spending habits towards in-home products, including bedding products. We believe this may be a long-term shift in consumer spending habits, which could continue to favorably impact our industry. The rapid increase in demand for bedding products has challenged the entire bedding industry and supply chain, including our U.S. business. As a result, the U.S. sales growth in 2021 was unfavorably impacted as we could not fulfill the entire domestic demand for these products. These supply chain constraints were largely resolved by the end of 2021. We expect to be better positioned to meet consumer demand in 2022.
During 2021, commodity costs unfavorably impacted our gross margin. Throughout 2021, we implemented pricing actions to mitigate the dollar impact of these known commodity headwinds. In January 2022, we implemented further pricing actions designed to offset the dollar impact of these inflationary headwinds.
Product Launches
In 2022, we plan to complete the rollout of a complete refresh of our North American Sealy portfolio that began in 2021. The updated Sealy portfolio features new models in our Posturepedic PlusTM, Posturepedic® and Essentials product lines. We also expect to launch a complete refresh of our North American Stearns & Foster portfolio in 2022. In the U.S., we plan to launch a Sealy-branded, eco-friendly mattress collection, as well as a Sealy mattress with a best-in-class pressure-relieving gel grid layer at a consumer-appealing, mid-market price point, in 2022.
In our international segment, we expect to begin the launch an all-new line of Tempur® products in Europe and Asia-Pacific in 2022 with the objective of reaching a new segment of international consumers. This new line of products will broaden Tempur®'s price range with the super-premium average selling price ceiling maintained and the floor expanded into the premium category.
Our global 2022 marketing plan is to aggressively support our innovative bedding products through investing significant marketing dollars to promote our worldwide brands and product launches.
Omni-Channel Distribution Expansion
We have a diversified group of strong retail partners and a rapidly growing direct business. Due to supply chain constraints, we were not able to fulfill the entire domestic demand for our products in 2021. As a result, we focused on our existing third-party retailer relationships and did not meaningfully expand domestic distribution through new or existing retail partners during the year. In 2022, we expect to be better positioned to meet consumer demand and able to reengage with opportunities to expand our distribution through our domestic wholesale channel.
We have been focused on building our direct channel, both online and company-owned retail stores in recent years. The development of our online business has been particularly important as consumers have grown more comfortable shopping for bedding products online. Online purchases accelerated during the pandemic and we expect that consumers will continue to lean into this channel in the future. The direct channel growth rate has surpassed the wholesale growth rate over the last few years, and we anticipate the direct channel to continue to grow as a percentage of net sales in future years.
We currently operate over 650 retail stores globally through our wholly-owned and joint venture operations. We expect to continue to increase our store count organically through opening an average of 60 new stores per year over the next several years. As of December 31, 2021, we had 88 Tempur-Pedic retail stores throughout the U.S. We plan to expand our network to 125 to 150 new retail stores in the long-term. We expect these retail stores to complement our existing third-party retail partners by increasing our products' brand awareness in the local markets. In addition to our high-end Tempur-Pedic retail stores, we operate Sleep Outfitters, a regional bedding retailer that had 104 stores in 2021. Additionally, in 2021, we expanded our retail presence in the International segment through our acquisition of Dreams. Dreams has a successful multi-channel sales strategy, with over 200 brick and mortar retail locations in the U.K., an industry-leading online channel, as well as manufacturing and delivery assets.
In 2020, we expanded our presence into the OEM market by offering non-branded products, including mattresses, pillows, and other bedding products and components at a wide range of price points. The addition of non-branded offerings expands our capabilities to service third-party retailers and creates opportunity to capture manufacturing profits from bedding brands outside our own.
Acquisition of Dreams
On August 2, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Dreams, for a cash purchase price of $476.7 million, which included $49.5 million of cash acquired. The transaction was funded using cash on hand and bank financing. As a multi-branded retailer, Dreams sells a variety of products across a range of price points with a margin profile lower than our historical International segment margins.
2021 Results of Operations
A summary of our results for the year ended December 31, 2021 include:
•Total net sales increased 34.1% to $4,930.8 million as compared to $3,676.9 million in 2020.
•Gross margin was 43.8% in 2021 as compared to 44.6% in 2020.
•Operating income was $912.3 million as compared to $532.1 million in 2020. Adjusted operating income, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was $918.5 million as compared to $617.7 million in 2020.
•Net income was $624.5 million as compared to $348.8 million in 2020. Adjusted net income, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, was $651.7 million as compared to $405.7 million in 2020.
•EPS increased to $3.06 as compared to $1.64 in 2020. Adjusted EPS, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, increased 67.0% to $3.19 as compared to $1.91 in 2020.
For a discussion and reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures as discussed above to the corresponding GAAP financial results, refer to the non-GAAP financial information set forth below under the heading "Non-GAAP Financial Information."
We may refer to net sales or earnings or other historical financial information on a "constant currency basis," which is a non-GAAP financial measure. These references to constant currency basis do not include operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency rates. To provide information on a constant currency basis, the applicable financial results are adjusted based on a simple mathematical model that translates current period results in local currency using the comparable prior corresponding period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the functional currency is the local country currency. This information is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance. Constant currency information is not recognized under GAAP, and it is not intended as an alternative to GAAP measures. Refer to Part II,