Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (Annual Report). Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. You should carefully read the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections of this Annual Report to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company that aims to transform the lives of patients by establishing EEV therapeutics as a new class of medicines and we aim to become the world’s foremost intracellular therapeutics company. Through our proprietary, highly versatile and modular EEV platform (EEV Platform), we are building a robust development portfolio of EEV therapeutic candidates designed to enable the efficient intracellular delivery of therapeutics in various organs and tissues with an improved therapeutic index.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all our resources to research and development efforts relating to our EEV Platform, advancing development of our portfolio of programs and general and administrative support for these operations, including raising capital. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sales of our preferred stock, and most recently, with proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our initial public offering (IPO). In November 2021, we completed our IPO pursuant to which we issued and sold 10,436,250 shares of our common stock, including 1,361,250 shares of common stock pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $20.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds from our IPO of $190.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $14.6 million and offering expenses payable of $3.4 million.
We have incurred losses since our inception. Our net losses were $51.2 million and $26.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $93.7 million. We expect to continue to generate operating losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future as we advance our platform and EEV therapeutic candidates into later stages of preclinical development and, if successful, clinical development. We will not generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more therapeutic candidates, if ever. If we obtain regulatory approval for any therapeutic candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution.
Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy, as we advance therapeutic candidates through preclinical and, if successful, into clinical development, seek regulatory approval, prepare for and, if any therapeutic candidates are approved, proceed to commercialization and operate as a public company. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions.
If we are unable to obtain funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion and ultimate commercialization efforts, which would adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations. Although we continue to pursue these plans, we may not be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund continuing operations, if at all.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we can generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $291.1 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources.” To finance our operations beyond that point we will need to raise additional capital, which cannot be assured.
Impact of the Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The duration of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the extent to which it may directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, subject to change and difficult to predict, including the duration of the outbreak, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19, such as new strains of the virus, including the Delta and Omicron variants and any future variants that may emerge, which may impact rates of infection and vaccination efforts, developments or perceptions regarding the safety of vaccines and the extent and effectiveness of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, including vaccination campaigns and lockdown measures, among others. At times during the pandemic, we, our contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs), and our contract research organizations (CROs), experienced temporary reductions in certain operations that have since normalized. We, together with our CMOs and CROs, are closely monitoring the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on these operations. Additionally, to provide a safe work environment for our employees, we have implemented various measures including limiting on-site presence to essential employees, providing for social distancing, increased sanitization of our facilities and providing personal protective equipment for our employees. We are continuing to monitor the impact and effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and our response to it, and we expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other business partners in light of the pandemic.
We have not incurred any significant impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as a result of the pandemic and we are not aware of any specific related event or circumstance that would require us to revise our estimates reflected in our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our estimates of the impact on our business may change based on new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue. We do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our therapeutic candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval or we successfully enter into collaboration or license arrangements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales, payments from collaboration or license arrangements that we may enter into with third parties, or any combination thereof.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our programs. These expenses include:
● personnel-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for individuals engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and preclinical development of our therapeutic candidates and research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors, and CROs;
● the cost of developing and validating our manufacturing process for use in our preclinical studies and potential future clinical trials, including the cost of raw materials used in our research and development activities, and engaging with third party CMOs;
● the cost of laboratory supplies and research materials;
● the costs of payments made under third-party licensing agreements and related future payments should certain development and regulatory milestones be achieved; and
● facilities, depreciation and other direct and allocated expenses, including rent and other operating costs, incurred as a result of our research and development activities.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed, or when it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered or the services rendered. Upfront payments under license agreements are expensed upon receipt of the license and annual maintenance fees under license agreements are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Milestone payments under license agreements are accrued, with a corresponding expense being recognized, in the period in which the milestone is determined to be probable of achievement and the related amount is reasonably estimable.
As a preclinical-stage company in the early phases of development, our research and development costs are often devoted to proof-of-concept studies and our overall EEV Platform that underpins our therapeutic candidates. Our direct, external research and development expenses consist primarily of fees paid to outside consultants, CROs, CMOs and research laboratories in connection with our process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. Our direct external research and development expenses also include fees incurred under license and intellectual property purchase agreements. We expect to track these external research and development costs on a program-by-program basis as we identify specific programs and product candidates to advance into clinical development.
We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our development efforts and facilities, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources and third-party consultants primarily to conduct our research and development activities as well as for managing our process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities.
Therapeutic candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our platform development efforts and planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future. We expect that the research and development expenses of our programs will increase in the near term as we initiate investigational new drug (IND)-enabling activities for our therapeutic candidates. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our therapeutic candidates. The successful development of our therapeutic candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, including the following:
● the scope, timing, rate of progress and expenses of our ongoing and potential future research activities, including preclinical and IND-enabling studies, clinical trials and other research and development activities we decide to pursue;
● the successful initiation, enrollment, and completion of clinical trials under current good clinical practices;
● the timing of filing and acceptance of INDs or comparable foreign applications that allow commencement of future clinical trials for our therapeutic candidates;
● whether our therapeutic candidates show safety and efficacy in our clinical trials and an acceptable risk-benefit profile in the intended populations;
● our ability to hire and retain key research and development personnel;
● our ability to successfully develop, obtain regulatory and marketing approvals of our therapeutic candidates for the expected indications and patient populations;
● our ability to establish and maintain agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if our therapeutic candidates are approved;
● commercializing therapeutic candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● our ability to maintain a continued acceptable safety, tolerability, and efficacy profile of our therapeutic candidates following approval;
● our ability to establish new licensing or collaboration arrangements to support our potential therapeutic candidates on favorable business terms;
● any decisions we make to discontinue, delay or modify our programs to focus on others;
● obtaining, maintaining, protecting and enforcing patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our therapeutic candidates;
● obtaining and maintaining adequate coverage and reimbursement from third party payors; and
● the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our therapeutic candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that therapeutic candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our therapeutic candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, legal, finance and accounting, corporate and business development, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include: legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting, and tax services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs and EEV Platform. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, director and officer insurance, and investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash and cash equivalents balances.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of gains and losses on disposal of fixed assets and gains and losses on foreign currency transactions.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred or for the research and development tax credits earned in each year and interim period as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of $93.1 million, which may be available to offset future taxable income, of which $3.2 million expire at various dates beginning in 2036 and the remaining $89.9 million do not expire but are limited in their usage to an annual deduction equal to 80% of annual taxable income. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had state net operating loss carryforwards of $88.0 million, which may be available to offset future taxable income and expire at various dates beginning in 2036. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $2.3 million and $1.2 million, respectively, which may be available to reduce future tax liabilities and expire at various dates beginning in 2039 and 2034, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically corroborate the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include those related to fees paid to:
● vendors in connection with discovery and preclinical development activities;
● CROs in connection with preclinical studies and testing; and
● third-party manufacturers in connection with the development and scale up activities and the production of materials.
We base the expense recorded related to contract research and manufacturing on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple service providers that conduct services and supply materials. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services were performed and the level of effort expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. While the majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met, some require advance payments. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. We record these as prepaid expenses on our consolidated balance sheets.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based compensation awards granted as stock-based compensation expense at fair value in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (ASC 718). Our stock-based payments include stock options and grants of common stock restricted for vesting conditions. The measurement date for awards is the date of grant, and stock-based compensation costs are recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period, on a straight-line basis. Stock-based compensation expense is classified in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations based on the function to which the related services are provided. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires inputs based on certain subjective assumptions, including the expected share price volatility, the expected term of the option, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of the option, and our expected dividend yield. Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock, and consequently, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering third-party valuations of our common stock as well as our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent third-party valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (Practice Aid). The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating the enterprise value across classes of series of capital stock in determining the fair value of our common stock at each valuation date. Since our IPO, we have determined the fair market value of our common stock using the closing price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market.
Subsequent to the IPO, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards is the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $35.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $14.8 million in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to:
● an increase of $7.1 million in personnel-related costs driven by increased headcount in our research and development function, inclusive of stock-based compensation expense of $0.9 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively;
● an increase of $4.1 million in facility and equipment-related costs, including depreciation, and other allocated miscellaneous expenses in connection with the operating lease for our corporate headquarters;
● an increase of $2.2 million in external expenses associated with discovery and preclinical studies performed by outside consulting services, including third party CROs; and
● an increase of $1.4 million in lab supplies due to the increased investment in research and development activities.
We expect our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we continue our current research and development activities, initiate new research programs, continue our preclinical development of therapeutic candidates and progress ENTR-601-44, and future product candidates, into clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $15.2 million, compared to $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $9.6 million was primarily attributable to the following:
● a $5.2 million increase in personnel-related costs, primarily as a result of the increase in headcount in our general and administrative function, inclusive of stock-based compensation expense of $1.6 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively;
● a $2.1 million increase in professional services costs, primarily attributable to legal and outside consulting services to support our continued research activities and development of our programs;
● a $1.3 million increase in other miscellaneous expenses, including fees attributable to operating as a public company; and
● a $1.0 million increase in facility and equipment-related expenses in connection with the operating lease for our corporate headquarters.
Other Income (Expense)
Total other expense was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to total other income of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total other income included interest income on our cash equivalents, which are primarily invested in money market funds which decreased less than $0.1 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception in 2016, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $51.2 million and $26.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $93.7 million and $42.5 million, respectively. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we further our platform development and advance the preclinical and, if successful, the clinical development of our programs. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with $201.8 million in proceeds from the sale of preferred stock, and most recently, with proceeds from the sale of common stock in our IPO completed in November 2021, including the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option to purchase additional shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $291.1 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $50.9 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $51.2 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million, depreciation expense of $1.1 million, loss on disposal of assets of $0.1 million, and net cash used in our operating assets and liabilities of $3.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $25.6 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $26.5 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation expense of $0.3 million, depreciation expense of $0.3 million, and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.6 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and resulted from our purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $307.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of $115.8 million of net proceeds from the sale of our Series B Preferred Stock in March 2021 and $190.7 million of aggregate net proceeds from our IPO in November 2021, and stock option exercises, inclusive of early exercises of stock options, of $1.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $50.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $49.8 million of net proceeds from the sale of our Series A Preferred Stock in January 2020 and August 2020, and stock option exercises, inclusive of early exercises of stock options, of $0.3 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and, if successful, the clinical development of our programs. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Our operating expenses and future funding requirements are expected to increase substantially as we continue to advance our portfolio of programs. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the second half of 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development, and commercialization of our candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including costs associated with:
● the continuation of our current research programs and our preclinical development of therapeutic candidates from our current research programs;
● seeking to identify additional research programs and additional therapeutic candidates;
● advancing our existing and future therapeutic candidates into clinical development;
● initiating preclinical studies and clinical trials for any therapeutic candidates we identify and develop or expand development of existing programs into additional indications;
● maintaining, expanding, enforcing, defending and protecting our intellectual property portfolio and providing reimbursement of third-party expenses related to our patent portfolio;
● timing of manufacturing for our therapeutic candidates and commercial manufacturing if any therapeutic candidate is approved;
● establishing and maintaining clinical and commercial supply for the development and manufacture of our therapeutic candidates;
● seeking regulatory and marketing approvals for any of our therapeutic candidates that we develop, if any;
● seeking to identify, establish and maintain additional collaborations and license agreements, and the success of those collaborations and license agreements;
● ultimately establishing a sales, marketing, and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any platforms for which we may obtain marketing approval, either by ourselves or in collaboration with others;
● generating revenue from commercial sales of therapeutic candidates we may develop for which we receive marketing approval;
● hiring additional personnel including research and development, clinical, and commercial personnel;
● adding operational, financial, and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development;
● achieve sufficient market acceptance, coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
● acquiring or in-licensing products, intellectual property, and technologies; and
● the ongoing costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, and other similar arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or therapeutic candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our therapeutic candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such therapeutic candidates ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, third-party manufacturers, and other third parties for preclinical research studies and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the preceding table as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
We have also entered into license agreements under which we are obligated to make certain payments. The table above does not include potential success payments, sublicense fees, royalty fees, licensing maintenance fees and reimbursement of patent maintenance costs that we may be required to pay under license agreements. For additional information about our license agreement and amounts that could become payable in the future under such agreements, see “Business-Intellectual property- License agreement with The Ohio State University” and Note 9 Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” or EGC, under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the JOBS Act). Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of delayed adoption of new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as private entities.
As an EGC, we may, and intend to, take advantage of certain exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions, as an EGC:
● we may present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations;
● we may avail ourselves of the exemption from providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (the Sarbanes-Oxley Act);
● we may avail ourselves of the exemption from complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis;
● we may provide reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements; and
● we may not require nonbinding advisory votes on executive compensation or stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments.
We will remain an EGC until the earliest to occur of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the previous rolling three-year period or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act).
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.