Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion focuses on 2021 and 2020 financial condition and results of operations and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Similar discussion of our 2019 financial condition and results and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are innovating and redefining the medication safety market and creating solutions designed to empower pharmacists, providers, and patients to optimize medication regimens. Our advanced technology, MedWise®, identifies the cause of medication-related problems, including adverse drug events (“ADEs”), so healthcare professionals can minimize harm and reduce medication-related risks. Our software and services help improve patient outcomes and lower healthcare costs through reduced hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and healthcare utilization. We believe we have the most extensive clinical tele-pharmacy network in the United States (“U.S.”), with seven call centers across the country, a number of which are tethered to academic institutions. Health plans and pharmacies nationwide use our solutions to assist them in meeting a range of value-based payment requirements and quality improvement benchmarks. Our vision and mission are supported by our industry-recognized leadership team, our significant investments, and collaborations to advance precision pharmacotherapy research and its application in clinical practice, and our culture.
We operate our business through two segments, CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare, which accounted for 75% and 25% of revenue, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our CareVention HealthCare segment provides our clients, primarily organizations with Programs of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (“PACE”), with medication fulfillment services, cloud-based software, pharmacy benefit management (“PBM”) solutions, and clinical pharmacist services at the point-of-care. Our MedWise HealthCare segment provides our clients, primarily health plans and retail pharmacies, with cloud-based software and full-service clinical pharmacy programs.
CareVention HealthCare
CareVention HealthCare primarily services PACE, which is a Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (“CMS”) sponsored program providing comprehensive medical and social services to adults age 55 and older who need a nursing facility level of care but can live safely in community settings. We access the market through a number of different service lines and brands, including CareKinesis®, Capstone Risk Adjustment Services, CareVention Consulting™, PACElogic™, TruChart®, PeakTPA, PersonifilRx®, and Pharmastar®.
Our largest CareVention HealthCare revenue offering is our medication fulfillment services, which is built around our novel and proprietary MedWise® technology, designed to enable clinicians to increase patient safety, create individualized medication regimens, promote adherence, and eliminate unnecessary prescriptions. Our medication fulfillment and adherence packaging services utilize MedWise technology to reduce medication-related risk for the high-cost, high-risk PACE population. The CareVention HealthCare suite of offerings also includes risk adjustment services, PBM solutions, cloud-based electronic health records solutions (“EHR”), and third-party administration services, which are all specifically tailored to the PACE market. Our CareVention HealthCare segment serves more than 150 healthcare organizations.
The CareVention HealthCare segment revenue model is primarily based on payments on a per-member per-month (“PMPM”) basis, payments on a subscription basis, payments on a transaction basis, and payments for charges and dispensing fees for medication fulfillment.
MedWise HealthCare
Our MedWise HealthCare segment promotes medication safety and adherence to improve patient outcomes, reduce healthcare costs, and strengthen patient engagement. MedWise HealthCare is primarily comprised of service offerings from our acquisitions of the SinfoníaRx business in September 2017 and PrescribeWellness in March 2019. As a result of these acquisitions, we believe that we are one of the leading providers of medication therapy management (“MTM”) software and services for Medicare, Medicaid, and commercial health plans, and that we are a leading provider of cloud-based patient engagement software and services for retail pharmacies.
Approximately 18,000 retail pharmacies and more than 350 health plans, including several Blue Cross Blue Shield organizations, Express Scripts, Humana, UnitedHealth Group, and WellCare, utilize our MedWise HealthCare solutions to execute a range of clinical programs. These programs support MTM, Medicare quality improvement programs, Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (“HEDIS”) quality measures, and post-hospital discharge care transitions through a combination of our nearly 30,000 PrescribeWellness network pharmacists and/or our clinical tele-pharmacy call centers across the country. Through our unique, proprietary approaches to healthcare, our MedWise HealthCare segment offers cloud-based software and clinical pharmacist services through various service offerings and brands, such as MedWise® Safety Review, MedWise® MTM, PrescribeWellness, and DoseMeRx®.
The MedWise HealthCare segment revenue model is primarily based payments on a PMPM basis, payments on a subscription basis, and payments on a fee-for-service basis for each clinical intervention.
Our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $331.3 million and $297.2 million, respectively. We incurred net losses of $79.1 million and $81.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.6 million compared to $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for our definition of Adjusted EBITDA, why we present Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net losses to Adjusted EBITDA.
We face a variety of challenges and risks, which we will need to address and manage as we pursue our growth strategy. In particular, we will need to continue to innovate in the face of a rapidly changing healthcare landscape if we are to remain competitive. We will also need to effectively manage our growth, especially related to our expansion beyond the PACE and post-acute markets to other at-risk providers and payers. Our senior management continuously focuses on these and other challenges, and we believe that our culture of innovation and our history of growth and expansion will contribute to the success of our business. We cannot, however, assure you that we will be successful in addressing and managing the many challenges and risks that we face.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate and manage our business. These metrics are useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry.
We monitor the key metrics set forth in the preceding table to help us evaluate trends, establish budgets, measure the effectiveness and efficiency of our operations, and gauge our cash generation. We discuss Adjusted EBITDA in more detail in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.” We also monitor net revenue retention rate described as follows.
Net Revenue Retention
We believe that our ability to retain revenue associated with new or existing client relationships is an indicator of the stability of our revenue base and the long-term value we provide to our clients. We assess our performance in this area using a metric we refer to as net revenue retention. We calculate our net revenue retention by comparing revenue by client and segment at the end of the most recent calendar year divided by revenue at the end of the prior calendar year from only clients that were contracted with us at the end of the prior calendar year. We believe net revenue retention captures our cross-sell success, client expansion, changes in pricing, and client churn or downgrades.
During 2021 and 2020, our CareVention HealthCare segment generated net revenue retention of 110% and 111%, respectively, driven by census growth at existing clients and cross-sell revenue. Our MedWise HealthCare segment generated net revenue retention of 85% in 2021 compared to 73% in 2020 due to improved client retention efforts.
Factors Affecting our Future Performance
We believe that our future success will be dependent on many factors, including our ability to maintain and grow our relationships with existing clients, expand our client base, continue to enter new markets and expand our offerings to meet evolving market needs. While these areas present significant opportunities, they also present risks that we must manage to ensure successful results. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” for a discussion of certain risks and uncertainties that may impact our future success.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on both our employees and operations. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, including hybrid and remote work arrangements, reduced density in our buildings, guidelines to ensure safe business travel, and safety protocols for on-site employees, including social distancing, enhanced cleaning, and contact tracing.
We continue to experience challenges with revenue growth as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In our CareVention segment, we had seen overall census growth for PACE dip below historical levels during 2020. During the second quarter of 2021, we experienced a recovery in our net PACE census growth to pre-pandemic levels, which continued through the remainder of 2021 and positively impacted revenue.
Our MedWise HealthCare segment also continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Changes made by CMS to their Medicare Part D Star Ratings improvement programs for health plans in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted our medication safety services revenues. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has elevated the role of retail pharmacies and created strong demand for pharmacists and pharmacy technicians. As a result, we have faced challenges in hiring clinical staff.
Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and the global responses to curb its spread, we are not able to predict the continuing effects that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity. We continue to actively monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and are prepared to mitigate potential adverse impacts to our business, including our financial position, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue is derived from our product sales and service activities under our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare segments. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, product sales represented 57% and 54% of our total revenue, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, service revenue represented 43% and 46% of our total revenue, respectively.
CareVention HealthCare
PACE Product Revenue
We provide medication fulfillment pharmacy services to PACE organizations. While the majority of medications are routinely filled in order to treat chronic conditions, the mix and quantity of medications can vary. Revenue from medication fulfillment services is generally billed monthly or weekly, depending on whether the PACE organization is contracted with a pharmacy benefit manager, and recognized when medications are delivered and control has passed to the client. At the time of delivery, we have performed substantially all our performance obligations under our client contracts. We do not experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
PACE Solutions
We provide medication safety services and health plan management services to PACE organizations. These services primarily include medication safety services, risk adjustment services, PBM solutions, EHR solutions, and third-party administration services. Revenue related to these services primarily consists of a fixed monthly fee assessed based on number of members served, or PMPM, a fee for each claim adjudicated, and subscription fees. These fees are recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation to stand ready to provide PACE services, which occurs when our clients have access to the PACE services. We generally bill for PACE services on a monthly basis as the services are provided.
MedWise HealthCare
Product Revenue
We provide COVID-19 test kits to pharmacies and other clients. Revenue from the sale of these products is generally billed when test kits are shipped and is recognized as we satisfy our performance obligations to deliver the test kits. We do not experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
Medication Safety Services
We provide medication safety services, which include identification of high-risk individuals, medication regimen reviews, including patient and prescriber counseling, and targeted interventions to increase adherence and close gaps in care. Revenue related to these services primarily consists of PMPM fees and fees for each medication review and clinical assessment completed. Revenue is recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation to stand ready to provide medication safety services, which occurs when our clients have access to the medication safety services and when medication reviews and clinical assessments are completed. We generally bill for the medication safety services on a monthly basis.
Software Subscription and Services
We provide software as a service, or SaaS, solutions which allow for the identification of individuals with high medication-related risk, for patient communication and engagement, for documentation of clinical interventions, for optimizing medication therapy, for targeting adherence improvement, and for precision dosing. Revenues related to these software services primarily consist of monthly subscription fees and are recognized monthly as we meet our performance obligation to provide access to the software. Revenue for implementation and set up services is generally recognized over the contract term as the software services are provided. We generally bill for the software services on a monthly basis.
Cost of Revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization)
Product Cost
Cost of product revenue includes all costs directly related to the fulfillment and distribution of medications under our CareVention HealthCare offerings. These costs consist primarily of the purchase price of the medications we dispense, shipping, packaging, expenses associated with operating our medication fulfillment centers, including employment costs and stock-based compensation, and technology expenses. Such costs also include direct overhead
expenses and allocated indirect overhead costs. We allocate indirect overhead costs among functions based on employee headcount. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, medication costs represented 81% and 79% of our total product costs, respectively.
Service Cost
Cost of service revenue includes all costs directly related to servicing our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare service contracts. These costs primarily consist of labor costs, including stock-based compensation, outside contractors, expenses related to supporting our software platforms, direct overhead expenses, and allocated indirect overhead costs. We allocate indirect overhead costs among functions based on employee headcount.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our research and development functions. This personnel include employees engaged in scientific research, healthcare analytics, the design and development of new scientific algorithms, and the enhancement of our software and technology platforms. Research and development expenses also include fees paid to third-party consultants, costs related to quality assurance and testing, and other allocated facility-related overhead and expenses.
We capitalize certain costs incurred in connection with obtaining or developing the proprietary software platforms that support our product and service contracts, including third-party contractors and payroll costs for employees directly involved with the software development. Capitalized software development costs are amortized beginning when the software project is substantially completed and the asset is ready for its intended use. Costs incurred during the preliminary project stage and post implementation stage, as well as maintenance and training costs, are expensed as incurred. We continue to focus our research and development efforts on adding new features and applications to increase the functionality and enhance the ease of use of our existing suite of software solutions.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we increase our research and development efforts to further strengthen and enhance our software solutions and service offerings but will decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term because we expect our revenue to increase at a greater rate than such expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist principally of salaries, commissions, bonuses, and stock-based compensation and employee benefits for sales, marketing, and account management personnel, as well as travel costs related to sales, marketing, and account management activities. Marketing costs also include costs for communication and branding materials, conferences, trade shows, public relations, and allocated overhead.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we strategically invest to grow our sales, account management, and marketing infrastructure as we introduce new products and enter new markets but decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation for employees who are responsible for information systems, administration, human resources, finance, strategy, legal, and executive management, as well as other corporate expenses associated with these functional areas. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, consulting, and accounting services, and allocated overhead. General and administrative expenses are expensed when incurred.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our infrastructure but decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Change in Fair Value of Acquisition-related Contingent Consideration
We classified our acquisition-related contingent consideration as a liability. Acquisition-related contingent consideration was subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date. Any change in the fair value of such acquisition-related contingent consideration was reflected in our consolidated statements of operations as a change in fair value of the liability. We adjusted the carrying value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration until the contingency was finally determined or final payment was made.
Intangible Asset Impairment Charge
Definite-lived intangible assets are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. When an impairment review is performed to evaluate a long-lived asset for recoverability, we compare forecasts of undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the long-lived asset to its carrying value. If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and disposition of an asset are less than its carrying amount, we would recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying value of the impaired asset over its fair value, determined based on discounted cash flows or a combination of income and market approaches.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily attributable to our capital investment in equipment, our capitalized software, and our acquisition-related intangibles.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily attributable to interest expense associated with our 2026 Convertible Notes, our 2020 Credit Facility (as defined below), our 2015 Line of Credit (as defined below), and the promissory notes related to the Personica acquisition purchase consideration. Interest expense also includes the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs related to our various debt arrangements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased $30.5 million, or 19%, from $159.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $190.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. New business acquired from the Personica acquisition in October 2020 contributed approximately $6.2 million to the increase in 2021. Excluding the Personica acquisition, approximately $17.7 million of the increase was due to increased medication fulfillment volume from growth in the number of patients served by our existing clients, medication mix of prescriptions filled, and payer mix. Medications dispensed by our community pharmacy network on behalf of CareVention HealthCare contributed $6.6 million to the increase as a result of amended client agreements. The increase in product revenue was partially offset by a $670 thousand decrease in COVID-19 test kits sold through our CareVention HealthCare segment and PrescribeWellness pharmacy network.
Service Revenue
Service revenue increased $3.6 million, or 3%, from $137.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $141.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
CareVention HealthCare service revenue increased by $10.8 million, or 23%, to $58.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The acquisition of Personica in October 2020 contributed approximately $6.3 million to the increase in 2021. The remaining increase was primarily attributable to new clients and growth within existing clients, primarily in our third-party administration services division, and an increase in manufacturer rebates earned under our pharmacy benefit management services.
Service revenues generated by our MedWise HealthCare segment decreased by approximately $7.3 million, or 8%, to $82.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Medication safety services decreased $11.4 million, primarily as a result of a large MTM client contract that did not renew in 2021 and of reduced fees in the final year of the EMTM pilot program. This decrease was offset by an increase in software subscription services of $4.1 million, or 10%, related to a contract to support 2021 Medicare open enrollment using the PrescribeWellness platform.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue increased $26.9 million, or 23%, from $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $144.1 million for the comparable period in 2021. New business acquired from the Personica acquisition
contributed approximately $5.8 million to the increase. Excluding the Personica acquisition, increased medication volume from growth in the number of patients served by our existing customers contributed approximately $13.6 million to the change. Medications dispensed by our community pharmacy network on behalf of CareVention HealthCare contributed $6.6 million to the increase as a result of amended client agreements. The increase in cost of product revenue was also due to a $638 thousand increase in distribution charges related to higher shipping volume for the medications we fulfilled. The remaining increase in cost of product revenue was primarily attributable to increased personnel and employee costs to support our growth.
Cost of Service Revenue
Cost of service revenue increased $1.6 million, or 2%, to $89.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020.
Cost of service revenue related to our CareVention HealthCare segment increased $8.3 million, or 26%, to $40.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Of the total increase, $3.2 million was related to the acquisition of Personica in October 2020. The remaining increase was primarily related to increased personnel and employee costs and professional services related to our third-party administration services. In February 2022, we entered into a business process outsourcing contract within our third-party administration services in order to better scale these services into markets outside of PACE.
Cost of service revenue related to our MedWise HealthCare segment decreased $6.7 million, or 12%, to $49.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was comprised of lower employee compensation costs due to a decrease in headcount, a decrease in the use of contracted resources, and reduced printing and postage expenses resulting from fewer clinical interventions performed.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $1.6 million, or 9%, from $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Stock-based compensation costs increased $1.8 million primarily as a result of equity awards granted during 2021. Research and development expenses also increased by $942 thousand due to increased technology-related expenses for new project management tools to support our software development teams. The increase in research and development expenses was partially offset by a decrease in employee compensation costs, excluding stock-based compensation, and professional services primarily due to increased capitalization rates of development initiatives to enhance the software supporting our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare offerings.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $4.4 million, or 21%, to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $1.7 million increase in employee compensation costs, which included a $789 thousand increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily related to equity awards granted during 2021. The remaining increase in employee compensation costs was primarily related to additional headcount and increased employee benefits costs, including bonus and commission expense. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was also due to a $1.0 million increase in marketing and public relations related expenses, including advertising services, and a $519 thousand increase in professional consulting services related to enhancing and executing the Company’s branding and marketing strategies. The remaining increase was primarily attributable to increased software licenses and technology-related expenses related to an enhanced client and marketing management tool and increased conference and travel related spend.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $8.4 million, or 13%, from $65.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $73.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The acquisition of Personica contributed approximately $499 thousand to the increase in expenses during 2021, which consisted primarily of employee compensation costs, including stock-based compensation, and professional consulting services. General and administrative expenses also includes an $800 thousand contract termination fee in order to enter into a more favorable
PBM rebate agreement. Excluding costs related to the Personica acquisition and the contract termination fee, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $7.0 million.
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to higher employee compensation costs of $4.1 million, which included a $2.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily related to equity awards granted during 2021. The remaining increase in employee costs was primarily related to increased costs for health insurance premiums and other supplemental benefits, including bonus expense. The increase in general and administrative expenses was also due to a $711 thousand increase in directors and officers and cyber insurance premiums and a $692 thousand increase in realignment costs, which include severance and other employee costs, related to the realignment of our Company’s resources to better support our strategic objectives. Also contributing to the increase in general administrative expenses were a $578 thousand increase in professional consulting services, a $449 thousand increase in recruiting expenses, a $338 thousand increase in bad debt expense, and a $214 thousand increase in employee travel and office-related expenses. Partially offsetting these increases was a $577 thousand reduction in acquisition-related costs incurred in the prior year related to the Personica acquisition that was completed in October 2020.
Acquisition-Related Contingent Consideration Expense
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we elected to accelerate the payment of the acquisition-related contingent consideration associated with our acquisition of Cognify in 2018 for an aggregate payment of $13.4 million, which was partially satisfied by cash payments of $6.4 million and by the issuance of 135,434 shares of our common stock with a fair value of $6.9 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $2.6 million charge to increase the fair value of the Cognify acquisition-related contingent consideration primarily due to the accelerated payment. No charges were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 as the final amount of the Cognify acquisition-related contingent consideration liability was determined and fixed as of December 31, 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we made the final cash payment of $166 thousand in full satisfaction of the remaining acquisition-related contingent consideration liability.
Intangible Asset Impairment Charge
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $5.0 million intangible asset impairment charge related to certain intangible assets obtained from the Medliance acquisition in 2014. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we became aware of changes in circumstances impacting the future performance of our pharmacy cost management services and evaluated the recoverability of the related intangible assets by comparing their carrying amount to the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the assets to determine if the carrying value is not recoverable. The recoverability test indicated that certain customer relationships and developed technology intangible assets were impaired. As a result, we used an income approach to measure the fair value of the intangible assets and recognized non-cash impairment charges of $3.8 million and $1.2 million to the customer relationships and developed technology intangible assets, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not record any intangible asset impairment charges in 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $2.7 million, or 6%, from $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily due to a $5.1 million increase in the amortization of capitalized software related to new software functionality placed into service since 2020 to support our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare segments. The increase in amortization related to capitalized software was partially offset by a $2.1 million decrease in amortization expenses primarily related to changes in the estimated useful lives of certain intangible assets during the prior year.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $11.6 million from $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to a $11.7 million decrease in interest expense related to the adoption of ASU 2020-06, which significantly reduced the debt discount accretion in 2021 related to the 2026 Convertible Notes. The decrease was also due to a decrease in interest expense of $1.2 million related to additional interest incurred during 2020 as a result of the failure to remove the restrictive legend on the 2026 Convertible
Notes. The decrease in interest expense was partially offset by an $1.1 million increase in interest expense related to additional borrowings on the 2020 Credit Facility during 2021 compared to 2020.
Income Taxes
On February 12, 2021, the Company received a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service, which determined, based on information submitted and representations made by the Company, that the Company met the requirements to deduct the interest expense resulting from the amortization of the debt discount associated with the 2026 Notes. As a result, the Company recorded a deferred tax asset of $26,313 and a corresponding $26,313 increase to its valuation allowance. As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a full valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $627 thousand primarily related to indefinite-lived deferred tax liabilities for goodwill amortization, which resulted in an effective tax rate of (0.8)%. The effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the full valuation allowance recorded that is currently limiting the realizability of our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. Accordingly, the tax benefit was limited due to unbenefited losses during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $5.2 million, which resulted in an effective tax rate of 6.0%. The benefit primarily consists of the benefit generated by the Company’s losses, the benefit from windfall tax benefits generated from the vesting of restricted stock, disqualifying dispositions, and the exercising of nonqualified stock options during the period, offset by other tax expense due to the increase in the Company's valuation allowance.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
To provide investors with additional information about our financial results, we disclose Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, each of which is considered a non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted EBITDA consists of net loss plus certain other expenses, which include interest expense, income tax expense or benefit, depreciation and amortization, change in fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration expense, intangible asset impairment charge, settlement costs, business optimization expenses, severance costs, acquisition-related expense, and stock-based compensation expense. We consider acquisition-related expense to include nonrecurring direct transaction and integration costs, severance, and the impact of purchase accounting adjustments related to the fair value of acquired deferred revenue. We consider business optimization expenses to include contract termination payments, severance, retention payments, and other employee and non-recurring vendor costs incurred related to our business optimization initiatives during 2021. We consider severance costs to include severance payments related to the realignment of our resources. Adjusted EBITDA margin is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin because they are some of the measures used by our management and Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance, and we consider them important supplemental measures of performance. We believe these metrics are commonly used by the financial community, and we present them to enhance investors’ understanding of our operating performance and cash flows. We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin provide investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance.
Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin:
● as measures of operating performance to assist in comparing performance from period to period on a consistent basis;
● to prepare and approve our annual budget; and
● to develop short- and long-term operational plans.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. As non-GAAP measures, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations in that they do not reflect all the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with GAAP. In particular:
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect cash interest income or expense;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation and related employer taxes;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect settlement costs paid during 2021;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect costs incurred in connection with the Company’s business optimization initiatives during 2021;
● Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin do not reflect severance costs related to the realignment of our resources;
● other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin alongside other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss and our other GAAP financial results and not in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. You should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in the presentation, and we do not intend to imply that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
The following is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin to our net loss for the periods presented:
Adjusted Diluted Net (Loss) Income Per Share, or Adjusted Diluted EPS
Adjusted Diluted EPS excludes the impact of certain items and, therefore, has not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe the exclusion of these items assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying operations, results, and trends; allows for comparability with our peer company index and industry; and enables more consistency with our expected capital structure on a going forward basis. Our management uses this measure along with corresponding GAAP financial measures to manage our business and to evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace. We define Adjusted Diluted EPS as net loss before fair value adjustments for acquisition-related contingent consideration, intangible asset impairment charge, amortization of acquired intangibles, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, settlement costs, business optimization expenses, severance costs, acquisition-related expense, stock-based compensation related expense, and the tax impact of those items using a normalized tax rate on pre-tax income (loss) adjusted for those items expressed on a per share basis using weighted average diluted shares outstanding. We consider acquisition-related expense to include nonrecurring direct transaction and integration costs, severance, and the impact of purchase accounting adjustments related to the fair value of acquired deferred revenue. We consider business optimization expenses to include contract termination payments, severance, retention payments, and other employee and non-recurring vendor costs incurred related to our business optimization initiatives during 2021. We consider severance costs to include severance payments related to the realignment of our resources.
Adjusted Diluted EPS is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies. In the future, we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in the presentation, and we do not intend to imply that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
The following table reconciles net loss per share on a diluted basis, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted Diluted EPS:
(1) The impact to taxes was calculated using a normalized statutory tax rate applied to pre-tax income or loss adjusted for the respective items above and then subtracting or adding the tax provision or benefit, respectively, as determined for GAAP purposes.
The following table reconciles the diluted weighted average shares of common stock outstanding used to calculate net loss per share on a diluted basis for GAAP purposes to the diluted weighted average shares of common stock outstanding used to calculate Adjusted Diluted EPS:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2021, we accounted for the convertible senior subordinated notes utilizing the if-converted method in accordance with the guidance under ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 (see Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Under this method, we are required to presume that the convertible senior subordinated notes are converted at the beginning of the current period and settled entirely in our common stock. However, no potential shares are assumed outstanding and are excluded from the diluted EPS calculation if including them would have an anti-dilutive effect. For the year ended December 31, 2021, there was no impact on diluted EPS from the convertible senior subordinated notes as the conversion would have had an anti-dilutive effect.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, under the previous accounting standard, we accounted for the convertible senior subordinated notes utilizing the treasury stock method. Under this method, we presumed that we would settle the notes entirely or partly in cash. The underlying shares issuable upon conversion of the notes were excluded from the calculation of diluted EPS, except to the extent that the average stock price for the reporting period exceeded their conversion price of $69.95 per share. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, there was no impact on diluted EPS from the convertible senior subordinated notes as the conversion price exceeded our average stock price.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We incurred net losses of $79.1 million, $81.0 million, and $32.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our primary liquidity and capital requirements are for research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative expenses, debt service obligations, and strategic business acquisitions. We have funded our operations, working capital needs, and investments with cash generated through operations, issuance of stock, and borrowings under our credit facilities. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash of $9.7 million.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of our net loss of $79.1 million, offset by the addition of noncash items of $88.8 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities totaling $5.7 million. The noncash items primarily included $47.7 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $38.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, $2.2 million of amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts primarily related to the 2026 Notes and acquisition-related notes payable, and a $513 thousand change in net deferred taxes, offset by acquisition-related contingent consideration paid of $67 thousand related to the Cognify acquisition. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities mostly due to increased consideration payable to clients under our rebate administration services and an increase in accrued employee compensation costs. The change in operating assets and liabilities was partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to an increase in contract assets related to rebate administration services under our PBM solutions and an increase in non-trade receivables.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of our net loss of $81.0 million, $2.6 million in payments for the contingent purchase price consideration related to the Cognify acquisition, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities totaling $5.1 million, offset by the addition of noncash items of $93.5 million. These noncash items primarily included $45.0 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $32.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, $13.6 million of amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts primarily related to the 2026 Convertible Notes, changes in net deferred taxes of $5.3 million, a $5.0 million intangible asset impairment charge, and a $2.6 million change in fair value of the Cognify acquisition-related contingent consideration. The change in operating assets and liabilities, net of the effect from acquisitions, was primarily due to an increase in client claims receivables and an increase in accounts receivable. The increase in accounts receivable was attributable to growth in our CareVention HealthCare segment as a result of new clients and growth in existing clients, as well as the timing of client payments. The change in operating assets and liabilities was also due to a decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities primarily due to lower accrued employee compensation costs. The change in operating assets and liabilities was partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to payments received related to prior year contract asset balances and non-trade receivables and an increase in accounts payable primarily due to the timing of vendor payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which reflected $31.8 million in software development costs for our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare technologies. Net cash used in investing activities also included $3.4 million in purchases of property and equipment primarily to
support technology-related needs and infrastructure at our pharmacies, call center locations, and Moorestown, New Jersey headquarters, as well as fixtures and improvements for our new office space in Eden Prairie, Minnesota and for an expansion of our pharmacy in Boulder, Colorado.
Net cash used in investing activities was $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and reflected $6.8 million paid in connection with the acquisition of Personica, net of cash acquired. In addition, net cash used in investing activities consisted of $18.8 million in software development costs for our CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare technologies. Net cash used in investing activities also consisted of $3.1 million in purchases of property, equipment, and leasehold improvements primarily related to equipment to support the pharmacy at our Moorestown, New Jersey location, improvements for our expanded office space at our Moorestown, New Jersey headquarters, and improvements for our call center space in Tucson, Arizona to support our medication safety services.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily reflected $19.5 million of net borrowings on our 2020 Credit Facility mainly used to fund the repayment of the promissory notes in connection with the Personica acquisition. Proceeds received from the exercise of stock options totaled $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was partially offset by repayments of $16.5 million related to the promissory notes in connection with the 2020 Personica acquisition.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily reflected $10.0 million of borrowings on our 2020 Credit Facility to fund the acquisition of Personica and $3.9 million of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was partially offset by $3.8 million of payments for the contingent purchase price consideration related to the Cognify acquisition, $3.0 million in payments for payroll taxes remitted to taxing authorities on behalf of employees for shares withheld from the net exercise of stock options during 2020, and $1.3 million in payments for debt financing costs.
Funding Requirements
On September 6, 2017, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the “2015 Line of Credit”), which provided for borrowing availability in an aggregate amount up to $60,000 to be used for general corporate purposes, with a $1,000 sublimit for cash management services, letters of credit, and foreign exchange transactions. The 2015 Line of Credit matured pursuant to its terms on December 6, 2020. To replace the 2015 Line of Credit, on December 18, 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Western Alliance Bank, or the 2020 Credit Facility, which provides for a $120 million secured revolving credit facility, with a $1.0 million sublimit for cash management services and letters of credit and foreign exchange transactions. The 2020 Credit Facility matures on May 16, 2025. As of December 31, 2021, we had $27.7 million available for borrowing and $90.4 million of unused commitments under our 2020 Credit Facility, and we were in compliance with all related financial and operating covenants thereunder. See Note 13 in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information with respect to the 2020 Credit Facility.
We believe that our unrestricted cash of $9.7 million as of December 31, 2021, borrowing capacity under our 2020 Credit Facility, and cash flows from continuing operations will be sufficient to meet the short-term and long-term cash requirements of our business operations. Our ability to maintain successful operations will depend on, among other things, new business, the retention of clients, and the effectiveness of sales and marketing initiatives.
We may seek additional funding through public or private debt or equity financings. We may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all. The terms of any financing may adversely affect our stockholders. If we are unable to obtain funding, we could be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion, or commercialization efforts, which could adversely affect our business prospects. There is no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund continuing operations, if at all.
Future Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes certain estimated future cash requirements under our various contractual obligations, including future principal payments on the 2020 Credit Facility, principal and interest payments on our convertible senior subordinated notes, minimum rental payments on our noncancelable operating leases, and minimum payments on our other commitments as of December 31, 2021. These amounts are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction
Principal payments on our 2020 Credit Facility are due on the maturity date of May 16, 2025. Our convertible senior subordinated notes mature on February 16, 2026, unless earlier converted or repurchased. Interest payments on our convertible senior subordinated notes are payable semiannually at a rate of 1.75% per year.
Our existing office lease agreements provide us with the option to renew and generally provide for rental payments on a graduated basis. Our future operating lease obligations would change if we entered into additional operating lease agreements as we expand our operations.
Other commitments include $17.4 million of minimum purchase obligations under certain vendor agreements to provide information technology services, a $100 thousand letter of credit, which renews annually and expires in September 2027, related to our lease agreement for our corporate headquarters in Moorestown, New Jersey, and a $30 thousand per month minimum purchase obligation through December 31, 2022 with our data aggregation partner for our pharmacy cost management services.
Effective March 2019, we entered into an Affiliated Pharmacy Agreement and Pharmaceutical Program Supply Agreement with Thrifty Drug Stores, Inc., which was replaced on July 1, 2020 by a new Affiliated Pharmacy Agreement and Pharmaceutical Program Supply Agreement, to provide us with the pharmaceutical products that we sell. The contract commits us to a minimum purchase obligation of 98% of our total prescription product requirements from Thrifty Drug Stores through September 2023. The table below does not include future payments to Thrifty Drug Stores because certain terms of these payments were not determinable at December 31, 2021 due to the timing and volume of future purchases.
On February 24, 2022, we expanded our existing relationship with a third-party service provider for business process support and technology services designed to enhance the operational efficiency of its third-party administration services and transform its electronic health records solutions. As a result, the partner will hire approximately 180 employees from our Company, hire to fill existing open positions, and augment with additional resources to meet client demand. The agreement term is seven years and includes total estimated fees of $115.3 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
We base this management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. We consider
these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Our significant accounting policies, and related estimates and assumptions, are described more fully in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We provide technology-enabled solutions tailored toward the specific needs of healthcare organizations, payers, providers, and pharmacies. These solutions can be integrated or provided on a standalone basis. Contracts generally have a term of one to five years and generally renew at the end of the initial term. In most cases, clients may terminate their contracts with a notice period ranging from zero to 180 days without cause, thereby limiting the term in which we have enforceable rights and obligations. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that is expected in exchange for the goods or services.
We use the practical expedient to not account for significant financing components because the period between recognition and collection does not exceed one year for most of our contracts. We do not disclose the amount of variable consideration that we expect to recognize in future periods as the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied performance obligation or to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a distinct good or service that forms part of single performance obligation, and the terms of that variable consideration relate specifically to our efforts to transfer the distinct service, or to a specific outcome from transferring the distinct service. Our customers’ contracts primarily include monthly fees associated with unspecified membership, claims, or MSRs that fluctuate throughout the contract.
CareVention HealthCare
PACE Product Revenue
We provide medication fulfillment pharmacy services to PACE organizations. While the majority of medications are routinely filled in order to treat chronic conditions, the mix and quantity of medications can vary. Revenue from medication fulfillment services is generally billed monthly or weekly, depending on whether the PACE organization is contracted with a pharmacy benefit manager, and recognized when medications are delivered and control has passed to the client. At the time of delivery, we have performed substantially all our performance obligations under our client contracts. We do not experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
PACE Solutions
We provide medication safety services and health plan management services to PACE organizations. These services primarily include medication safety services, risk adjustment services, PBM solutions, EHR solutions, and third-party administration services. Revenue related to these services primarily consists of a fixed monthly fee assessed based on number of members served, or PMPM, a fee for each claim adjudicated, and subscription fees. These fees are recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation to stand ready to provide PACE services, which occurs when our clients have access to the PACE services. We generally bill for PACE services on a monthly basis as the services are provided.
For client contracts for which we perform both medication fulfillment and the PBM services, we recognize revenue using the gross method at the contract price negotiated with our clients and when we have concluded that we control the prescription drug before it is transferred to the client plan members. We control prescriptions dispensed indirectly through our retail pharmacy network because we have separate contractual arrangements with those pharmacies, have discretion in setting the price for the transaction, and assume primary responsibility for fulfilling the promise to provide prescription drugs to our client plan members while performing the related PBM services. These factors indicate that we are the principal and, as such, we recognize the total prescription price contracted with clients in revenue.
MedWise HealthCare
Product Revenue
We provide COVID-19 test kits to pharmacies and other clients. Revenue from the sale of these products is generally billed when test kits are shipped and is recognized as we satisfy our performance obligations to deliver the test kits. We do not experience a significant level of returns or reshipments.
Medication Safety Services
We provide medication safety services, which include identification of high-risk individuals, medication regimen reviews, including patient and prescriber counseling, and targeted interventions to increase adherence and close gaps in care. Revenue related to these services primarily consists of PMPM fees and fees for each medication review and assessment completed. Revenue is recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation to stand ready to provide medication safety services, which occurs when our clients have access to the medication safety services, and when medication reviews and assessments are completed. We generally bill for the medication safety services on a monthly basis.
Software Subscription and Services
We provide software as a service, or SaaS, solutions which allow for the identification of individuals with high medication-related risk, for patient communication and engagement, for documentation of clinical interventions, for optimizing medication therapy, for targeting adherence improvement, and for precision dosing. Revenues related to these software services primarily consist of monthly subscription fees and are recognized monthly as we meet our performance obligation to provide access to the software. Revenue for implementation and set up services is generally recognized over the contract term as the software services are provided. We generally bill for the software services on a monthly basis.
Business Combinations
Acquired businesses are accounted for using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the purchase price be allocated to the net assets acquired at their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Amounts allocated to contingent consideration are recorded to the balance sheet at the date of acquisition based on their relative fair values. The purchase price allocation requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, with respect to intangible assets. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates used in valuing acquired intangible assets include:
● future expected cash flows from sales and acquired developed technologies;
● the acquired company’s trade name and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and customer relationships will continue to be used in the combined company's portfolio;
● the probability of meeting the future events; and
● discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates were inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used, the purchase price for the acquisition could have been allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we had made. In addition, unanticipated events and circumstances could have occurred, which could have affected the accuracy or validity of such estimates. If such events had occurred, we could have been required to record a charge against the value ascribed to an acquired asset or an increase in the amounts recorded for assumed liabilities.
Goodwill
Goodwill consists of the excess purchase price over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for impairment annually by reporting unit. Based on these considerations, we have determined that our two operating segments, CareVention HealthCare and MedWise HealthCare, each represent a reporting unit for our goodwill impairment assessment.
GAAP provides an entity with an option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount prior to performing the quantitative assessment. If this is the case, the quantitative impairment test is required. If the quantitative impairment test is required, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared with its carrying amount (including goodwill). If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, an indication of goodwill impairment exists for the reporting unit and an impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount over the reporting unit’s fair value.
The fair value of the reporting units is estimated using a combination of a discounted cash flow method, or income approach, and market approaches, which estimate fair value based on a selection of appropriate peer group companies. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make significant assumptions and estimates, which include, but are not limited to: forecasts of revenue, operating income, income taxes, capital expenditures, and working capital requirements; the selection of appropriate peer group companies; control premiums and valuation multiples appropriate for acquisitions in the industries in which the Company competes; discount rates; terminal growth rates; and long-term operating margin assumptions. We also consider each reporting unit’s current and historical financial results and the current industry trends. Our estimates can be affected by several factors, including general economic, industry, and regulatory conditions, the risk-free interest rate environment, our market capitalization, and our ability to achieve our forecasted operating results. Changes in estimates or the application of alternative assumptions could produce significantly different results.
We complete our goodwill impairment assessment on October 1st of each year or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired.
2021 Goodwill Impairment Test
During our annual impairment analysis as of October 1, 2021, we evaluated qualitative factors that could indicate whether the fair value of our reporting units may be lower than the carrying value. We did not identify any qualitative factors that would trigger a quantitative goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2021. However, during the fourth of quarter of 2021, we experienced a sustained decline in the market price of our Company’s common stock and determined that an indicator of impairment was present. As a result, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2021 for each reporting unit.
The fair value of the CareVention HealthCare reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by a significant margin. The fair value of the MedWise HealthCare reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 11%. As a result, goodwill was not impaired as of December 31, 2021.
The MedWise HealthCare reporting unit has continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Changes made by CMS to their Medicare Part D Star Ratings improvement programs for health plans in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have negatively impacted our medication safety services revenues. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has elevated the role of retail pharmacies and created strong demand for pharmacists and pharmacy technicians. As a result, we have faced challenges in staffing our call centers to support our health plan clients.
During first quarter of 2022 and through the date of this report, we experienced a sustained decline in the price of our common stock. A sustained decrease in our Company’s common stock is a potential indicator that impairment is present and may require a quantitative impairment assessment of our assets including goodwill and intangible assets, which may result in an impairment charge for the first quarter of 2022.
2020 and 2019 Goodwill Impairment Tests
For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, we performed a qualitative assessment of goodwill and determined that it was not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of our reporting units was less than the carrying amount. Accordingly, no impairment loss was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, or 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets Including Other Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets consist of property and equipment, software development costs and definite-lived intangible assets. Long-lived assets to be held and used are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include significant underperformance of the business in relation to expectations, significant negative industry or economic trends and significant changes or planned changes in the use of the assets. If an impairment review is performed to evaluate a long-lived asset for recoverability, we compare forecasts of undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the long-lived asset to its carrying value. An impairment loss may be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and disposition of an asset are less than its carrying amount. The impairment loss would be based on the excess of the carrying value of the impaired asset over its fair value, determined based on discounted cash flows or a combination of income and market approaches.
Although we believe the carrying values of our long-lived assets are currently realizable, future events could cause us to conclude otherwise. If assumptions or estimates in the fair value calculations change or if future cash flows vary from what was expected, this may impact the impairment analysis and could reduce the underlying cash flows used to estimate fair values and result in a decline in fair value that may trigger future impairment charges.
During fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that an indicator of impairment was present as it related to the financial performance of the DoseMe business. We evaluated the recoverability of the related intangible assets and determined that the estimated fair value of the asset group was greater than its carrying value. As a result, the related intangible assets were not impaired and no impairment charges were recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we became aware of changes in circumstances impacting the future performance of our pharmacy cost management services, which relate to certain intangible assets acquired from the Medliance acquisition in 2014. We evaluated the recoverability of the related intangible assets and determined that certain customer relationships and developed technology intangible assets were impaired. As a result, we recognized non-cash impairment charges of $5.0 million to the related intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020.
There were no indicators of impairment during the year ended December 31, 2019 and there were no intangible asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of new accounting standards. As of January 1, 2021, we adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40).