Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information concerning our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the notes in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Tripadvisor operates the world’s largest travel guidance platform, connecting a global audience of prospective travelers with travel partners through rich content, price comparison tools, and online reservation and related services for destinations, accommodations, travel activities and experiences, and restaurants. Our mission is to help people around the world plan, book and experience the perfect trip.
In 2000, under our flagship brand Tripadvisor, we launched www.Tripadvisor.com in the U.S. Since then, we have built a portfolio of travel guidance brands and businesses, seamlessly connecting travelers to destinations, accommodations, travel activities and experiences, and restaurants in over 40 markets and over 20 languages worldwide. As of December 31, 2021, Tripadvisor featured more than 1 billion reviews and opinions on nearly 8 million hotels and other accommodations, restaurants, experiences, airlines and cruises.
In addition to the flagship Tripadvisor brand, we own and operate a portfolio of online travel brands and businesses, operating under various websites, connected by the common goal of providing consumers the most comprehensive travel-planning and trip-taking resources in the travel industry. For information on our portfolio of brands and our business model, see the discussion set forth in Part I, Item 1. “Business”, under the captions “Overview” and “Our Business Model.”
Our reporting structure includes the following reportable segments: (1) Hotels, Media & Platform; and (2) Experiences & Dining. For further information regarding our segments, including the principal revenue streams within these segments and timing of revenue recognition and cashflows, refer to “Note 4: Revenue Recognition” and “Note 20: Segment and Geographic Information” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Executive Financial Summary
Tripadvisor is the world’s largest travel guidance platform, as measured by unique users de-duplicated monthly, according to SimilarWeb. As a result, Tripadvisor represents an attractive platform for travel partners - including hotel chains, independent hoteliers, OTAs, destination marketing organizations, experience operators, restaurants, and other travel-related and non-travel related product and service providers - who seek to market and sell their products and services to a global audience. Tripadvisor’s platform and product offerings enable consumers to discover, research and price shop a variety of travel products, including hotels, flights, cruises, cars, vacation rentals, tours, travel activities and other experiences, and restaurants; and book a number of these travel experiences either directly on our platform, or on our travel partners’ websites or mobile apps.
Business Trends
The online travel industry in which we operate is large and also highly dynamic and competitive. Our overall strategy is to deliver more value to consumers and travel partners in order to generate more monetization on our platform. While we operate with a long-term growth focus, our specific growth objectives and resource allocation strategies can differ in both duration and magnitude within our segments. We describe below these dynamics, as well as the current trends affecting our overall business and reportable segments, key drivers of our financial results, and uncertainties that may impact our ability to execute on our objectives and strategies.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a significant negative impact on the travel, leisure, hospitality, and restaurant industries (collectively, the “travel industry”), and consequently adversely and materially affected our
business, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Among other impacts, COVID-19 has negatively impacted global consumer travel demand and consumers’ ability to travel and take part in other travel, leisure, and dining activities, thereby causing many of our travel partners to operate at significantly reduced and/or intermittent service levels during this timeframe.
Commencing in late February 2020 and progressively worsening through March 2020, we experienced a significant decline in consumer demand for our products and services as well as an increase in customer cancellations, concurrent with widespread travel restrictions imposed by governments and businesses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the second half of March 2020 and throughout April 2020, significant year-over-year revenue declines generally stabilized across the Company’s segments and products, a trend which generally continued throughout the second quarter of 2020, although modestly improved during the third quarter of 2020. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, however, local governments, particularly in Europe, began to impose new restrictions to mitigate the spread of the virus, which again negatively impacted trends. Also, in the fourth quarter of 2020, multiple COVID-19 vaccines were approved for widespread distribution throughout various parts of the world, including the United States and Europe, and in the first quarter of 2021, vaccination distribution programs were initiated around the world. Vaccine programs in our largest markets, the U.S and Europe, appear to be progressing well, and we expect the same for much of the rest of the world. We are encouraged by recent developments, although the timing and extent of widespread vaccine distributions on a global basis, and efficacy against recent variants (e.g., the Delta and Omicron) and future variants, if any, of COVID-19 remains unclear.
The adverse impact to our business from COVID-19 has been significant, albeit unevenly at different points in time and in different geographies throughout 2020. This adverse impact has been driven by the pandemic’s proliferation, intermittent containment and resurgence of the virus, and new variants of the virus introduced throughout the world, followed by travel restrictions and other mandates put in place, lifted and/or reinstated at different timeframes during 2020 and 2021 by local governments to mitigate the spread of the virus. As such, the travel industry’s recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic has been varied and uneven region-to-region on a global basis, as well as state-to-state in the U.S. These adverse impacts continued to negatively impact the travel industry and dampen consumer demand for our products and services at varied levels throughout 2021, although to a materially lesser extent in 2021 as the travel industry broadened its recovery.
In addition, the ultimate duration of the negative impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations, liquidity and financial condition remains uncertain and is dependent upon factors beyond our control, such as the continued transmission rate of COVID-19, including any new variants and/or additional resurgences of existing variants, if any, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions taken, vaccine efficacy, and the ultimate impact of these and other factors on consumer demand for travel and usage patterns on our platform. Although uncertainty remains, we generally saw continued improvement in the travel market in 2021 and expect that the market will continue to improve in 2022, driven by continued vaccination programs, the gradual lifting of government restrictions, and what we believe to be continued significant pent-up consumer demand for travel industry related services.
Traffic trends on our platform, a leading indicator of consumer travel demand, have improved since the trough of significant declines seen in the second half of March 2020 and throughout April 2020, as monthly unique users on Tripadvisor-branded websites for April 2020 were approximately 33% of the comparable period in 2019. By means of showing a comparison to a pre-COVID-19 timeframe, average monthly unique users on Tripadvisor-branded websites during the fourth quarter of 2021 were approximately 73% of 2019's comparable period despite impact late in the quarter from the Omicron variant, in comparison to approximately 55%, 70% and 76% of 2019’s comparable periods during the first, second and third quarters of 2021, respectively, driven by vaccine progress, the easing of various government restrictions, albeit unevenly, and consumer travel demand’s improving recovery.
Our consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $902 million, or an increase of 49%, when compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, by means of showing a comparison to a pre-COVID-19 timeframe, consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 58% of 2019’s comparable period. Our consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately 39% of 2019’s comparable period. Revenue trends have also improved as 2021 has progressed as consolidated revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 was approximately 72% of 2019's comparable period, in comparison to approximately 33%, 56% and 71% of 2019’s comparable periods during the first, second and third quarters of 2021, respectively. This increase in revenue was driven largely by continued strength in the U.S. marketplace, but also due to marked improvement in Europe, where
revenue began accelerating in May 2021 and continued through the third quarter of 2021, however was again impacted by the emergence of the Omicron variant late in the fourth quarter of 2021.
In response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we took several steps to further strengthen our financial position and balance sheet, and maintain financial liquidity and flexibility, including, but not limited to, restructuring activities, reducing our ongoing operating expenses and headcount, additional borrowings and issuances of debt, and amendments to our Credit Facility, all of which are described in more detail below.
Liquidity
During the first quarter of 2020, we borrowed $700 million under the Credit Facility as a precautionary measure to reinforce our liquidity position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty in the global markets resulting from COVID-19. We repaid these borrowings in full in the third quarter of 2020 using proceeds from our 2025 Senior Notes. In addition, during 2020, by means of amendments to our Credit Facility, we were able to secure, among other things, covenant relief in the form of suspending our leverage ratio covenant, until the earlier of the first day after June 30, 2021 through maturity on which borrowings and other revolving credit utilizations under the revolving commitments exceed $200 million, or such earlier date as we may elect, when the leverage ratio covenant will then be reinstated. We also extended the maturity date of this facility to May 2024.
In July 2020, we completed the sale of $500 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes in a private offering, our 2025 Senior Notes, at 7.0% per annum with a maturity date of July 15, 2025. We used the proceeds received of $490 million, net of debt issuance costs, to repay a portion of our Credit Facility borrowings.
In March 2021, we completed the sale of $345 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes in a private offering, our 2026 Senior Notes, at 0.25% per annum with a maturity date of April 1, 2026. Concurrently, we used a portion of the proceeds received from the 2026 Senior Notes to enter into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain of the initial purchasers of the 2026 Senior Notes and/or their respective affiliates and/or other financial institutions at a cost of approximately $35 million. The Company intends to use the remainder of the proceeds from this offering for general corporate purposes, which may include repayment of debt, including the redemption and/or purchase of a portion of its 2025 Senior Notes prior to maturity.
We believe these measures provide us additional financial flexibility which we believe is important given our continued limited ability to predict our future financial performance due to the uncertainties associated with COVID-19.
Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information about our Credit Facility, 2025 Senior Notes, and 2026 Senior Notes.
Cost Reduction Measures
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company instituted a cost reduction initiative to preserve cash flows, including targeted workforce reduction measures largely in the Experiences & Dining segment, in addition to optimizing and reducing brand advertising as the Company pivoted to leverage newer advertising mediums we believe will be more effective than our historically television-focused campaign.
During the latter part of the first quarter of 2020, and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company instituted additional cost reduction measures, including the elimination of the majority of discretionary spending, business travel and non-critical vendor relationships, brand advertising, as well as the temporary cessation of nearly all new hiring and contingent staff, reduction of targeted employee benefits and the furlough of over 100 employees.
In April 2020, management approved and the Company announced an additional cost reduction initiative in response to the continued economic and financial impacts resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic, which included the following:
•Enacting a workforce reduction eliminating more than 900 employees;
•Furloughing additional employees bringing the total furloughed employees during March and April 2020 to approximately 850 employees, primarily in our European operations at The Fork; and
•Making targeted reductions of the Company’s office lease portfolio, primarily either through subleasing or allowing property leases to expire.
The Company incurred total pre-tax restructuring and other related reorganization costs of approximately $41 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of these measures. Such costs were both recorded on our consolidated statement of operations and fully paid by the Company during 2020.
CARES Act and Other Governmental Relief
In March 2020, the U.S. government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), an emergency economic stimulus package enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes numerous income tax provisions, some of which are effective retroactively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not record any income tax benefit under the CARES Act; however, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $23 million as a result of a loss carryback provision provided under the CARES Act.
In addition, certain governments have passed legislation to help businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic through loans, wage subsidies, wage tax relief or other financial aid. Some of these governments have extended or are considering extending these programs. We have participated in several of these programs, including the CARES Act in the U.S., the United Kingdom's job retention scheme, as well as similar programs in other jurisdictions. In addition, in certain countries, such as within the European Union, Singapore, Australia, and other jurisdictions, we participated in programs where government assistance came in the form of wage subsidies and reductions in wage-related employer taxes paid by us. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized government grants and other assistance benefits of $9 million and $12 million, respectively, as a reduction of personnel and overhead costs in the consolidated statements of operations.
For further details of income tax benefits and other government assistance recorded by the Company under the CARES Act and other governmental relief programs, refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Hotels, Media & Platform Segment
Our Hotels, Media & Platform segment is comprised of: Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue and Tripadvisor-branded Display and Platform Revenue.
Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue primarily consists of hotel auction revenue and, to a lesser extent, hotel B2B revenue, which primarily includes subscription-based advertising services that we offer to travel partners and click-based revenue generated from hotel sponsored placement advertising that enables hotels to enhance their visibility on Tripadvisor hotel pages. Tripadvisor-branded Display and Platform Revenue primarily includes impression-based advertising revenue.
Our overall strategic objective in our Hotels, Media & Platform segment is to drive revenue and profits while delivering compelling services to consumers and driving a holistic user experience, increased customer engagement and monetization, as well as offering travel partners a diverse set of advertising opportunities on the Tripadvisor platform.
For consumers, we test and implement product enhancements that deliver a more engaging and comprehensive hotel shopping experience. This includes providing rich, immersive content - reviews, photos, videos and ratings, among other contributions, increasing the number of travel partners and properties as well as the available hotel supply on our platform. We believe providing consumers tools to discover, research, price shop and book a comprehensive selection of accommodations helps increase brand awareness and brand loyalty and, over time, can result in deeper consumer engagement, more qualified leads delivered to travel partners and greater monetization on our platform.
We seek to monetize our influence through hotel-related product improvements, supply and marketing efforts and customer advertising opportunities. Historically, we have generated a significant amount of hotel shoppers from search engines, such as Google. A hotel shopper is a visitor to our platform that views either a listing of hotels in a city or a specific hotel page. Our key ongoing objective related to traffic acquisition is to attract or acquire hotel shoppers at or above our desired marketing return on investment targets. Over the long-term, we are focused on driving a greater percentage of our traffic from direct traffic sources rather than search engines, which comes with little to no traffic acquisition costs.
As noted in the “COVID-19” discussion above, easing of travel restrictions across the world, rising vaccination rates, and an increase in consumer travel demand drove improved financial results during 2021, as Hotel, Media & Platform revenue increased by 52% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, despite the impact from the rise of the Delta variant late in the third quarter of 2021 and then the emergence of the Omicron variant late in the fourth quarter of 2021. Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue increased 55% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by our hotel auction revenue, which reached approximately 58% of 2019’s comparable period, an increase from 32% in 2020 of 2019’s comparable period. The Company saw particular strength in recovery of domestic consumer travel, most notably in the U.S., whereas international travel and, in particular, inter-continental travel, has been slower to recover. Our U.S. hotel auction revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, reached nearly 85% of 2019’s comparable period on strong consumer travel demand, and improved sequentially during the first three quarters of 2021, when compared as a percentage to 2019's comparable periods, while declining in the fourth quarter of 2021 again due to the emergence of the Omicron variant. In addition, our U.S. hotel auction CPC rates regained 2019 levels in early May 2021 and remained above 2019 levels through December 2021, demonstrating strong travel partner engagement on our platform as consumer travel demand recovers in the U.S. Although slower to recover, hotel auction revenue in Europe and the rest of the world also showed improvement during 2021, however, as with the U.S., Europe was also negatively impacted by the emergence of the Omicron variant late in the fourth quarter of 2021. As a result of these overall positive trends noted above, we increased our performance marketing investment throughout 2021 in correlation with the increase in consumer travel demand and a more favorable hotel auction environment.
While slower to recover than Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue, our display and platform revenue increased by 41% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, and by means of also showing a comparison to a pre-COVID-19 timeframe, Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue improved when compared to the comparable period in 2020, while reaching approximately 60% of 2019’s comparable period in 2021 and also improved sequentially during the first three quarters of 2021 when compared to 2019’s comparable periods, while declining modestly in the fourth quarter of 2021, when compared as a percentage to the 2019 comparable period, due to the emergence of the Omicron variant. This overall improvement for 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in marketing spend from our advertisers in correlation with increasing consumer travel demand, as discussed above.
Over the long-term, we believe that improving our offerings to deepen consumer engagement on our platform will enable us to more effectively monetize our influence. For example, in Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue, we enable travel partners to amplify their brand, generate brand impressions, and potentially drive qualified leads and bookings for their businesses. Historically, we have limited both the type and number of display-based advertising opportunities we make available to travel partners, particularly on mobile phone, which, in turn, has limited display-based advertising revenue growth. However, we continue to work on initiatives to better leverage our audience, content, data, travel influence and platform breadth to open up new media advertising opportunities through a more modern, high-powered advertising suite spanning native, video and programmatic solutions. We have broadened our solution to a larger set of advertising travel endemic and non-travel endemic advertising partners, including industries such as entertainment, spirits, and finance. On the consumer side, we are focused on making Tripadvisor membership more valuable for consumers. As an example, during 2021, we launched Tripadvisor Plus, an annual subscription-based membership that offers financial incentives, benefits and perks to members who book hotels and experiences on our platform.
As discussed above, the Company initiated cost reduction measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, the majority of which were related to personnel and overhead costs and brand advertising, or television advertising, for this segment. During 2021, we maintained the majority of these cost savings in this segment,
however, as noted above, the Company increased its performance marketing spend during the year. Relative strength in CPC pricing allowed us to increase spend in marketing channels at a profitable ROAS (return on ad spend), while our free traffic, or SEO traffic, has been slower to recover.
These efforts demonstrate our continued focus on increasing the quality of customer engagement on our platform, including driving membership growth, increasing personalization, and innovating our mobile app experience. We believe delivering - and improving upon - a great experience for users will encourage more users to use our services more frequently, increase member growth and member engagement, and drive loyalty to our brand and services. In turn, we believe this makes our platform more attractive for travel partners, and can result in increased monetization over time for us and our travel partners.
Experiences & Dining Segment
Our Experiences & Dining offerings contribute to the comprehensive user experience we deliver, which we believe helps to increase awareness of, loyalty to, and engagement with our products, drive more bookings to Experiences & Dining travel partners and generate greater revenue and increased profitability on our platform. Given the significant market opportunities in these large categories, we expect to continue to invest in building these offerings to drive consumer engagement, bookings and revenue growth for the long-term. Since the first quarter of 2020, this segment’s revenue has been negatively and materially impacted at varying levels by a significant reduction in consumer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which has reduced consumer willingness to research, purchase, and consume travel activities. This negative impact has also been driven by a wide variety of government-instituted actions and restrictions around the globe aimed at limiting the spread of the virus, all of which have impacted consumer access to experience offerings and restaurants. For example, during the first quarter of 2021, restaurants in most of the European countries in which our Dining business operates were ordered to remain closed.
However, during most of 2021, our Experiences & Dining segment’s financial results improved significantly, as revenue in this segment increased by 65% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, driven by our Experiences offering, as a result of the growing travel demand recovery driven by vaccine progress and various government restrictions being gradually lifted. By means of showing a comparison to a pre-COVID-19 timeframe, during the fourth quarter of 2021, our Experiences & Dining segment revenue reached approximately 90% of the fourth quarter of 2019 revenue, an increase from 81% of the third quarter of 2019 revenue in the third quarter of 2021, despite the impact of the Delta and Omicron variants. In addition, our Experiences & Dining segment revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, was 67% of 2019’s comparable period, an increase from 40% of 2019’s comparable period during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our Experiences revenue grew over 230%, when compared to the same period in 2020, and reached 64% of 2019’s comparable period revenue, primarily driven by our Viator point of sale business. As a result of strong consumer demand in our Viator business with the growing travel demand recovery during 2021, we significantly increased investments in performance marketing channels in order to capture additional market share while maintaining a positive return on investment measured over the projected lifetime of a customer. In Dining, we saw a notable recovery since mid-May 2021, as restaurants in most European countries in which TheFork operates began reopening for in-restaurant dining. However, late in the fourth quarter of 2021, Omicron-related restrictions and related impact to consumer demand within Europe again began to impact Dining. Overall, Dining revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by 5%, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by the impact of COVID-19, as restaurants in most of the European countries in which our Dining business operates were ordered to remain closed during the first quarter of 2021, while Dining revenue during the final three quarters of 2021 exceeded the total from the comparable quarters for 2020 by approximately 29%. By means of showing a comparison to a pre-COVID-19 timeframe, Dining revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 reached 74% of 2019's comparable period.
As discussed above, the Company initiated cost reduction measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, the majority of which was related to personnel and overhead costs and brand advertising in this segment. During 2021, we maintained the majority of cost savings in this segment, however, as noted above, the Company significantly increased its performance marketing spend during the year.
During 2021, we have explored new initiatives to delight and engage consumers. For example, we improved our site navigation, recommendations, sort orders, quality of our experience products, mobile apps, and offered new consumer payment options, as new customer acquisition remains top priority during the growing travel recovery. For operators, we launched a new advertising program, Viator Accelerate, which is aimed at helping operators increase their visibility on the platform through targeted advertising, ultimately with the goal of increasing bookings and reach.
Other
Other is a combination of our Rentals, Flights & Car, and Cruise offerings and is not considered a reportable segment. Other revenue continues to experience the ongoing negative impact of COVID-19, particularly in our Flights and Cruise offerings, and was also negatively impacted by the sale of our SmarterTravel business during the second quarter of 2020. We continue to operate these businesses opportunistically as they complement our overall strategic objectives to deliver more value to consumers and travel partners.
Consolidated Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021.
Results of Operations
Selected Financial Data
(in millions, except percentages)
Revenue and Segment Information
n.m. = not meaningful
(1) “Adjusted EBITDA Margin by Segment” is defined as Adjusted EBITDA by segment divided by revenue by segment.
Hotels, Media & Platform Segment
Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue increased by $188 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to increased hotel auction revenue, particularly in the U.S., and, to a lesser extent, increased hotel auction revenue in Europe, due to the impact of growing consumer travel demand and increasing travel industry recovery on our business, as discussed above.
Adjusted EBITDA in our Hotels, Media & Platform segment increased $98 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020. This was primarily due to an increase in revenue as noted above, and, to a lesser extent, a reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions related to our cost-reduction measures during 2020 in response to COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in direct selling and marketing expenses related to search engine marketing, or SEM, and other online paid traffic acquisition costs in response to increasing consumer travel demand as travel restrictions ease, vaccination rates increase, and the travel industry recovers, and, to a lesser extent, an increase in personnel and overhead costs to help support business and key staff retention growth during the growing travel demand recovery.
The following is a detailed discussion of the revenue sources within our Hotels, Media & Platform segment:
Tripadvisor-branded Hotels Revenue
Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue primarily includes hotel auction revenue and, to a lesser extent, hotel B2B revenue, which includes click-based revenue generated from hotel sponsored placement advertising that enable hotels to enhance their visibility on Tripadvisor hotel pages, and subscription-based advertising services that we offer to travel partners. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, 82%, 81%, and 83%, respectively, of our total Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue was derived from Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue. Tripadvisor-branded hotels revenue increased $160 million or 55% during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by our hotel auction revenue, particularly in the U.S., and, to a lesser extent, an increase in hotel auction revenue in Europe, despite the impact from the Delta variant late in the third quarter of 2021 and the emergence of the Omicron variant late in the fourth quarter of 2021, due to rising consumer travel demand and travel industry recovery, given rising vaccination rates and easing of government travel and leisure restrictions. As consumer travel demand continued to increase during 2021, the Company saw continued improvement in hotel auction monetization, as CPC rates during the second half of 2021 exceeded parity of 2019's comparable period, which enabled increased efficient marketing investment on performance channels, enhancing our 2021 hotel auction revenue growth. See “Business Trends” above for further discussion.
Tripadvisor-branded Display and Platform Revenue
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, 18%, 19%, and 17%, respectively, of our total Hotels, Media & Platform segment revenue was derived from Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue, which consists of revenue from display-based advertising across our platform. Tripadvisor-branded display and platform revenue increased $28 million or 41% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by an increase in marketing spend from our advertisers in correlation with increasing consumer travel demand, as discussed above.
Experiences & Dining Segment
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our Experiences & Dining segment revenue accounted for 34%, 31% and 29%, respectively, of total consolidated revenue. Experiences & Dining segment revenue increased by $121 million or 65% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, driven by Experiences revenue, as discussed above under “Business Trends.”
This segment’s revenue has been negatively and materially impacted at varying levels by a significant reduction in consumer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic at varying levels during 2020 and 2021. However, during 2021, our Experiences & Dining segment’s financial results significantly improved as a result of the growing consumer travel demand recovery, albeit unevenly, driven by vaccine progress and various government restrictions being gradually lifted during the same time period, which is discussed further under “Business Trends” above.
Experiences & Dining segment Adjusted EBITDA loss decreased by $43 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase in revenue as noted above, a reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions related to our cost-reduction measures during 2020 in response to COVID-19, and, to a lesser extent, lower television advertising costs, office lease costs, and bad debt expense, partially offset by increased selling and marketing expenses related to SEM and other online paid traffic acquisition costs in response to increased consumer demand for experiences and restaurants as part of the growing consumer travel demand recovery and, to a lesser extent, an increase in personnel and overhead costs to help support business growth and key staff retention during the growing travel demand recovery.
Other
Other revenue, which includes Rentals revenue, in addition to primarily click-based advertising and display-based advertising revenue from our Flights & Cars, and Cruises offerings on Tripadvisor websites and mobile apps, decreased by $11 million or 19% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the continued negative impact of COVID-19 on these offerings, and the sale of our SmarterTravel business during the second quarter of 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA in Other increased $10 million or 67% during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to reduction in personnel costs as a result of workforce reductions related to our cost-reduction measures during the first half of 2020 in response to COVID-19 and lower non-income tax costs, partially offset by a decrease in revenue, as noted above.
Consolidated Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of expenses that are directly related or closely correlated to revenue generation, including direct costs, such as credit card and other booking transaction payment fees, data center costs, costs associated with prepaid tour tickets, ad serving fees, flight search fees, and other transaction costs. In addition, cost of revenue includes personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and bonuses for certain customer support personnel who are directly involved in revenue generation.
Cost of revenue increased $19 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to increased direct costs from credit card payment and other revenue-related transaction costs in our Experiences & Dining segment in correlation with an increase in revenue.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist of direct costs, including traffic generation costs from SEM and other online traffic acquisition costs, syndication costs and affiliate marketing commissions, social media costs, brand advertising (including television and other offline advertising), promotions and public relations. In addition, our selling and marketing expenses consist of indirect costs such as personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries, commissions, benefits, stock-based compensation, and bonuses for sales, sales support, customer support and marketing employees.
Direct selling and marketing costs increased $166 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase in our SEM and other online traffic acquisition spend in our Hotels, Media & Platform and Experiences & Dining segments in response to increasing consumer travel demand as travel activity restrictions ease and the travel industry recovers.
Personnel and overhead costs decreased $13 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily as a result of a reduction in headcount related to our cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19 implemented during the first half of 2020, partially offset by increased personnel and overhead related to performance bonuses and additional headcount to help support business growth and key staff retention during the growing travel demand recovery during 2021.
Technology and Content
Technology and content expenses consist primarily of personnel and overhead expenses, including salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and bonuses for salaried employees and contractors engaged in the design, development, testing, content support, and maintenance of our platform. Other costs include licensing, maintenance expense, computer supplies, telecom costs, content translation and localization costs, and consulting costs.
Technology and content costs decreased $8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to decreased personnel and overhead costs across our business as a result of a reduction in headcount driven by cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19 implemented during the first half of 2020, partially offset by an increase in performance bonuses, contingent staff costs, and stock-based compensation expense to help support business growth and key staff retention during the growing travel demand recovery during 2021.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related overhead costs, including personnel engaged in leadership, finance, legal, and human resources, as well as stock-based compensation expense for those same personnel. General and administrative costs also include professional service fees and other fees including audit, legal, tax and accounting, and other costs including bad debt expense, non-income taxes, such as sales, use and other non-income related taxes.
General and administrative costs decreased $6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020. Personnel and overhead costs increased $13 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by an increase in performance bonuses, recruiting costs, and stock-based compensation expense to help support business growth and key staff retention during the growing consumer travel demand recovery, partially offset by decreased personnel and overhead costs as a result of a reduction in headcount driven by cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19 implemented during the first half of 2020. Professional service fees and other decreased $19 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to a decrease in bad debt expense of $14 million due to improved collection trends as the travel industry recovers and to a lesser extent a decrease in third-party professional service costs related to cost-reduction measures and other non-income related taxes costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on computer equipment, leasehold improvements, furniture, office equipment and other assets, and amortization of capitalized website development costs and right-of-use (“ROU”) assets related to our finance lease. Amortization consists of the amortization of definite-lived intangibles purchased in business acquisitions.
Depreciation and amortization decreased $14 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the completion of amortization related to certain intangible assets from business acquisitions in previous years and lower depreciation related to computer equipment, leasehold improvements, furniture and capitalized website development costs driven by a reduction in headcount related to our cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19 implemented during the first half of 2020.
Impairment of Goodwill
The Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $3 million related to our Tripadvisor China reporting unit in the third quarter of 2020. Refer to “Note 8: Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Restructuring and other related reorganization costs
Restructuring and other related reorganization costs consist primarily of employee severance and related benefits.
The Company incurred restructuring and other related reorganization costs of $41 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to actions taken by the Company in response to COVID-19.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred, commitment fees, and debt issuance cost amortization related to our Credit Facility, 2025 Senior Notes, 2026 Senior Notes, as well as interest on our finance lease.
Interest expense increased $10 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the issuance of our 2025 Senior Notes in July 2020, partially offset by lower interest expense on our Credit Facility as the Company did not borrow from this facility during 2021. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned from bank deposits available on demand, money market funds, overnight demand deposits and marketable securities, including amortization of discounts and premiums on our marketable securities.
Interest income decreased $2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to a reduction in average interest rates earned on our investments during 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net generally consists of net foreign exchange gains and losses, forward contract gains and losses, earnings/(losses) from equity method investments, gain/(loss) and impairments on non-marketable investments, gain/loss on sale/disposal of businesses, and other non-operating income (expenses).
Other expense, net increased $2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to increased foreign currency transaction losses as a result of the fluctuation of foreign exchange rates during 2021 and a net increase in allowance for credit losses of $2 million, when compared to 2020, on a long-term note receivable, partially offset by a loss on sale of business of $6 million during 2020, which did not reoccur in 2021. Refer to “Note 18: Other Income (Expense), Net” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(Provision) Benefit for Income Taxes
We had an income tax benefit of $37 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in our income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020, was
primarily due to greater pretax losses incurred the year ended December 31, 2020 than 2021, and an income tax benefit of $23 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 from the tax rate differential in tax years applicable to U.S. loss carryforwards that became eligible for carryback under the CARES Act that did not reoccur in 2021. This was partially offset by an increase in the recognition of stock-based compensation windfalls related to the increase in the Company’s common stock price during the year ended December 31, 2021 and a partial release of a valuation allowance on our U.K. subsidiary's interest carryforward deferred tax asset. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Net income (loss)
Net loss decreased $141 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase in revenue, as described above in “Revenue and Segment Information”, restructuring costs incurred of $41 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which did not reoccur during the year ended December 31, 2021, and decreased personnel and overhead costs across our business as a result of a reduction in headcount driven by cost-reduction measures across our business in response to COVID-19 implemented during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset largely by an increase in selling and marketing expenses in response to increasing consumer travel demand as travel activity restrictions ease and the travel industry recovers and, to a lesser extent, an increase in personnel and overhead costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 to help support business growth and key staff retention during the growing consumer travel demand recovery, all of which is described above under “Consolidated Expenses.”
Adjusted EBITDA
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we also disclose consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. A “non-GAAP financial measure” refers to a numerical measure of a company’s historical or future financial performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP in such company’s financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA is also our segment profit measure and a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate the financial performance of our business and on which internal budgets and forecasts are based and approved. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons and better enables management and investors to compare financial results between periods as these costs may vary independent of ongoing core business performance. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus: (1) (provision) benefit for income taxes; (2) other income (expense), net; (3) depreciation and amortization; (4) stock-based compensation and other stock-settled obligations; (5) goodwill, intangible asset, and long-lived asset impairments; (6) legal reserves and settlements; (7) restructuring and other related reorganization costs; and (8) other non-recurring expenses and income.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results reported in accordance with GAAP. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
Some of these limitations are:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation or other stock-settled obligations;
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect certain income and expenses not directly tied to the ongoing core operations of our business, such as legal reserves and settlements, restructuring and other related reorganization costs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•Adjusted EBITDA is unaudited and does not conform to SEC Regulation S-X, and as a result such information may be presented differently in our future filings with the SEC; and
•other companies, including companies in our own industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Net Income (Loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, for the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, see Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021.
Our principal source of liquidity is cash flow generated from operations and our existing cash and cash equivalents balance. Our liquidity needs can also be met through drawdowns under our Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $723 million and $418 million, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents, and $497 million of available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $151 million of our cash and cash equivalents were held by our international subsidiaries outside of the U.S., of which approximately 50% was located in the U.K. As of December 31, 2021, the significant majority of our cash was denominated in U.S. dollars. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $845 million in long-term debt, as a result of the issuance of our 2025 Senior Notes in July 2020 and 2026 Senior Notes in March 2021, as discussed below.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $427 million of cumulative undistributed earnings in foreign subsidiaries which were no longer considered to be indefinitely reinvested. As of December 31, 2021, we maintained a deferred income tax liability on our consolidated balance sheet, which was not material, for the U.S. federal and state income tax and foreign withholding tax liabilities on the cumulative undistributed foreign earnings that we no longer consider indefinitely reinvested. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2021, we are party to our Credit Facility, which, among other things, provides for a $500 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of May 12, 2024.
The Credit Facility requires us to maintain a maximum leverage ratio and contains certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default, including a change of control. Borrowings under the Credit Facility generally bear interest, at the Company’s option, at a rate per annum equal to either (i) the Eurocurrency Borrowing rate, or the adjusted LIBO rate for the interest period in effect for such borrowing; plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.00% (“Eurocurrency Spread”), based on the Company’s leverage ratio; or (ii) the Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) Borrowing, which is the greatest of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the New York Fed Bank Rate in effect on such day plus 1/2 of 1.00% per annum and (c) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (or LIBO rate multiplied by the Statutory Reserve Rate) for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%; in addition to an applicable margin ranging from 0.25% to 1.00% (“ABR Spread”), based on the Company’s leverage ratio.
However, we amended the Credit Facility in May 2020 and December 2020, to among other things, suspend the leverage ratio covenant for quarterly testing of compliance beginning in the second quarter of 2020, replacing it with a minimum liquidity covenant through June 30, 2021 (requiring the Company to maintain $150 million of unrestricted cash, cash equivalent and short-term investments less deferred merchant payables plus available revolver capacity), until the earlier of (a) the first day after June 30, 2021 through maturity on which borrowings and other revolving credit utilizations under the revolving commitments exceed $200 million, and (b) the election of the Company, at which time the leverage ratio covenant will be reinstated (the “Leverage Covenant Holiday”).
The Company remained in the Leverage Covenant Holiday as of December 31, 2021. During the Leverage Covenant Holiday, any borrowings under the Credit Facility bear interest at LIBOR plus a 2.25% margin with a LIBOR floor of 1% per annum. We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee, at an applicable rate of 0.5%, on the daily unused portion of the revolving credit facility for each fiscal quarter while the Leverage Covenant Holiday is in place. The Credit Facility includes restrictions on the Company’s ability to make certain payments and distributions, including share repurchases and dividends.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, we had no outstanding borrowings and were in compliance with our covenant requirements in effect under the Credit Facility. While there can be no assurance that we will be able to meet the leverage ratio covenant after the Leverage Covenant Holiday ceases, based on our current projections, we do not believe there is a material risk we will not remain in compliance throughout the next twelve months.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company borrowed $700 million under the Credit Facility. These funds were drawn down as a precautionary measure to reinforce our liquidity position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty in the global markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company repaid those borrowings in full during the third quarter of 2020 with proceeds received from the 2025 Senior Notes, as discussed below.
2025 Senior Notes
In July 2020, the Company completed the sale of $500 million in 2025 Senior Notes. The 2025 Senior Notes provide, among other things, that interest, at an interest rate of 7.0% per annum, will be payable on January 15 and July 15 of each year, which began on January 15, 2021, until their maturity on July 15, 2025. The Company used the proceeds from the 2025 Senior Notes, or $490 million, net of approximately $10 million in debt issuance costs, to
repay a portion of our outstanding borrowings under our Credit Facility, as noted above. The 2025 Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries.
2026 Senior Notes
In March 2021, the Company completed the sale of $345 million of our 2026 Senior Notes. The 2026 Senior Notes provide, among other things, that interest, at an interest rate of 0.25% per annum, will be payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year, which began on October 1, 2021, until their maturity on April 1, 2026. Concurrently, the Company used a portion of the proceeds from the 2026 Senior Notes to enter into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain of the initial purchasers of the 2026 Senior Notes and/or their respective affiliates and/or other financial institutions at a cost of approximately $35 million. The Company intends to use the remainder of the proceeds from this offering for general corporate purposes, which may include repayment of debt, including the partial redemption and/or purchase of the 2025 Senior Notes prior to maturity. The 2026 Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries.
The 2025 Senior Notes and 2026 Senior Notes are not registered securities and there are currently no plans to register these notes as securities in the future. As a result, Rule 3-10 of Regulation S-X promulgated by the SEC is not applicable and no separate financial statements are required for the guarantor subsidiaries of these notes. We may from time to time repurchase our outstanding 2025 Senior Notes or 2026 Senior Notes through tender offers, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
For further information on our Credit Facility, 2025 Senior Notes, and 2026 Senior Notes, refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Significant uses of capital and other liquidity matters
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 4,707,450 and 2,059,846 shares, respectively, of the Company’s outstanding common stock at an aggregate cost of $115 million and $60 million, respectively, under our share repurchase program. The Company did not repurchase any shares of outstanding common stock under the share repurchase program during 2021 and had $75 million remaining available to repurchase shares of our common stock as of December 31, 2021. The terms of our Credit Agreement were amended to limit the Company from share repurchases during the Leverage Covenant Holiday and the terms of the 2025 Indenture related to the 2025 Senior Notes also impose certain limitations and restrictions on share repurchases.
Our business typically experiences seasonal fluctuations that affect the timing of our annual cash flows during the year related to working capital. In our Experiences business and our Rentals free-to-list model, we receive cash from travelers at the time of booking or prior to the occurrence of an experience or rental, and we record these amounts, net of commissions, on our consolidated balance sheet as deferred merchant payables. We pay the operator, or the experience supplier and/or property rental owners, after the travelers’ use. Therefore, we generally receive cash from the traveler prior to paying the operator and this operating cycle represents a source or use of cash to us. During the first half of the year Experiences and Rentals bookings typically exceed the amount of completed experiences and rental stays, resulting in higher cash flow related to working capital, while during the second half of the year, particularly in the third quarter, this pattern reverses and cash flows from these transactions are typically negative. However, this seasonal trend was negatively and materially impacted by COVID-19’s impact on our business throughout the year of 2020, albeit unevenly, primarily reflecting the decline in consumer demand for our products and increased cancellations of reservations. Although consumer demand, traveler hotel and rental stays, and travel activities and experiences taken generally remains materially lower than historic levels, these trends improved during 2021, resulting in increased revenues, working capital and operating cash flow more akin to typical and historical seasonality trends. However, the ultimate extent and longevity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new or existing variants (i.e. Delta and/or Omicron), and its impact on travel, regional and global markets, and overall economic activity in currently affected countries and/or globally remains unknown and impossible to predict with certainty, as such, the impacts on our business, including our operating cash flows, while generally improving, remain uncertain at this point in time. Other factors may also impact typical seasonal fluctuations, which include
further significant shifts in our business mix or adverse economic conditions unrelated to COVID-19 that could result in future seasonal patterns that are different from historical trends. In addition, new or different payment options offered to our customers could impact the timing of cash flows. For example, during the third quarter of 2019 we introduced a new payment option, “Reserve Now, Pay Later” which allows our travelers the option to reserve certain experiences and defer payment until a date no later than two days before the experience date, which although used in a minority of bookings through 2021, may affect the timing of our future cash flows and working capital.
As discussed in “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have received Notices of Proposed Adjustments issued by the IRS for tax years 2009 through 2016, as of December 31, 2021. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries, and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $95 million to $105 million, exclusive of interest expense, at the close of the audit if the IRS prevails. In addition, we received from HM Revenue & Customs (“HMRC") in the U.K. an issue closure notice relating to adjustments for 2012 through 2016 tax years, as of December 31, 2021. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $45 million to $55 million, exclusive of interest expense, at the close of the audit if HMRC prevails. We disagree with the proposed adjustments and we intend to defend our positions through applicable administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies. Although the ultimate timing for resolution of these matters is uncertain, any future payments would negatively impact our operating cash flows.
The CARES Act, enacted in March 2020, made tax law changes to provide financial relief to companies as a result of the business impacts of COVID-19. Key income tax provisions of the CARES Act include changes in net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback and carryforward rules, increase of the net interest expense deduction limit, and immediate write-off of qualified improvement property. The CARES Act allowed us to carryback our U.S. federal NOL incurred in 2020, generating an expected tax refund of $48 million, which is reported in income taxes receivable on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. This tax refund is expected to be received during 2022.
We believe that our available cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our foreseeable working capital requirements, capital expenditures, existing business growth initiatives, debt and interest obligations, lease commitments, and other financial commitments through at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements may also include capital needs for acquisitions and/or other expenditures in support of our business strategy, which may potentially reduce our cash balance and/or require us to borrow under our Credit Facility or to seek other financing alternatives.
In addition, our capital requirements may increase due to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new, if any, or existing variants (i.e. Delta and Omicron), which has resulted in reduced revenues and operating cash flows for the Company, and the extent and duration to which it may continue to impact the Company’s business and the travel industry remains unclear. Given the continued uncertainty in the uneven market and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our liquidity and capital requirements, and therefore our capital structure.
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in our consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the following table:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our primary use of cash was financing activities (including payment of withholding taxes on net share settlements of our equity awards of $44 million and purchase of Capped Calls of $35 million) and investing activities (including capital expenditures of $54 million). This use of cash was funded primarily with cash on hand, operating cash flow and financing activities, which includes $340 million of proceeds from the issuance of our 2026 Senior Notes, net of financing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $302 million when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to a decrease in net losses of $141 million and an increase in working capital of $227 million, primarily driven by an increase in deferred merchant payables and deferred revenue reflecting the cash received from travelers due to an increase in experiences bookings which exceeded our payments to traveler suppliers, an increase in marketing cost accruals and a decrease in income tax payments, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable across the business, all largely reflective of the increasing consumer demand for travel activities during 2021, in addition to timing of vendor payments and collection of receivables, as well as, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in non-cash items of $66 million which was primarily due to an increase in deferred income tax benefits and a decrease in bad debt expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities decreased by $2 million when compared to the same period in 2020, as capital expenditures decreased slightly as part of cost-reduction measures across the business implemented during the first half of 2020 in response to COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $78 million when compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to cash provided from the issuance of our 2025 Senior Notes in the third quarter of 2020 of $490 million, net of financing costs, partially offset by cash used to purchase shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program of $115 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, both which did not reoccur in 2021, as contrasted to proceeds received from the issuance of our 2026 Senior Notes of $340 million in the first quarter of 2021, net of financing costs, and cash received for stock option exercises of $8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which was partially offset by payments of $35 million for the Capped Calls in connection with our 2026 Senior Notes, which also occurred during the first quarter of 2021, and an increase in payment of withholding taxes on net share settlements of equity awards of $23 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table summarizes our current and long-term material cash requirements, both accrued and off-balance sheet, as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Represents outstanding principal on our 2025 Senior Notes due July 2025 and assumes that our existing debt is repaid at maturity. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(2)Expected interest payments on our 2025 Senior Notes are based on a fixed interest rate of 7.0%, as of December 31, 2021 and assumes that our existing debt is repaid at maturity. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(3)Represents outstanding principal on our 2026 Senior Notes due April 2026 and assumes that our existing debt is repaid at maturity. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(4)Expected interest payments on our 2026 Senior Notes are based on a fixed interest rate of 0.25%, as of December 31, 2021 and assumes that our existing debt is repaid at maturity. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(5)Estimated future lease payments for our Headquarters Lease in Needham, Massachusetts. Refer to “Note 7: Leases” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(6)Estimated future lease payments for our operating leases, primarily for office space, with non-cancelable lease terms. These amounts exclude expected rental income under non-cancelable subleases. Refer to “Note 7: Leases” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(7)Expected commitment fee payments are based on the daily unused portion of the Credit Facility, issued letters of credit, and the effective commitment fee rate as of December 31, 2021; however, these variables could change significantly in the future. Refer to “Note 10: Debt” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
(8)Estimated purchase obligations that are fixed and determinable, primarily related to telecommunication and licensing contracts, with various expiration dates through approximately June 2029. These contracts have non-cancelable terms or are cancelable only upon payment of significant penalty. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
(9)Excluded from the table was $177 million of unrecognized tax benefits, including interest, which is included in other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, for which we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period of payment. Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
(10)Excluded from the table was $3 million of undrawn standby letters of credit, primarily as security deposits for certain property leases as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, other than the items discussed above, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC, that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Office Lease Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we leased approximately 280,000 square feet of office space for our corporate headquarters in Needham, Massachusetts. Our Headquarters Lease, has an expiration date of December 2030, with an option to extend the lease term for two consecutive terms of five years each. We account for our Headquarters Lease as a finance lease as of December 31, 2021.
In addition to our Headquarters Lease, we also have contractual obligations in the form of operating leases for office space, in which we lease an aggregate of approximately 430,000 square feet, at approximately 35 other locations across North America, Europe, Asia Pacific and South America, in cities such as New York, London, Sydney, Barcelona, Buenos Aires, and Paris, primarily used for sales offices, subsidiary headquarters, and international management teams, pursuant to leases with various expiration dates, with the latest expiring in June 2027.
Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we are party to regulatory and legal matters, including threats thereof, arising out of or in connection with our operations. These matters may involve claims involving patent and other intellectual property rights (including privacy, alleged infringement of third-party intellectual property rights), tax matters (including value-added, excise, transient occupancy and accommodation taxes), regulatory compliance (including competition, consumer matters and data privacy), defamation and reputational claims. Periodically, we review the status of all significant outstanding matters to assess any potential financial exposure. When (i) it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred; and (ii) the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated and is material, we record the estimated loss in our consolidated statements of operations. We provide disclosures in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for loss contingencies that do not meet both of these conditions if there is a reasonable possibility that a loss may have been incurred that would be material to the consolidated financial statements. We base accruals on the best information available at the time which can be highly subjective. Although occasional adverse decisions or settlements may occur, we do not believe that the final disposition of any of these matters will have a material adverse effect on our business. However, the final outcome
of these matters could vary significantly from our estimates. Finally, there may be claims or actions pending or threatened against us of which we are currently not aware and the ultimate disposition of which could have a material adverse effect on us.
We are also under audit by the IRS and various other domestic and foreign tax authorities with regards to income tax and non-income tax matters. We have reserved for potential adjustments to our provision for income taxes that may result from examinations by, or any negotiated agreements with, these tax authorities. Although we believe our tax estimates are reasonable, the final determination of audits could be materially different from our historical income tax provisions and accruals. The results of an audit could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows in the period for which that determination is made.
By virtue of consolidated income tax returns previously filed with Expedia, we are currently under an IRS audit for the 2009, 2010 and short-period 2011 tax years. We are separately under examination by the IRS for the short-period 2011, 2012 through 2016, and 2018 tax years, and have various ongoing audits for foreign and state income tax returns. These audits include questioning of the timing and the amount of income and deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. These examinations may lead to proposed or ordinary course adjustments to our taxes. We are no longer subject to tax examinations by tax authorities for years prior to 2009. During June 2021, we closed an employment tax audit by the IRS for the 2015 through 2017 tax years with no material assessments. As of December 31, 2021, no material assessments have resulted, except as noted below regarding our 2009, 2010, and 2011 IRS audit with Expedia and our 2012 through 2016 standalone IRS audit.
In January 2017 and April 2019, as part of the IRS audit of Expedia, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustment from the IRS for the 2009, 2010, and 2011 tax years. Subsequently, in September 2019, as part of Tripadvisor’s standalone audit, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustment from the IRS for the 2012 and 2013 tax years, and in August 2020, we received Notices of Proposed Adjustments from the IRS for the 2014, 2015 and 2016 tax years. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries, and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $95 million to $105 million at the close of the audit if the IRS prevails. The estimated range takes into consideration competent authority relief and transition tax regulations, and is exclusive of deferred tax consequences and interest expense, which would be significant. We disagree with the proposed adjustments and we intend to defend our position through applicable administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies. Our policy is to review and update tax reserves as facts and circumstances change. Based on our interpretation of the regulations and available case law, we believe the position we have taken with regard to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries is sustainable. In addition to the risk of additional tax for 2009 through 2016 transactions, if the IRS were to seek transfer pricing adjustments of a similar nature for transactions in subsequent years, we would be subject to significant additional tax liabilities. We have requested competent authority assistance under Mutual Agreement Procedure (“MAP”) for tax years 2009 through 2016. We expect the competent authorities to present a resolution for the 2009 through 2011 tax years in the near future. Upon receipt, we will assess the resolution provided by the competent authorities as well as its impact on our existing income tax reserves for all subsequent years which remain open.
In January 2021, we received an issue closure notice relating to adjustments for 2012 through 2016 tax years from HMRC. These proposed adjustments are related to certain transfer pricing arrangements with our foreign subsidiaries and would result in an increase to our worldwide income tax expense in an estimated range of $45 million to $55 million, exclusive of interest expense, at the close of the audit if HMRC prevails. We disagree with the proposed adjustments and we intend to defend our position through applicable administrative and, if necessary, judicial remedies. Our policy is to review and update tax reserves as facts and circumstances change. Based on our interpretation of the regulations and available case law, we believe the position we have taken with regard to transfer pricing with our foreign subsidiaries is sustainable.
Over the last several years, the OECD has been working on a Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project to address the tax challenges arising from digitalization. The OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework has issued various guidelines, policy notes, and proposals that if adopted could result in an overhaul of the international taxation system under which our current tax obligations are determined. In October 2021, more than 130 countries tentatively signed on to a framework, expected to be implemented in 2023, which calls for a minimum tax rate on corporations of 15% and a reallocation of profits from the largest and most profitable businesses to countries where they make sales. The proposed framework, once enacted, envisages new international tax rules and the removal of all digital services
taxes. As this framework is subject to further negotiation and implementation by each member country, the timing and ultimate impact of any such changes on our tax obligations is uncertain. As the OECD/G20 continues to drive toward a consensus framework, several countries which have previously enacted unilateral digital services tax initiatives, such as France, Italy, Spain, and the U.K., will continue to impose these revenue-based taxes until implementation of the consensus framework. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded $1 million and $2 million, respectively, of digital service tax to general and administrative expense on our consolidated statement of operations.
Due to the one-time transition tax on the deemed repatriation of undistributed foreign subsidiary earnings and profits in 2017, as a result of the 2017 Tax Act, the majority of previously unremitted earnings have been subjected to U.S. federal income tax. To the extent future distributions from these subsidiaries will be taxable, a deferred tax liability has been accrued which was not material as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $427 million of our cumulative undistributed foreign earnings were no longer considered to be indefinitely reinvested.
Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on potential tax contingencies, including current audits by the IRS and various other domestic and foreign tax authorities, and other income tax and non-income tax matters.
Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions
For information on our related party transactions, refer to “Note 19: Related Party Transactions” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in accordance with GAAP. Preparation of the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as revenue and expenses during the periods reported. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, when applicable and other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There are certain critical estimates that we believe require that management use significant judgment and estimates in applying those policies in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
•It requires us to make an assumption because information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time we were making the estimate; and/or
•Changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected may have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Refer to “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K for an overview of our significant accounting policies and new accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or that we plan to adopt that have had or may have an impact on our financial statements.
A discussion of information about the nature and rationale for our critical accounting estimates is below:
Income Taxes
We record income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our estimation of the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for book and tax purposes. We determine deferred income taxes based on the differences in accounting methods and timing between financial statement and income tax reporting. Accordingly, we determine the deferred tax asset or liability for each temporary difference based on the enacted income tax rates expected to be in effect
when we realize the underlying items of income and expense. We consider all relevant factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience by jurisdiction, expectations of future taxable income and the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, as well as assessing available tax planning strategies. We may establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. As of December 31, 2021, we had a valuation allowance of approximately $123 million related to certain NOL carryforwards and other foreign deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not, the tax benefit will not be realized. We classify deferred tax assets and liabilities as noncurrent on our consolidated balance sheet. Due to inherent complexities arising from the nature of our businesses, future changes in income tax law, tax sharing agreements or variances between our actual and anticipated operating results, we make certain judgments and estimates. Therefore, actual income taxes could materially vary from these estimates.
We record liabilities to address uncertain tax positions we have taken in previously filed tax returns or that we expect to take in a future tax return. The determination for required liabilities is based upon an analysis of each individual tax position, taking into consideration whether it is more likely than not that our tax position, based on technical merits, will be sustained upon examination. For those positions for which we conclude it is more likely than not it will be sustained, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. The difference between the amount recognized and the total tax position is recorded as a liability. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions may be greater or less than the liabilities recorded.
Refer to “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K and “Contingencies” above for further information, including certain uncertainties, estimates, and potential contingencies related to ongoing audits regarding income taxes.