Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “company,” “Corner Growth,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Corner Growth Acquisition Corp. 2. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 10, 2021 (inception) as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). While we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in any business, industry, sector or geographical location, we focus on industries that complement our management team’s background, and in our search for targets for our Business Combination seek to capitalize on the ability of our management team to identify and acquire a business, focusing on the technology industry in the United States and other developed countries.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on June 16, 2021. On June 21, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 18,500,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $185,000,000, and incurring offering costs of $10,873,351, inclusive of $6,475,000 in deferred underwriting commissions. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-half of one redeemable warrant. Each whole public warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 4,950,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,425,000. Each private placement warrant is exercisable for one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and private placement, $185,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in the trust account, located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and are only invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the trust account. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied toward consummating an initial Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 12 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or June 21, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay for our income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of our company, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $1,268,509 our operating bank account, and working capital of $1,403,792, and $20,263 of unrealized gains on the proceeds deposited in the trust account. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our initial Business Combination plans.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares to our sponsor and a commitment from our sponsor to loan up to $300,000 to us to cover our expenses in connection with our Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has no amounts outstanding under such loan.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASU 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through June 21, 2022, our scheduled liquidation date if we do not complete the Business Combination prior to such date. We intend to complete a Business Combination by June 21, 2022 but cannot guarantee such event. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after June 21, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies
Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”). Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, 18,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption at the redemption amount are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial carrying value to redemption amount. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480 and ASC 815. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Results of Operations
All activity during the year ended December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our formation, the Initial Public Offering and, since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, a search for initial Business Combination candidates. As of December 31, 2021, $1,268,509 was held outside the trust account and was being used to fund the company’s operating expenses. We are not generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from February 10, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,752,760, which consisted of $1,389,224 in general and administrative costs offset by $20,263 in unrealized gains on securities held in the trust account, transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $448,003, a realized gain on the extinguishment of overallotment liability of $185,409, and a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,384,315.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On February 18, 2021, our sponsor paid $25,000, or approximately $0.005 per share, to cover certain expenses on our behalf in consideration of 5,031,250 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001. In March 2021, our sponsor transferred 50,000 Class B ordinary shares to each of our independent directors. The number of founder shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such founder shares would represent 20% of the issued and outstanding shares upon completion of this offering. Up to 656,250 of the Class B ordinary shares outstanding were subject to forfeiture by our sponsor to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment in connection with the Initial Public Offering was not exercised in full or in part. As a result of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, the sponsor forfeited 406,250 Class B ordinary shares for no consideration, resulting in an aggregate of 4,625,000 Class B ordinary shares outstanding as of December 31, 2021. The founder shares (including the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise thereof) may not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by the holder.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last sale price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Concurrently with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, our sponsor purchased 4,950,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating proceeds of $7,425,000 in the private placement.
Each private placement warrant is exercisable for one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the trust account. If we do not complete a business combination within 12 months after the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the private placement warrants will expire worthless. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by our sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their private placement warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On February 24, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of September 30, 2021 or the completion of the Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has no amount outstanding under the Note.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a Business Combination is not completed, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding Working Capital Loans under this arrangement.
Administrative Support Agreement
We agreed, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering through the earlier of the company’s consummation of a Business Combination and its liquidation, to pay our sponsor a total of $40,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We recognized $259,333 in expenses incurred in connection with the aforementioned arrangements with the related parties on our Statements of Operations for the period from February 10, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion of such shares into Class A ordinary shares) pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement entered into upon consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration and shareholder rights. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we may not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 2,625,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters partially exercised their option and purchased an additional 1,000,000 Units.
The underwriters were entitled to underwriting discounts of $0.20 per Unit, or $3,700,000 in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $6,475,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares: Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 11,116,667, of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the years ended December 31, 2021. Remeasurement associated with the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the principal executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.