Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 3, 2021. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities that we have not yet identified.
Our sponsor is TortoiseEcofin Sponsor III LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company, which is owned by Tortoise and our management (directly or indirectly, including through family trusts). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective by the SEC on July 19, 2021. On July 22, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $28.3 million, of which $10.5 million was for deferred underwriting commissions and $11.1 million was the excess of the fair value of the Founder Shares sold by the Sponsor to the Anchor Investors over the price paid by such Anchor Investors for such Founder Shares. On July 23, 2021, the underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full and on July 27, 2021, they purchased 4,500,000 additional Units, generating gross proceeds of $45.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $2.5 million, of which approximately $1.6 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. Approximately $1,329,000 of the offering costs were allocated to derivative warrant liabilities.
Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 6,333,333 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, to TortoiseEcofin Borrower, generating proceeds of $9.5 million. Concurrently with the consummation of the Over-Allotment on July 27, 2021, TortoiseEcofin Borrower purchased 600,000 additional Private Placement Warrants, generating proceeds of $900,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering on July 22, 2021, and the closing of the Over-Allotment on July 27, 2021, the net proceeds thereof consisting of $345.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) were placed in the Trust Account, located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and may be invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our Initial Public Offering, the Over-Allotment and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an initial business combination. If we have not completed an business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or 27 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering but have not completed an initial business combination within such 24-month period (the “Combination Period”), the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish our public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.2 million in operating cash and working capital of approximately $2.1 million.
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of our Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain expenses on behalf of our Company in exchange for the issuance of 8,625,000 Founder Shares, and the loan from our Sponsor of approximately $195,000 under an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”). We repaid the Note in full on July 22, 2021 and borrowings thereunder are no longer available. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds of $3.5 million from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Over-Allotment and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination and one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating our initial business combination.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from February 3, 2021 (inception) through July 22, 2021 was in preparation for an Initial Public Offering, and since the completion of our Initial Public Offering through December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $8.7 million, which consisted of $12.3 million in change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, partly offset by approximately $851,000 of general and administrative expenses inclusive of $54,000 of administrative expenses with a related party, approximately $1.4 million of loss on the issuance of Private Placement Warrants, and approximately $1.3 million of offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or approximately $6.0 million in the aggregate, upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $10.5 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of our Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on July 23, 2021, and on July 27, 2021, the underwriters purchased 4,500,000 additional Units, generating gross proceeds of $45.0 million.
Upon the consummation of the Over-Allotment on July 27, 2021, the underwriters were paid an additional underwriting commission of $900,000 and approximately $1.6 million in additional deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Deferred Legal Fees Associated with Initial Public Offering
We entered into an engagement letter to obtain legal advisory services in connection with our Initial Public Offering, pursuant to which our legal counsel agreed to defer half of their fees until the closing of our initial business combination. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded an aggregate of $150,000 in connection with such arrangement as deferred legal fees in the accompanying balance sheet.
Administrative Support Agreement
On July 19, 2021, we entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which, commencing on the date that our Company’s securities were first listed on the NYSE through the earlier of consummation of the initial business combination and the date of our liquidation, we agreed to reimburse an affiliate of the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support made available to us. For the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred $54,000 for such expenses, included as general and administrative expenses - related party on the financial statements of operations contained herein. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had paid in full for such services.
In addition, our Sponsor, executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our Company’s behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combination targets. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by our Company to the Sponsor, executive officers or directors, or our Company’s or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made using funds held outside the Trust Account. During the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $46,000 of such expenses. Approximately $7,000 was payable as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued warrants to purchase shares, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering, the Over-Allotment and the Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Black-Scholes Option Pricing Method and Monte Carlo simulation. Subsequent to the public warrants being separately listed and traded from the Units, the fair value of the public warrants was measured based on their listed market price, and the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was estimated by reference to the listed market price of the public warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred and presented as non-operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were charged against their carrying value upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We classify deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480. Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ deficit. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, all 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the Over-Allotment), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the Over-Allotment) and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 15,558,333 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from the weighted average number of basic shares outstanding as they were contingent on the exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we have included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the JOBS Act, (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting and Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (d) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the IPO Closing Date or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.