Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included herein. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere herein. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
TrueCar is a leading automotive digital marketplace that enables car buyers to connect to our network of Certified Dealers. We are building the industry’s most personalized and efficient car buying experience as we seek to bring more of the purchasing process online.
We have established a diverse software ecosystem on a common technology infrastructure, powered by proprietary data and analytics. Our company-branded platform is available on our TrueCar website and mobile applications. In addition, we customize and operate our platform on a co-branded basis for our many affinity group marketing partners, including financial institutions like Navy Federal, PenFed and American Express; membership-based organizations like Consumer Reports, AARP, Sam’s Club, and AAA; and employee buying programs for large enterprises such as IBM and Walmart. We enable users to obtain market-based pricing data on new and used cars, and to connect with our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers. We also allow automobile manufacturers, known in the industry as OEMs, to connect with TrueCar users during the purchase process and efficiently deliver targeted incentives to consumers.
We benefit consumers by providing information related to what others have paid for a make, model and trim of car in their area and price offers on actual vehicle inventory, which we refer to as VIN-based offers, from our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers. VIN-based offers provide consumers with price offers for specific vehicles from specific dealers. We benefit our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers by enabling them to attract these informed, in-market consumers in a cost-effective, accountable manner, which we believe helps them to sell more cars profitably. We benefit OEMs by allowing them to more effectively target their incentive spending at deep-in-market consumers during their purchase process.
Our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers consists primarily of new car franchises, representing all major makes of cars, as well as independent dealers selling used vehicles. TrueCar Certified Dealers operate in all 50 states and the District of Columbia.
Our subsidiary, TCDS, provides our TrueCar Trade and Payments products. Our Trade solution gives consumers information on the value of their trade-in vehicles and enables them to obtain a guaranteed trade-in price before setting foot in the dealership. This valuation is, in turn, backed by a third-party guarantee to dealers that the vehicles will be repurchased at the indicated price if the dealer does not want to keep them. Our Payments solution leverages the digital retailing technology of our DealerScience subsidiary to help consumers calculate accurate monthly payments.
Finally, our former ALG subsidiary provided forecasts and consulting services regarding determination of the residual value of an automobile at given future points in time. These residual values are used to underwrite automotive loans and leases to determine payments by consumers. In addition, financial institutions use this information to measure exposure and risk across loan, lease, and fleet portfolios. On November 30, 2020, we divested ALG to J.D. Power. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included herein for further details.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenues of $231.7 million and recorded a net loss of $38.3 million.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Global Automotive Semiconductor Chip Shortage
Events surrounding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic have resulted and will continue to result in significant economic disruptions. We continue to experience the negative effects of COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial results as reflected in the year over year decline in revenues, and we expect to experience further negative effects on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows due to numerous uncertainties. In addition to vehicle inventory shortages caused by closures in OEM production facilities in the early days of the COVID-19 induced lockdown, OEMs have also been forced to cut production in the current year as supply-chain disruption due to the pandemic resulted in a global automotive semiconductor chip shortage. The ensuing automobile inventory shortage has resulted in significant unmet demand, with automotive dealers seeing some incoming new car shipments presold. The inventory shortage along with strong consumer demand has impacted and may continue to impact the decision of our current network of Certified Dealers and OEMs to cancel or pause our services and product offerings and could discourage new dealers and OEMs from joining our network. Refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for additional disclosures of risks related to COVID-19 and the global automotive semiconductor chip shortage.
Key Metrics
We regularly review a number of key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make operating and strategic decisions.
(1)We issued full credits of the amount originally invoiced with respect to 14,912, 17,655, and 21,201 units during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As discussed in the description of the units metric below, we have not adjusted the number of units downward to reflect these credited units.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors
We define a monthly unique visitor as an individual who has visited our website, our landing page on our affinity group marketing partner sites, or our mobile applications within a calendar month. We identify unique visitors through cookies for browser-based visits on either a desktop computer or mobile device and through device IDs for mobile application visits. In addition, if a TrueCar.com user logs in, we supplement their identification with their log-in credentials to attempt to avoid double counting on TrueCar.com across devices, browsers and mobile applications. If an individual accesses our service using different devices or different browsers on the same device within a given month, the first access through each such device or browser is counted as a separate monthly unique visitor, except where adjusted based upon TrueCar.com log-in information. We calculate average monthly unique visitors as the sum of the monthly unique visitors in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. We view our average monthly unique visitors as a key indicator of the growth in our business and audience reach, the strength of our brand, and the visibility of car-buying services to the member base of our affinity group marketing partners.
The number of average monthly unique visitors increased 3.4% to approximately 8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from approximately 8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher investments in marketing in the earlier months of 2021 as COVID-19 restrictions eased.
Units
We define units as the number of automobiles purchased from TrueCar Certified Dealers that are matched to users of TrueCar.com, our TrueCar-branded mobile applications or the car-buying sites and mobile applications we maintain for our affinity group marketing partners. A unit is counted after we have matched the sale to a TrueCar user with a TrueCar Certified Dealer. We view units as a key indicator of the health of our business, the effectiveness of our product and the size and geographic coverage of our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers.
On occasion, we issue credits to our TrueCar Certified Dealers with respect to units sold. However, we do not adjust our unit metric for these credits as we believe that in most cases a vehicle has in fact been purchased through our platform given the high degree of accuracy of our sales matching process. Credits are most frequently issued to a dealer that claims that it had a pre-existing relationship with a purchaser of a vehicle, and we determine whether we will issue a credit based on a number of factors, including the facts and circumstances related to the dealer claim and the level of claim activity at the dealership. In most cases, we issue credits in order to maintain strong business relations with the dealer and not because we have made an erroneous sales match or billing error.
The number of units decreased 20.7% to 607,667 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 766,413 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The unit decrease was primarily due to lower automobile inventory levels resulting from the global automotive semiconductor chip shortage. The impact of the chip shortage on units will be dependent on the duration of the chip-related production cuts by OEMs.
Monetization
We define monetization as the average transaction revenue per unit, which we calculate by dividing all of our transaction revenue (dealer revenue and OEM incentives revenue) in a given period by the number of units in that period. Our monetization increased by 8.0% to $380 during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $352 during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to temporary concessions provided to certain subscription arrangements in the second quarter of 2020 that were not continued in the corresponding periods of 2021 and increases within newer revenue streams, partially offset by a decline within OEM incentives revenue that has been negatively impacted by the automobile inventory shortage. We expect our monetization to be affected in the future by changes in our pricing structure and the unit mix between new and used cars, with used cars providing higher monetization.
Franchise Dealer Count
We define franchise dealer count as the number of franchise dealers in the network of TrueCar Certified Dealers who participate in our Auto Buying Program at the end of a given period. This number is calculated by counting the number of brands of new cars sold at each individual location, or rooftop, regardless of the size of the dealership that owns the rooftop. The network is comprised of dealers with a range of unit sales volume per dealer, with dealers representing certain brands consistently achieving higher than average unit sales volume. We view our ability to increase our franchise dealer count, particularly dealers representing high volume brands, as an indicator of our market penetration and the likelihood of converting users of our platform into unit sales. Our TrueCar Certified Dealer network includes independent non-franchised dealers that primarily sell used cars and are not included in franchise dealer count.
Our franchise dealer count decreased to 8,482 at December 31, 2021 from 10,589 at December 31, 2020 and from 12,565 at December 31, 2019. The decline in franchise dealer count was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of automobile inventory shortages and high consumer demand, certain franchise dealers have less of a need for marketing services and products. We expect our franchise dealer count to continue to be impacted by these inventory shortages.
Independent Dealer Count
We define independent dealer count as the number of independent dealers in the network of TrueCar Certified Dealers who participate in our Auto Buying Program at the end of a given period that exclusively sell used vehicles and are not directly affiliated with a new car manufacturer. This number is calculated by counting each location, or rooftop, individually, regardless of the size of the dealership that owns the rooftop. Our independent dealer count increased to 4,013 at December 31, 2021 from 3,794 at December 31, 2020 and decreased as compared to 4,395 at December 31, 2019. The increase in 2021 from 2020 was primarily due to strong used car demand, and the decline in 2020 from 2019 was primarily due to suspensions, cancellations, or going-out-of-business due to COVID-19. We expect our independent dealer count to also be impacted by new car shortages as demand for used cars have increased, which have also resulted in inventory constraints in the used car market.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude interest income, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, loss from equity method investment including impairment charges, certain litigation costs, certain restructuring costs, certain executive departure costs, certain transaction costs, changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, goodwill impairment, other income, impairment of right-of-use assets, and income taxes. We have provided below a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss) or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, our Adjusted EBITDA measure may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other organizations as they may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as we calculate this measure.
We use Adjusted EBITDA as an operating performance measure as it is (i) an integral part of our reporting and planning processes; (ii) used by our management and board of directors to assess our operational performance, and together with operational objectives, as a measure in evaluating employee compensation and bonuses; and (iii) used by our management to make financial and strategic planning decisions regarding future operating investments. We believe that using Adjusted EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons on a period-to-period basis because it excludes variations primarily caused by changes in the excluded items noted above. In addition, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures are widely used by investors, securities analysts, rating agencies and other parties in evaluating companies as measures of financial performance and debt service capabilities.
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the receipt of interest or the payment of income taxes;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
• although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditures or any other contractual commitments;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the costs to advance our claims in certain litigation or the costs to defend ourselves in various complaints filed against us, which we expect to continue to be significant;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the severance charges associated with restructuring plans;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impairment charges on our right of use (“ROU”) assets associated with subleasing;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the legal, accounting, consulting and other third-party fees and costs incurred by us in connection with the evaluation and negotiation of potential merger and acquisition transactions;
• Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the potentially dilutive impact of shares issued or to be issued in connection with stock-based compensation; and
• other companies, including companies in our own industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net loss, our other GAAP results, and various cash flow metrics. In addition, in evaluating Adjusted EBITDA you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses such as those that are the subject of adjustments in deriving Adjusted EBITDA, and you should not infer from our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA that our future results will not be affected by these expenses or any unusual or non-recurring items.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented:
(1)The excluded amounts include stock-based compensation of $7.2 million incurred in 2019 associated with the acceleration of certain equity awards and the extension of the exercise period for certain vested stock options related to the departures of certain executives, including our former chief executive officer.
(2)The excluded amounts include a $4.1 million impairment charge on our equity method investment in Accu-Trade in the fourth quarter of 2021.
(3)The excluded amounts relate to legal costs incurred in connection with complaints filed by non-TrueCar dealers and the California New Car Dealers Association against TrueCar and consumer class action lawsuits. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the excluded amount also includes a $2.0 million payment received from one of our insurance carriers in settlement of a lawsuit we brought in the fourth quarter of 2017 to recover insured legal fees. We believe the exclusion of these costs and recovery is appropriate to facilitate comparisons of our core operating performance on a period-to-period basis. Based on the nature of the specific claims underlying the excluded litigation matters, once these matters are resolved, we do not believe our operations are likely to entail defending against the types of claims raised by these matters.
(4)The excluded amounts include $4.6 million in executive severance costs, as well as related recruiting fees of $0.5 million, associated with the separation of our former chief executive officer and the termination of executive-level employees in connection with the change in chief executive officer in 2019. We believe excluding the impact of these terminations and the associated chief executive officer recruiting fees is consistent with our use of these non-GAAP measures as we do not believe they are a useful indicator of our ongoing operating results.
(5)The excluded amounts represent charges associated with the restructuring plans undertaken in the second quarter of 2020 and first quarter of 2019 to improve efficiency and reduce expenses. We believe excluding the impact of these charges is consistent with our use of these non-GAAP measures as we do not believe they are a useful indicator of our ongoing operating results.
(6)The excluded amounts represent external legal, accounting, consulting and other third-party fees and costs we incurred in connection with the evaluation and negotiation of potential merger and acquisition transactions. These expenses are included in
general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss). We consider these fees and costs, which are associated with potential merger and acquisition transactions outside the normal course of our operations, to be unrelated to our underlying results of operations and believe that their exclusion provides investors with a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business operations.
(7)The excluded amount represents a non-cash impairment charge we recognized on our goodwill during the first quarter of 2020.
(8)The excluded amount represents impairment charges on our ROU assets associated with certain of our existing office locations. We consider these charges to be unrelated to our underlying results of operations and believe that their exclusion is appropriate to facilitate period-to-period operating performance comparisons.
Presentation of Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of our wholly owned subsidiaries in accordance with FASB ASC 810 - Consolidation. Business acquisitions are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Our purchase accounting resulted in all assets and liabilities of acquired businesses being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition dates. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
We report our financial results as one operating segment, with three distinct service offerings: Dealer products and services, OEM incentives, and other. Our operating results are regularly reviewed by our chief operating decision maker on a consolidated basis, principally to make decisions about how we allocate our resources and measure our consolidated operating performance. Our chief operating decision maker regularly reviews revenue for each of our dealer, OEM incentives and other offerings in order to gain more depth and understanding of the factors driving our business.
We are reporting the historical results of our divested ALG subsidiary, including the results of operations and cash flows as discontinued operations for all periods presented herein.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
Our revenues are comprised primarily of dealer revenue and OEM incentives revenue. We recognize transaction revenue for certain of our Auto Buying Program and OEM incentives arrangements at the time introductions and incentives are delivered based upon expected subsequent vehicle sales between the Auto Buying Program user and the dealer.
Dealer Revenue. Dealer revenue is comprised of Auto Buying Program revenue as well as revenue from TrueCar Trade and DealerScience.
Auto Buying Program revenue consists of fees paid by dealers participating in our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers. Dealers pay us these fees on a per-vehicle basis for sales to our users, on a per-introduction basis for sales to our users or in the form of a subscription arrangement. Subscription arrangements fall into several types: flat-rate subscriptions, subscriptions subject to downward adjustment based on a minimum number of vehicle sales, which we refer to as guaranteed-sales subscriptions, and subscriptions based on introduction or impression volume, including those subject to downward adjustment based on a minimum number of introductions, which we refer to as guaranteed-introductions subscriptions. Additionally, certain dealers pay an incremental subscription fee for add-on products within our Auto Buying Program.
Under flat-rate subscription arrangements, fees are charged at a monthly flat rate regardless of the number of introductions made to users of our platform by the dealer.
Under guaranteed-sales subscription arrangements, fees are charged based on the number of guaranteed sales multiplied by a fixed amount per vehicle. To the extent that the actual number of vehicles sold by the dealers to users of our platform is less than the number of guaranteed sales, we provide a credit to the dealer. If the actual number of vehicles sold exceeds the number of guaranteed sales, we are not entitled to any additional fees.
Certain of our subscription arrangements are charged based on volume of introductions or impressions provided while other introduction-based subscription arrangements operate under a guaranteed-introductions model. Under guaranteed-introductions subscription arrangements, fees are charged based on a periodically-updated formula that considers, among other things, the introductions anticipated to be provided to the dealer. To the extent that the number of actual introductions is less than the number of guaranteed introductions, we provide a credit to the dealer. If the actual number of introductions provided exceeds the number guaranteed, we are not entitled to any additional fees.
For guaranteed-sales and guaranteed-introductions subscription arrangements, fees are charged based on the lesser of (i) the actual number of sales generated or introductions delivered through our platform during the subscription period multiplied by the contracted price per sale/introduction or (ii) the guaranteed number of sales or introductions multiplied by the contracted price per sale/introduction.
We offer additional add-on products to eligible dealers as part of the Auto Buying Program to increase traffic and retarget in-market consumers. These products include TrueCar Sponsored Listings and TrueCar Reach. TrueCar Sponsor Listings enables a dealer to place qualifying vehicles at more prominent positions within the used car search results page. TrueCar Reach is a service offered to retarget in-market consumers on the dealer’s behalf with co-branded emails. Fees are charged based on a monthly subscription rate for the right to sponsor up to a set number of vehicles at any time throughout the month under Sponsored Listings. Fees for our Reach product are also charged on a flat monthly rate regardless of the number of emails delivered.
TrueCar Trade revenue consists of dealers who pay monthly subscription fees that vary depending on the level of trade service selected. Depending on their subscription terms, some dealers pay additional transaction fees for each vehicle purchased from a consumer that was introduced via TrueCar Trade.
DealerScience revenue consists of monthly subscription fees paid by dealers for access to DealerScience’s products and services. DealerScience provides dealers with advanced digital retailing software tools that allow them to calculate accurate monthly payments, expedite vehicle desking, which is the process of presenting and agreeing upon financial terms and financing options, and streamline the consumers’ experience from shopping to showroom. In 2021, we began to phase out selling certain of DealerScience’s products and services.
OEM Incentives Revenue. OEM incentives revenue consists of fees paid by automobile manufacturers, or OEMs, to promote the sale of their vehicles through the offering of additional consumer incentives to members of our affinity group marketing partners. These OEMs pay us a subscription or per-vehicle fee for promotion of the incentive.
Other Revenue. Other revenue consists primarily of fees earned associated with the USAA transition services agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For a description of our revenue accounting policies, see Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). Cost of revenue includes expenses related to the fulfillment of our services, consisting primarily of data costs and licensing fees paid to third-party service providers and expenses related to operating our website and mobile applications, including data center costs; hosting fees; data processing costs required to deliver introductions to our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers; employee costs related to certain dealer operations and sales matching; and facilities costs. Cost of revenue excludes depreciation and amortization of software costs and other hosting and data infrastructure equipment used to operate our platforms, which are included in the depreciation and amortization line item on our statements of comprehensive income (loss).
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of television, digital, and radio advertising; media production costs; affinity group partner marketing fees, which also include loan subvention costs where we pay certain affinity group marketing partners a portion of consumers’ borrowing costs for car loan products offered by these affinity group marketing partners; marketing sponsorship programs; and digital customer acquisition. In addition, sales and marketing expenses include employee-related expenses for sales, customer support, marketing and public relations employees, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, severance, and stock-based compensation expenses; third-party contractor fees; and facilities costs. Marketing and advertising costs promote our services and are expensed as incurred, except for media production costs, which are expensed the first time the advertisement is aired.
Technology and Development. Technology and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, severance, and stock-based compensation expenses; third-party contractor fees; facilities costs; software costs; and costs associated with our product development, product management, research and analytics, and internal IT functions.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, severance, and stock-based compensation expenses for executive, finance, accounting, legal, and human resources functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal, accounting, and other third-party professional service fees, bad debt, lease exit costs, and facilities costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation consists primarily of depreciation expense recorded on property and equipment. Amortization expense consists primarily of amortization recorded on intangible assets, capitalized software costs, and leasehold improvements.
Interest Income. Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Other Income. Other income primarily consists of fees earned associated with the transition services agreement with J.D. Power as a result of our ALG divestiture.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes. We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States. We provided a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, as it is more likely than not that some or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. As a result of the valuation allowance, our income tax expense (benefit) is significantly less than the federal statutory rate of 21%. Our provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily reflects tax expense associated with state income taxes and the amortization of tax-deductible goodwill that is not an available source of income to realize deferred tax assets. Our benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily arose in connection with the impairment of goodwill, resulting in reduction of indefinite-lived deferred tax liabilities.
We had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $301.4 million and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $236.0 million at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development credit carryforwards of approximately $13.4 million and $11.0 million, respectively. Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code impose substantial restrictions on the use of net operating losses and other tax attributes in the event of a cumulative “ownership change” of a corporation of more than 50% over a three-year period. We experienced a cumulative ownership change as of December 31, 2019 within the meanings of Sections 382 and 383. We estimate that up to $15.2 million and $0.5 million of federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, respectively, may expire unused. Accordingly, we recorded a reduction of deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 for the Section 382 limitation of $3.2 million which was fully offset by a corresponding decrease in our valuation allowance, with no net tax provision impact. Additionally, with the finalization of our 2011 - 2020 research and development tax credit study in 2021, we estimate that certain federal research and development credit carryforwards may expire unused. Accordingly, we recorded a reduction of deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 for the Section 383 limitation of $12.3 million which was fully offset by a corresponding decrease in our valuation allowance, with no net tax provision impact.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act was enacted to provide economic relief to individuals and businesses facing economic hardship as a result of the COVID-19 public health emergency. The CARES Act includes, among other things, provisions relating to payroll tax credits and deferrals, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. On March 11, 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (ARP Act) was enacted to further extend economic relief from the impacts of COVID. The ARP Act includes, among other things, provisions relating to the extension of employee retention tax credits and credits for paid sick and family medical leave, repeal of a worldwide interest allocation election, changes to pension funding requirements, and expanded limits on executive compensation deductions. We estimate that neither the CARES or ARP Act will have a material impact on our tax expense (benefit), financial position or cash flows. In addition, on June 29, 2020 California enacted legislation suspending NOL deductions for taxpayers with more than $1 million of business income and imposing limits on the use of tax credits up to $5 million effective for tax years 2020 through 2022. As a result, we plan to utilize California research and development credits to offset California state taxes for the impacted tax years, including 2020, during which we recognized net taxable income in California due to the Divestiture. We will continue to monitor possible future impact of changes in tax legislation.
See Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements included herein for more information about our provision for income taxes.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our selected consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated.
The following table sets forth our selected consolidated statements of operations data as a percentage of revenues for each of the periods indicated.
* Less than 0.5% of revenues
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in our revenues of $47.0 million, or 16.9%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily impacted by the automobile inventory shortage. Dealer revenue, OEM incentives revenue, and other revenue comprised 95.9%, 3.7%, and 0.4%, respectively, of revenues for 2021 as compared to 90.8%, 6.0%, and 3.2%, respectively, for 2020. The decrease of $30.9 million in dealer revenue was primarily a result of low inventory associated with the global automobile semiconductor chip shortage. The decrease of $8.2 million in OEM incentives revenue was driven by the loss of OEM programs that targeted USAA members only and certain OEMs pausing their programs also as a result of low inventory associated with the global automobile semiconductor chip shortage. A decrease of $7.9 million in other revenue was primarily driven by fees earned related to the USAA transition services agreement which ended on September 30, 2020. We expect our revenues to continue to be impacted by the inventory constraints caused by the global automobile semiconductor chip shortage, which may influence dealers on our Certified Dealers network to cancel or pause our services or product offerings and could discourage new dealers from joining our network, and may also influence OEMs to pause on their incentive programs.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in our revenues of $56.4 million, or 16.8%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected a decrease in our dealer revenue offset by an increase in other revenue. Dealer revenue, OEM incentives revenue, and other revenue comprised 90.8%, 6.0%, and 3.2%, respectively, of revenues for
2020 as compared to 94.9%, 4.9%, and 0.2%, respectively, for 2019. The decrease of $65.0 million in dealer revenue for 2020 reflected a decrease in our Auto Buying Program revenue of $65.8 million primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 and concessions we provided to certain subscription arrangements as well as the wind-down of our partnership with USAA, offset by increases within newer revenue streams of $0.8 million. These decreases were offset by an increase of $8.4 million in other revenue primarily driven by fees earned related to the USAA transition services agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization)
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue of $0.7 million, or 3.2%, for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in data and licensing expenses primarily driven by growth in dealer adoption of our retail solutions products compared to the prior year. This increase was offset by a $2.5 million decrease in employee-related expenses, of which $0.6 million is associated with severance-related costs incurred as part of the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020 and $1.9 million related to reduced headcount, a $0.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation, and a $0.3 million decrease in facilities costs.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue of $6.3 million, or 22.6%, for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to a $2.6 million decrease in data and licensing costs, a $1.8 million decrease in employee-related costs related to reduced headcount following the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020, a $0.7 million decrease in stock-based compensation, and a $0.6 million decrease in conference and travel-related expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses of $15.4 million, or 10.2%, for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily reflected a $11.9 million decrease in employee-related expenses of which $5.3 million is associated with severance-related costs incurred as part of the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020 and $6.6 million related to reduced headcount, a $2.5 million decrease in creative production costs, a $1.5 million decrease in travel-related and industry conference expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a $1.3 million decrease in stock-based compensation, and a $0.7 million decrease in outsourced services, offset by a $2.3 million increase in revenue share paid to affinity marketing partners and a $1.0 million increase in branded media spend. We expect sales and marketing expenses to vary over the course of the year depending on the state of the automobile inventory and semiconductor chip shortages as it impacts the deployment of our branded media spend and revenue share that we pay to our affinity marketing partners. Additionally, we expect to incur incremental branded media expenses to support the launch of our TrueCar+ initiative.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses of $75.1 million, or 33.1%, for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected a $30.2 million decrease in partner marketing and revenue share paid to affinity marketing partners, a $23.4 million decrease in branded media spend, and a $10.5 million decrease, net of severance costs, in salaries and employee-related expenses due to reduced headcount following the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020. Further decreases include a $6.3 million decline in conference and travel-related expenses and a $4.7 million decrease in stock-based compensation.
Technology and Development Expenses
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in technology and development expenses of $3.5 million, or 7.8%, for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily reflected a $4.0 million decrease in employee-related expenses, of which $1.6 million is associated with severance-related costs incurred as part of the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020 and $2.4 million related to reduced headcount, and a $0.5 million decrease in facilities costs, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in outsourced services.
Capitalized software costs increased $1.1 million for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in third-party software costs of $1.7 million offset by a decrease in internally-developed software of $0.6 million.
We expect technology and development expenses to continue to be affected by variations in the amount of capitalized internally developed software.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in technology and development expenses of $11.2 million, or 19.9%, for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily reflected a $6.2 million decrease, net of severance costs, in salaries and employee-related expenses due to reduced headcount following the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020, a $3.1 million decrease in stock-based compensation, and a $1.2 million decrease in conference and travel-related expenses.
Capitalized software costs decreased $0.6 million for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to a decrease in the amount of internally-developed software of $0.9 million offset by an increase in third-party software costs of $0.4 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses decreased $1.2 million, or 2.5%, for 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease primarily reflected a $2.4 million decrease in bad debt expense driven by adjustments to our allowance for doubtful accounts resulting from both improved collection efforts and forecast assumptions, a $1.9 million decrease in employee-related expenses, of which $0.8 million is associated with severance-related costs incurred as part of the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020 and $1.1 million related to reduced headcount, a $0.4 million decrease in impairment charges on our right-of-use assets associated with office leases, and a $0.6 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense. The decrease was offset by a $3.3 million increase in legal expenses as a result of a $2.0 million payment received in the first quarter of 2020 from one of our insurance carriers in settlement of a lawsuit we brought during the fourth quarter of 2017 to recover insured legal fees and a $1.1 million increase in other expenses associated with bank fees and insurance costs.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses decreased $14.3 million, or 22.3%, for 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a $8.1 million decrease in costs for consulting and outsourced services, a $4.8 million decrease in stock-based compensation, a $3.0 million decrease in employee-related expenses due to decreased headcount following the restructuring undertaken in the second quarter of 2020, and a $1.2 million decrease in conference and travel-related expenses. These decreases were offset by a $2.1 million impairment charge on our right-of-use asset associated with an office lease and a $1.5 million increase in bad debt expense driven by an increase in our allowance for doubtful accounts due in part to the impact of COVID-19.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $4.3 million, or 20.8%, for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to certain long-lived assets reaching the end of their useful lives in 2020. We expect our depreciation and amortization expenses to continue to be affected by the amount of capitalized internally developed software costs, property and equipment, and the timing of placing projects in service. We expect our depreciation and amortization expenses to continue to be affected by the amount of capitalized internally developed software costs, property and equipment, and the timing of placing projects in service.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $0.1 million, or 0.6%, for 2020 as compared to 2019.
Goodwill Impairment
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a non-cash goodwill impairment charge in the amount of $8.3 million, which represents the amount that our carrying value was in excess of its estimated fair value at March 31, 2020. For further details, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included herein.
Interest Income
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income decreased $0.4 million, or 88.7%, for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. Interest income decreased $2.0 million, or 81.4%, for 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to lower interest rates.
Other Income
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, other income consists primarily of fees earned from the transition services agreement we entered into with J.D. Power in connection with our ALG divestiture.
Loss from Equity Method Investment
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an impairment charge in the amount of $4.1 million on our equity method investment in Accu-Trade, which represents the amount that our carrying value was in excess of its estimated fair value at December 31, 2021. For further details, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included herein.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Years ended December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The provision for income taxes for 2021 of $0.2 million primarily reflects tax expense associated with state income taxes and the amortization of tax-deductible goodwill that is not an available source of income to realize deferred tax assets. The benefit from income taxes for 2020 of less than $0.1 million primarily arose in connection with the impairment of goodwill, resulting in reduction of indefinite-lived deferred tax liabilities. The benefit from income taxes for 2019 of $1.3 million primarily reflects a tax benefit associated with the intraperiod tax allocation required by ASC 740.
Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code impose substantial restrictions on the use of net operating losses and other tax attributes in the event of a cumulative “ownership change” of a corporation of more than 50% over a three-year period. We experienced a cumulative ownership change as of December 31, 2019 within the meanings of Sections 382 and 383. We estimate that up to $15.2 million and $0.5 million of federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, respectively, may expire unused. The Section 382 limitation resulted in a reduction of deferred tax assets of $3.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and was fully offset by a corresponding decrease in our valuation allowance, with no net tax provision impact. Additionally, with the finalization of the 2011 - 2020 research and development tax credit study in 2021, we estimate that certain of the federal research and development credit carryforwards may expire unused. The Section 383 limitation resulted in a reduction of deferred tax assets of $12.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and was fully offset by a corresponding decrease in valuation allowance, with no net tax provision impact.
Income from Discontinued Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. Income from discontinued operations, net of taxes, was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 30, 2021 and relates to the resolution of net working capital adjustments of our ALG divestiture and professional fees associated with this resolution. We completed our divestiture of ALG on November 30, 2020. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included herein for more information.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. Income from discontinued operations, net of taxes, increased $92.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a gain on sale of $92.5 million recognized on the ALG divestiture.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $245.2 million.
We have incurred cumulative losses of $393.8 million from our operations through December 31, 2021, and expect to incur additional losses in the future. We generate cash inflows from operations primarily from selling services to dealers participating in our network of TrueCar Certified Dealers, and cash outflows to enable our business operations, develop new services and core technologies that further enhance our online automotive marketplace, and fund share repurchases based on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors. We believe that our existing sources of liquidity and cash expected to be generated from operations will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue levels, the timing and extent of our spending to support our technology and development efforts, costs related to potential acquisitions to further expand our business and product offerings, collection of accounts receivable, macroeconomic activity, and the length and severity of business disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. To the extent that existing cash and cash equivalents, and cash from operations, are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through public or private equity or debt financing. Additional funds may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
Credit Facility
We are party to a credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank that provides for advances of up to $35.0 million. This credit facility provides a $10.0 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit and contains an increase option permitting us, subject to the lender’s consent, to increase the revolving credit facility by up to $15.0 million, to an aggregate maximum of $50.0 million. The credit facility’s previous three-year term matured on April 19, 2021. In April 2021, we entered into an amendment to extend the maturity date of our credit facility for another three years to expire on April 12, 2024. No amounts were outstanding at December 31, 2021. The amount available under the amended credit facility at December 31, 2021 was $32.6 million, reduced for the letters of credit issued and outstanding under the subfacility of $2.4 million. See Note 8 of our consolidated financial statements herein for more information about our amended credit facility.
Share Repurchase Program
In the third quarter of 2020, our board of directors authorized an open market stock repurchase program (the “Program”) of up to $75 million to allow for the repurchase of shares of our common stock through September 30, 2022. In the second quarter of 2021, the Company’s board of directors increased the authorization of the Program by an additional $75 million, bringing the total authorization to $150 million. The timing and amount of any repurchases is determined by us based on our evaluation of market conditions and other factors. Repurchases of our common stock may be made under a Rule 10b5-1 plan, which would permit common stock to be repurchased when we might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws, open market purchases, privately-negotiated transactions, block purchases or otherwise in accordance with applicable federal securities laws. The Program may be suspended or discontinued at any time and does not obligate us to purchase any minimum number of shares. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company repurchased and retired a total of 6.1 million and 9.3 million shares under the Program for $32.3 million and $42.2 million respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a remaining authorization of $75.5 million for future share repurchases.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes net cash derived from operating, investing, and financing activities from continuing operations, as well as net cash from discontinued operations:
Operating Activities of Continuing Operations
Our net loss and cash flows provided by or used in operating activities are significantly influenced by our investments in headcount and infrastructure to support our growth, marketing, advertising, and sponsorship expenses. We have experienced positive operating cash flows despite having experienced a net loss due to the inclusion of non-cash expenses and charges.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 was $14.4 million. This was primarily due to a loss from continuing operations of $38.4 million, adjusted for non-cash items, including stock-based compensation expense of $20.4 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $16.3 million, loss from equity method investment of $5.4 million of which $4.1 million was related to an impairment charge, amortization of lease right-of-use assets of $4.3 million, an impairment charge associated with certain of our existing office locations of $1.7 million, and bad debt expense of $0.5 million. Net cash provided by operating activities also reflected an increase of $3.6 million from changes in operating assets and liabilities, which primarily reflected a decrease of $15.7 million in accounts receivable primarily due to a reduction in revenue and a decrease of $2.7 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, offset by a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $5.6 million primarily due to a decrease in marketing fees payable to our affinity group partners and advertisers, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $5.2 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $1.8 million, and a decrease in accrued employee expenses of $1.8 million.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2020 was $29.9 million. This was primarily due to a loss from continuing operations of $19.8 million, which was adjusted for non-cash items, including stock-based compensation expense of $23.1 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $20.4 million, goodwill impairment of $8.3 million, amortization of lease right-of-use assets of $5.4 million, bad debt expense of $3.0 million, and asset impairment and write-off of $2.4 million primarily due to a ROU asset impairment of $2.1 million. Net cash provided by operating activities also included a $14.2 million decrease from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The $14.2 million decrease primarily reflected a decrease of $8.2 million in accounts payable primarily due to a decrease in marketing fees payable to our affinity group partners and advertisers, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $6.3 million, and a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $4.1 million driven by reduced accrued legal fees, offset by cash collections of $2.3 million from accounts receivable, a decrease of $1.3 million in prepaid expense and other assets primarily due to a decrease in prepaid marketing costs.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2019 was $12.8 million. This was primarily due to a loss from continuing operations of $58.3 million, which adjusted for non-cash items, including stock-based compensation expense of $36.5 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $20.7 million and amortization of lease right-of-use assets of $5.9 million. Net cash provided by operating activities also included a $3.7 million increase in changes in operating assets and liabilities. The $3.7 million increase primarily reflected an increase of $10.5 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities mainly driven by accrued marketing costs and cash collections of $4.0 million from accounts receivable, offset by a $6.8 million decrease in operating lease liabilities and a $4.9 million decrease in accounts payable.
Investing Activities of Continuing Operations
Our investing activities consist primarily of cash paid for equity method investment and capital expenditures for capitalized software development costs and property and equipment.
Cash used in investing activities of $10.7 million during 2021 was for purchases of property and equipment, consisting primarily of $9.8 million of investments in software.
Cash used in investing activities of $10.3 million during 2020 was for purchases of property and equipment, consisting primarily of $9.1 million of investments in software.
Cash used in investing activities of $33.4 million during 2019 resulted primarily from a $23.2 million equity method investment in Accu-Trade as well as $10.2 million of purchases of property and equipment, consisting primarily of $9.8 million of investments in software.
Financing Activities of Continuing Operations
Cash used in financing activities of $38.1 million during 2021 primarily represents payments of $31.9 million for the repurchase of our common stock, taxes paid of $5.3 million for the net share settlement of certain equity awards, and a $2.2 million payment related to the fair value portion of a contingent consideration related to our 2018 acquisition of DealerScience. These decreases were offset by proceeds received of $1.4 million from the exercise of employee stock options.
Cash used in financing activities of $49.2 million during 2020 primarily represents payments of $42.8 million for the repurchase of our common stock, taxes paid of $4.3 million for the net share settlement of certain equity awards, and a $2.3 million payment related to the fair value portion of a contingent consideration related to our 2018 acquisition of DealerScience.
Cash used in financing activities of $0.5 million for 2019 reflects taxes paid for the net share settlement of certain equity awards of $3.3 million, offset by $2.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net Cash Provided by Discontinued Operations
Net cash provided by discontinued operations of $6.3 million mainly consisted of the $7.5 million cash earnout received from J.D. Power based upon ALG’s achievement of certain revenue metrics in 2020 net of a cash payment of $1.0 million related to final net working capital adjustments associated with the divestiture.
Net cash provided by discontinued operations of $121.4 million in 2020 includes net cash provided by operating activities of $9.2 million and cash provided by investing activities of $112.2 million, primarily from cash proceeds received from the sale of ALG. See Note 4 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Net cash provided by discontinued operations of $6.4 million in 2019 includes net cash provided by operating activities of $7.5 million, offset by cash used in investing activities of $1.1 million for purchases of property and equipment.
Contractual Obligations and Known Future Cash Requirements
The Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Leases
The Company has various leases for office space. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had fixed lease payment obligations of $37.0 million, with $6.8 million payable within 12 months that have not been reduced by minimum non-cancellable sublease rentals aggregating $7.6 million. See Note 3 “Leases” to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Purchase obligations
The Company has long-term agreements to purchase data information, software related licenses and support services, and other obligations that are enforceable and legally binding. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had purchase obligations of $11.1 million, with $7.8 million payable within 12 months. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. See Note 9 “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions on an ongoing basis and that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates. See Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to the consolidated financial statements, which describes our significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. The methods, estimates, and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgements, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain. Our most critical accounting estimates are those relating to revenue recognition, sales allowances and allowances for doubtful accounts, the recoverability of goodwill, long-lived assets, and equity method investment, income taxes, and the expensing and capitalization of software and website development costs.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our consolidated financial statements included herein.