Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the statements contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “target,” “would,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. The following information and any forward-looking statements should be considered in light of factors
discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly including those risks identified in Part I-Item 1A “Risk Factors” and our other filings with the SEC.
Our actual results and timing of certain events may differ materially from the results discussed, projected, anticipated, or indicated in any forward-looking statements. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate may differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Statements made herein are as of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K with the SEC and should not be relied upon as of any subsequent date. Even if our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate are consistent with the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, they may not be predictive of results or developments in future periods. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the SEC, to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of the investigational therapy Haduvio (nalbuphine ER) to treat serious neurologically mediated conditions. We are developing Haduvio for the treatment of chronic pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis and chronic cough in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or IPF.
We are conducting a Phase 2b/3 clinical trial of Haduvio, which we refer to as the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial, in patients with severe pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis. The Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial is a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled, two-arm treatment study that is designed to evaluate the safety and anti-pruritic efficacy of Haduvio in patients in the United States and Europe. In accordance with the protocol for the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial, we conducted a sample size re-estimation, or SSRE, analysis in July 2020, following such time as approximately 45% of the initial targeted number of subjects in the trial were evaluable for the primary endpoint. Based on the analysis, the independent Data Monitoring Committee, or DMC, recommended that the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial should continue and that the trial size should increase from an initial enrollment target of 240 to 360 subjects, which maintains the statistical power for the primary endpoint. Based on the DMC’s recommendation, we increased the planned trial size to 360 subjects. We completed enrollment in the trial on January 31, 2022. We expect to report top-line data in the second quarter of 2022. If the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial is successful, we expect that we will use the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial and an additional Phase 3 clinical trial that we believe we will need to conduct to support the submission of a new drug application, or NDA, to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, a marketing authorization application, or MAA, to the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, and an MAA to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency in the United Kingdom, or MHRA, for Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis.
We are also conducting a Phase 2 clinical trial of Haduvio for chronic cough in patients with IPF, which we refer to as the Phase 2 CANAL trial. The Phase 2 CANAL trial is a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled, two-treatment, two-period, crossover study that is designed to evaluate the efficacy, safety, tolerability and dosing of Haduvio for chronic cough in patients with IPF. This trial is designed to enroll approximately 60 subjects with a goal to have 44 study completers. We are conducting the trial at multiple sites in the United Kingdom. In February 2022, we conducted an interim statistical analysis for this trial. The interim analysis (N=26) was statistically significant on the primary efficacy endpoint demonstrating a 52% placebo-adjusted reduction in the geometric mean percent change in daytime cough events (p<0.0001, conditional power 100%) for Haduvio. P-value is a conventional statistical method for measuring the statistical significance of clinical results. A p-value of less than 0.05 is generally considered to represent statistical significance, meaning that there is a less than five percent likelihood that the observed results occurred by chance. The interim analysis was conducted by an independent statistical team according to the pre-specified endpoint in the protocol. In March 2022, we concluded enrollment early for our Phase 2 CANAL trial following the statistically significant efficacy results from the interim analysis. Because the trial achieved statistical significance in the interim analysis, sites were notified that they could enroll eligible subjects already in screening but that no additional recruitment was required. Approximately 40 subjects in total were enrolled in the study. We expect to report efficacy and safety data for the full set of subjects for this trial in the third quarter of 2022.
We are currently focusing our financial and operational resources on completing the Phase 2b/3 PRISM and the Phase 2 CANAL trials. After we receive top-line data from both of these trials we will evaluate additional indications for which we may choose to pursue the development of Haduvio.
Since commencing operations in 2011, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to the clinical development of Haduvio. We have not generated any revenue from product sales and, as a result, we have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since commencement of our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $180.9 million, primarily as a result of research and development and general and
administrative expenses. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and commercialize Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis or chronic cough in patients with IPF and we can provide no assurance that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
In May 2019, we issued and sold 5,500,000 shares of common stock in our IPO, and 1,500,000 shares of common stock in a concurrent private placement, in each case at an offering price of $10.00 per share, for combined net proceeds of $62.1 million after deducting aggregate underwriting discounts and commissions and private placement agent fees of $4.9 million and other offering expenses of $3.0 million. Upon the closing of the IPO, our preferred stock then outstanding converted into an aggregate of 10,381,234 shares of common stock.
In June 2020, we entered into a sales agreement with SVB Leerink LLC, or SVB Leerink, which we refer to as the ATM Sales Agreement, under which we may issue and sell shares of common stock, from time to time, having an aggregate offering price of up to $12.0 million. Sales of common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement may be made by any method that is deemed an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We are not obligated to make any sales of our common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement. We began making sales pursuant to the ATM Sales Agreement in July 2020, and as of December 31, 2021 we had issued and sold an aggregate of 3,583,394 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $11.0 million, before deducting estimated commissions and allocated fees of $0.8 million.
In August 2020, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or the SVB Loan Agreement, with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB pursuant to which SVB provided a term loan, or the SVB Term Loan, to us in the original principal amount of $14.0 million. On the first business day of each month commencing on March 1, 2022, we are required to repay the SVB Term Loan in 24 consecutive installments of principal plus monthly payments of accrued interest. All outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under the SVB Term Loan and all other outstanding obligations with respect to the SVB Term Loan are due and payable in full on February 1, 2024. The SVB Loan Agreement permits voluntary prepayment of all, but not less than all, of the SVB Term Loan, subject to a prepayment premium. In July 2021, we entered into an amendment to the SVB Loan Agreement with SVB, which we refer to as the Loan Amendment, that modified the conditions under which we will be required to cash collateralize the outstanding amounts owed to them under the SVB Loan Agreement. For further discussion of the SVB Term Loan and the Loan Amendment, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”.
On October 5, 2021 and October 18, 2021, we issued and sold in two private placements, or the October 2021 Private Placements, in the aggregate (i) 4,225,053 shares of our common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 8,450,106 shares of our common stock, and (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 4,926,069 shares of our common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,852,138 shares of our common stock. Each share of our common stock and accompanying common stock warrants were sold together at a combined price of $1.62, and each pre-funded warrant and accompanying common stock warrants were sold together at a combined price of $1.619, for gross proceeds of approximately $14.8 million. Each pre-funded warrant had an exercise price of $0.001 per share, became exercisable immediately upon issuance and continued to be exercisable until exercised in full. As of February 10, 2022, all of the pre-funded warrants had been exercised. Of the accompanying common stock warrants, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,151,122 shares will expire in April 2025 and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,151,122 shares will expire in October 2028. The accompanying common stock warrants have an exercise price of $1.37 per share and became exercisable immediately upon issuance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $36.8 million. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will not enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for 12 months from the date of issuance of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. After considering various risks and uncertainties as prescribed by Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-15, Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40), we concluded that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern as of the date of issuance of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K without additional capital. We have based our estimate as to how long we expect our existing cash and cash equivalents to continue to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Our future viability beyond that point is dependent on our ability to raise additional capital to finance our operations.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we advance Haduvio through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercial launch activities. Specifically, in the near term, we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial in patients with pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis and the additional Phase 3 clinical trial we believe we will be required to conduct to support the submission of an NDA to the FDA for Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis, our ongoing Phase 2 CANAL trial and the next trial we plan to conduct for Haduvio for the treatment of chronic cough associated with IPF which we intend to design as a Phase 2b/3 trial. We also expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future related to the development and validation of our commercial manufacturing process for Haduvio and other development activities. In addition, we may continue to incur additional expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related clinical trial delays and interruptions.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of Haduvio, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of Haduvio for one or more indications or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and government measures taken in response thereto have had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on segments of the global economy and have interrupted our clinical trial activities, disrupted our business operations and have the potential to interrupt our supply chain. We have experienced restrictions and delays at our existing clinical sites for both our Phase 2b/3 PRISM and Phase 2 CANAL trials. The COVID-19 pandemic may also adversely affect our ability to recruit and retain principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19, and may result in further disruptions to our clinical trials due to prioritization of hospital and medical resources toward the outbreak, restrictions on travel of patients and healthcare providers, potential unwillingness of patients to enroll in trials at this time or the inability of patients to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines or travel restrictions impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. The response to the COVID-19 pandemic may also redirect resources of regulators in a way that could adversely impact our ability to progress towards regulatory approvals and we may face impediments to regulatory meetings and approvals relating to our clinical trials due to measures intended to limit in-person interactions.
The COVID-19 pandemic may also affect employees of third-party contract research organizations located in affected geographies that we rely upon to carry out our clinical trials. The spread of COVID-19 or another infectious disease, could also negatively affect the operations at our third-party suppliers, which could result in delays or disruptions in the supply of drug product used in our clinical trials.
We have taken precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, including allowing employees to work remotely part of the week.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
All our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the development of Haduvio. These expenses include personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, consulting costs, contract manufacturing costs and fees paid to clinical research organizations, or CROs, to conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf. We do not allocate all of our costs by each indication for which we are developing Haduvio, as a significant amount of our development activities broadly support all indications. In addition, several of our departments support our Haduvio drug candidate development program and we do not identify internal costs for each potential indication.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next few years as we pursue our development program, pursue regulatory approval of Haduvio in the U.S., Europe and other jurisdictions outside the U.S. and prepare for a possible commercial launch of Haduvio. Predicting the timing or the cost to conduct our Haduvio development program and prepare for a possible commercial launch of Haduvio is difficult and delays may occur because of many factors including factors outside of our control. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, whether as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on our development program. Furthermore, we are unable to predict when or if, Haduvio will receive regulatory approval in the U.S. or elsewhere with any certainty.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation for personnel in executive, finance, commercial and other administrative functions; professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services; as well as rent and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of increased personnel costs, including stock-based compensation and expanded infrastructure.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Change in Fair Value of Term Loan Derivative Liability
In connection with the SVB Term Loan, upon the occurrence of the Phase 3 Event, as described below, the interest rate on the SVB Term Loan will increase by 2.00%. This contingent interest rate increase represents a free-standing financial instrument. Accordingly, we accounted for the contingent interest rate increase as a derivative under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and therefore, we recorded a term loan derivative liability for the contingent interest rate increase at its fair value. We adjust this liability to fair value at each reporting date it remains outstanding. We recognized changes in the fair value of this term loan derivative in our statements of operations as a component of other income (expense), net.
Other Expense
Other expense consists of the value of the shares of our common stock that we issued to Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC, or Lincoln Park, as a commitment fee as consideration for Lincoln Park’s commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the common stock purchase agreement, or the LPC Purchase Agreement, we entered into with Lincoln Park in June 2021.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned from money market funds on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
In August 2020, we entered into the SVB Loan Agreement under which we borrowed $14.0 million under a term loan or the SVB Term Loan. In connection with the SVB Term Loan, we recognize interest expense which includes amortization of deferred financing charges, accretion of loan discount-financing costs, accrual of the final payment fee, amortization of the term loan discount-interest and the stated interest on the SVB Term Loan. The SVB Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the greater of (A) the prime rate plus 1.00% and (B) 4.25%. If SVB receives evidence satisfactory to it that we have (i) received positive data for the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial sufficient to advance Haduvio into a second Phase 3 clinical trial for chronic pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis and (ii) raised sufficient financing to fund such Phase 3 clinical trial and our operations, which we refer to together as the Phase 3 Event, the interest rate under the SVB Term Loan will be adjusted to a floating rate equal to the greater of (A) the prime rate plus 3.00% and (B) 6.25%. The SVB Term Loan required interest-only payments until March 2022. Commencing on March 1, 2022, we are required to repay the SVB Term Loan in 24 consecutive installments of principal plus monthly payments of accrued interest. All outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under the SVB Term Loan and all other outstanding obligations with respect to the SVB Term Loan are due and payable in full on February 1, 2024.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $0.7 million, or 2.9%, to $23.0 million from $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in personnel-related expenses as a result of an increase in our employee headcount, including an increase in stock-based compensation associated with the increase in employee headcount. Costs associated with our clinical trials also increased along with consulting and professional fees. These increases were partially offset by decreased purchases of clinical trial supplies. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, all of our research and development expenses related to our development activity for Haduvio.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.7 million, or 6.6%, to $9.5 million from $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to decreased market research costs as well as lower stock-based compensation expense as a result of employee turnover, which were partially offset by higher legal and other professional fees.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $1.5 million from other expense, net of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily due to a $0.7 million increase in interest expense due to a full twelve months of recognition of interest expense on the SVB Term Loan as the SVB Term Loan was entered into in August 2020, as well as an increase of $0.4 million related to the value of the shares of our common stock that we issued to Lincoln Park as consideration for Lincoln Park’s commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the LPC Purchase Agreement. Also contributing to the change was a decrease in interest income of $0.2 million, primarily due to lower market interest rates and lower average cash balances. These changes in interest expense and interest income were partially offset by an increase in income of $0.1 million attributable to income being recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021 for the change in fair value of the term loan derivative liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Prior to the completion of our initial public offering, or the IPO, and concurrent private placement in May 2019, we financed our operations primarily through private placements of our preferred stock and convertible notes as well as borrowings under our prior term loan. From inception to our IPO, we raised an aggregate of $102.2 million in gross proceeds from sales of our preferred stock and convertible notes and borrowed $15.0 million under our prior term loan.
In May 2019, we issued and sold 5,500,000 shares of common stock in our IPO and 1,500,000 shares of common stock in a concurrent private placement, in each case at an offering price of $10.00 per share, for combined net proceeds of $62.1 million after deducting aggregate underwriting discounts and commissions and private placement agent fees of $4.9 million and other offering expenses of $3.0 million.
In June 2020, we entered into the ATM Sales Agreement, under which we may issue and sell shares of common stock, from time to time, having an aggregate offering price of up to $12.0 million. Sales of common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement may be made by any method that is deemed an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We are not obligated to make any sales of our common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement. We began making sales pursuant to the ATM Sales Agreement in July 2020, and as of December 31, 2021, we had issued and sold an aggregate of 3,583,394 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $11.0 million, before deducting estimated commissions and allocated fees of $0.8 million.
SVB Loan Agreement
In August 2020, we entered into the SVB Loan Agreement with SVB, pursuant to which SVB provided the SVB Term Loan in the original principal amount of $14.0 million. The proceeds from the SVB Term Loan may be used by us for working capital and general corporate purposes. The SVB Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the
greater of (A) the prime rate plus 1.00% and (B) 4.25%. If SVB receives evidence satisfactory to it that we have (i) received positive data for the Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial, sufficient to advance Haduvio into a second Phase 3 clinical trial for prurigo nodularis and (ii) raised sufficient financing to fund such Phase 3 clinical trial and our operations, the interest rate under the SVB Term Loan will be adjusted to a floating rate equal to the greater of (A) the prime rate plus 3.00% and (B) 6.25%. On the first business day of each month commencing on March 1, 2022, we are required to repay the SVB Term Loan in 24 consecutive installments of principal plus monthly payments of accrued interest. All outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under the SVB Term Loan and all other outstanding obligations with respect to the SVB Term Loan are due and payable in full on February 1, 2024. The SVB Loan Agreement permits voluntary prepayment of all, but not less than all, of the SVB Term Loan, subject to a prepayment premium. Such prepayment premium would be 3.00% of the principal amount of the SVB Term Loan if prepaid prior to the first anniversary of the date on which we entered into the SVB Term Loan or the Effective Date, 2.00% of the principal amount of the SVB Term Loan if prepaid on or after the first anniversary of the Effective Date, but prior to the second anniversary of the Effective Date and 1.00% of the principal amount of the SVB Term Loan if prepaid on or after the second anniversary of the Effective Date but prior to February 1, 2024. Upon repayment in full of the SVB Term Loan, we will be required to pay a final payment fee equal to $1.2 million. The SVB Term Loan and related obligations under the SVB Loan Agreement are secured by substantially all of our properties, rights and assets, except for our intellectual property (which is subject to a negative pledge under the SVB Loan Agreement). The SVB Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, events of default and covenants. The occurrence and continuation of an event of default could cause interest to be charged at the rate that is otherwise applicable plus 5.00% (unless SVB elects to impose a smaller increase) and would provide SVB with the right to accelerate all obligations under the SVB Loan Agreement and exercise remedies against us and the collateral securing the SVB Term Loan and other obligations under the SVB Loan Agreement, including foreclosure against assets securing the SVB Term Loan and other obligations under the SVB Loan Agreement, including our cash.
On July 6, 2021, we and SVB entered into the Loan Amendment. The Loan Amendment modifies the conditions under which we are required to cash collateralize outstanding amounts owed to SVB under the SVB Loan Agreement. Under the Loan Amendment, if we fail to receive positive data in our Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial or, prior to June 30, 2022, fail to raise sufficient net proceeds from the sale of equity securities to finance our planned second Phase 3 clinical trial of Haduvio for prurigo nodularis and our ongoing operations, each of which we refer to as a Milestone Condition, we will be required to deposit unrestricted and unencumbered cash equal to 100% of the principal amount of the SVB Term Loan then outstanding in a cash collateral account with SVB, which can be used by SVB to prepay the SVB Term Loan at any time. In addition, the Loan Amendment provides that if we fail to maintain at least $20.0 million in unrestricted and unencumbered cash in our accounts with SVB at any time prior to the satisfaction of all the Milestone Conditions, we will be required to cash collateralize all outstanding amounts owed to SVB under the SVB Loan Agreement. We would also have been required to cash collateralize all outstanding amounts owed to SVB under the SVB Loan Agreement if we did not raise at least $15.0 million in net proceeds from the sale of equity securities during the period from June 1, 2021 through October 31, 2021. We satisfied this equity funding condition through a combination of equity issuances under our ATM Sales Agreement and the proceeds from the October 2021 Private Placements.
Private Placements
On October 5, 2021 and October 18, 2021, we issued and sold in two private placements in the aggregate (i) 4,225,053 shares of our common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 8,450,106 shares of our common stock, and (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 4,926,069 shares of our common stock and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,852,138 shares of our common stock. Each share of our common stock and accompanying common stock warrants were sold together at a combined price of $1.62, and each pre-funded warrant and accompanying common stock warrants were sold together at a combined price of $1.619, for gross proceeds of approximately $14.8 million. Each pre-funded warrant had an exercise price of $0.001 per share, became exercisable immediately upon issuance and was exercisable until exercised in full. As of February 10, 2022, all of the pre-funded warrants had been exercised. Of the accompanying common stock warrants, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,151,122 shares will expire in April 2025 and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,151,122 shares will expire in October 2028. The accompanying common stock warrants have an exercise price of $1.37 per share and became exercisable immediately upon issuance.
Equity Purchase Agreement
On June 18, 2021, we entered into the LPC Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park for an equity line financing. The LPC Purchase Agreement provides that, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to $15.0 million of shares of common stock at our sole discretion, over a 24-month period commencing on July 23, 2021. We filed a registration statement on Form S-1 covering the resale of shares of common stock that are issued to Lincoln Park under the LPC Purchase Agreement, which was declared effective on July 14, 2021. As part of the LPC Purchase Agreement, we issued 170,088 shares of our common
stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the LPC Purchase Agreement. Under the terms of the October 2021 Private Placements, we agreed to not issue or sell additional shares under the LPC Purchase Agreement on or prior to April 6, 2023.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $36.8 million. Our cash and cash equivalents are primarily held in money market accounts. The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $28.9 million of net cash, resulting from our net loss of $33.9 million, partially offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.5 million and non-cash charges of $3.5 million. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of a $0.3 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.8 million increase in accounts payable and a $0.3 million decrease in accrued expenses. The decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets was primarily due to the return of a deposit associated with the completion for one of our clinical trials. The increase in accounts payable was primarily due to timing of vendor invoices. The decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities was primarily due to decreased accruals related to non-income-based taxes and accrued consulting and professional fees partially offset by increased accruals for research, development and clinical trial work performed by our CROs. The non-cash charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million, $0.6 million of accretion/accrual of term loan discounts and debt issuance costs and $0.4 million of other expense associated with the value of the shares of our common stock that we issued to Lincoln Park as consideration for Lincoln Park’s commitment to purchase shares of our common stock under the LPC Purchase Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $29.0 million of cash, resulting from our net loss of $32.8 million, partially offset by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.1 million and non-cash charges of $2.7 million. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a $0.7 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.4 million increase in accounts payable and a $0.1 million decrease in accrued expenses. The decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets was due to a refund of prepayments made to one of our vendors, which we received in the first quarter of 2020 and the application of such prepaid amounts to clinical trial activity in 2020 offset by additional prepayments made to one of our vendors, which were paid back to us in the first quarter of 2021. The increase in accounts payable was primarily due to timing of vendor invoices. The non-cash charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense of $2.4 million and $0.2 million of accretion/accrual of term loan discounts and debt issuance costs.
Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we used an insignificant amount of cash in investing activities, consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $20.8 million, primarily consisting of net cash proceeds from our October 2021 Private Placements of $13.7 million and cash proceeds of $7.5 million, net of commissions, from sales of our common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement, partially offset by payments of offering costs of $0.4 million and payments of financing costs of $0.1 million associated with the First Amendment to the SVB Loan Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $16.7 million, primarily consisting of cash proceeds from the SVB Term Loan of $14.0 million and cash proceeds of $3.1 million, net of commissions, from sales of our common stock under the ATM Sales Agreement.
Funding Requirements
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we advance Haduvio through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercial launch activities. Specifically, in the near term,
we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial, the additional Phase 3 clinical trial we believe we will need to conduct to support the submission of an NDA to the FDA and MAAs to the EMA and MHRA for Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis, our ongoing Phase 2 CANAL trial and our next clinical trial that we intend to design to be a Phase 2b/3 trial as well as any additional clinical trials required to support the submission of an NDA to the FDA and MAAs to the EMA and MHRA for Haduvio for the treatment of chronic cough associated with IPF. Generally, regulatory authorities require two adequate and well-controlled studies for approval. We also expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future related to the costs of commercialization activities, including manufacturing capabilities, for Haduvio and other development activities. In addition, we have incurred and may continue to incur additional expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting clinical trial delays and interruptions. Furthermore, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of Haduvio, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other sources to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our future funding requirements, both short-term and long-term, will depend on many factors, including:
•
the scope, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials of Haduvio, including our ongoing Phase 2b/3 PRISM trial and our ongoing Phase 2 CANAL trial, as well as any future product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of indications for which we seek to develop Haduvio or any future product candidates and their respective development requirements;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of clinical and nonclinical trials and of seeking regulatory approvals, including the costs of supportive clinical studies such as our planned human abuse liability, or HAL, study and a potential Thorough QT, or TQT, study;
•
the costs associated with the manufacture of necessary quantities of Haduvio or any future product candidate for clinical development in connection with regulatory submissions;
•
the costs of commercialization activities for Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis or for the treatment of chronic cough in patients with IPF or for any other serious neurologically mediated conditions or for any future product candidates that receive marketing approval, if any, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•
subject to receipt of marketing approvals, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis or for the treatment of chronic cough in patients with IPF or for any other serious neurologically mediated conditions or from any future product candidates;
•
our ability to identify potential collaborators for Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis or for the treatment of chronic cough in patients with IPF or for any future product candidates and the terms and timing of any collaboration agreement that we may establish for the development and any commercialization of such product candidates;
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license rights to other potential product candidates or technologies and the terms and timing of any such acquisition or licensing arrangements;
•
our potential obligation to make milestone payments to Endo, which would become due upon the successful completion of the first Phase 3 clinical trial of a licensed product candidate, the marketing approval of a licensed product in the United States and to pay mid-single digit royalties on the net sales of the product;
•
our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development activities and establish a commercial infrastructure;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining, expanding and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property-related claims;
•
the effect of competing technologies and market developments;
•
our ability to establish and maintain healthcare coverage and adequate reimbursement for our products;
•
the costs of operating as a public company;
•
our ability to continue as a going concern; and
•
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the scope, progress, timing, costs and results of our ongoing and planned clinical trials of Haduvio.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, including the proceeds from our October 2021 Private Placements, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2022, without giving effect to the rights of SVB under the SVB Loan Agreement if we fail to achieve either of the Milestone Conditions or fail to maintain at least $20.0 million in unrestricted and unencumbered cash in our accounts with SVB at any time prior to the satisfaction of the Milestone Conditions. If we fail to achieve any of the Milestone Conditions or to maintain the minimum cash requirement and SVB cash collateralizes the amounts then owed to SVB under the SVB Loan Agreement or uses such amounts to prepay the SVB Term Loan, the period for which we will be able to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements will be significantly shorter.
We have based our estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, in which case we would be required to obtain additional financing and financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, on a timely basis or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
We do not have any committed external source of funds. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain further funding through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements or other sources to complete the clinical development and commercialization of Haduvio for the treatment of pruritus associated with prurigo nodularis or for the treatment of chronic cough in patients with IPF or any other indication. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any debt financing into which we enter would result in fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include grants of security interests on our assets and restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, granting liens over our assets, redeeming stock or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. For example, in connection with the SVB Term Loan, we granted a security interest on all of our assets, excluding our intellectual property, agreed to a negative pledge on our intellectual property, agreed to restrictive covenants including, subject to certain exceptions, covenants that prohibit us from transferring all or any part of our business or property, changing our business, liquidating or dissolving, merging with or acquiring another entity, entering into a transaction that will result in a change in control, incurring additional indebtedness, creating any lien on our property, paying dividends or redeeming stock, making payments on subordinated debt or entering into material transactions with affiliates and agreed to cash collateralize the SVB Term Loan in certain circumstances. Future debt securities or other financing arrangements could contain similar or more restrictive negative covenants. We are also bound by certain contractual terms and obligations that may limit or otherwise impact our ability to raise additional funding in the near-term including, but not limited to, provisions in the October 2021 Private Placements prohibiting us from obtaining additional financing through a variable rate transaction such as an equity line of credit. In addition, securing financing could require a substantial amount of time and attention from our management and may divert a disproportionate amount of their attention away from day-to-day activities, which may adversely affect our management’s ability to oversee the development of our product candidates. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that could adversely affect our common stockholders.
If we are unable to raise sufficient capital as and when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or abandon our product development programs or commercialization efforts. If we raise additional funds through collaborations or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to future revenue streams or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the Notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are deferred and capitalized and recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
We have entered into agreements with CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and other companies that provide services in connection with our research and development activities. Our research and development accruals are estimated based on the level of services performed, progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, and contracted costs. The estimated costs of research and development provided, but not yet invoiced, are included in accrued expenses on our consolidated balance sheet. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and other companies under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements with employees and non-employees for consultancy services in accordance with ASC 718, Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires the recognition of compensation expense, using a fair value-based method, for costs related to all stock-based payments, including stock options. Our determination of the fair value of stock options on the date of grant utilizes the Black-Scholes option pricing model for stock options with time-based vesting and is impacted by our common stock price as well as changes in assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include the expected term that options will remain outstanding, expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option awards, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends.
The fair value of an option award is recognized over the period during which the optionee is required to provide services in exchange for the option award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
Estimating the fair value of equity-settled awards as of the grant date using valuation models, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model, is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require analysis and judgment to develop.
Expected Term-The expected term assumption represents the weighted average period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We have elected to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of the options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
Expected Volatility-For all stock options granted to date, the volatility data was estimated based on a study of publicly traded industry peer companies. For purposes of identifying these peer companies, we considered the industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies.
Expected Dividend-The Black-Scholes valuation model calls for a single expected dividend yield as an input. We currently have no history or expectation of paying cash dividends on our common stock.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues similar in duration to the expected term of the equity-settled award.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Income Taxes
We provide for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, or ASC 740. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date,
unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
Warrants
We determine the accounting classification of warrants that are issued, as either liability or equity, by first assessing whether the warrants meet liability classification in accordance with ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and then in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. Under ASC 480, warrants are considered liability classified if the warrants are mandatorily redeemable, obligate the issuer to settle the warrants or the underlying shares by paying cash or other assets, or must or may require settlement by issuing a variable number of shares.
If warrants do not meet liability classification under ASC 480, we assess the requirements under ASC 815, which states that contracts that require or may require the issuer to settle the contract for cash are liabilities recorded at fair value, irrespective of the likelihood of the transaction occurring that triggers the net cash settlement feature. If the warrants do not require liability classification under ASC 815, in order to conclude equity classification, we assess whether the warrants are indexed to our common stock and whether the warrants are classified as equity under ASC 815 or other applicable GAAP. After all relevant assessments are made, we conclude whether the warrants are classified as liability or equity. Liability classified warrants are required to be accounted for at fair value both on the date of issuance and on subsequent accounting period ending dates, with all changes in fair value after the issuance date recorded in the statements of operations as a gain or loss. For equity classified warrants, no changes in fair value are recognized after the issuance date.
Fair Value Measurements
Our financial instruments have consisted of cash and cash equivalents, tax credit and other receivables, accounts payable, accrued expenses, term loans, term loan derivative liability and warrants to acquire our common stock. Fair value estimates of these instruments are made at a specific point in time, based on relevant market information. The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, tax credit and other receivables, accounts payable and accrued expenses are generally considered to be representative of their respective fair values because of the short-term nature of those instruments. The carrying amount of the term loan approximates its fair value due to its floating market-based interest rate. The fair value of the term loan derivative liability is estimated utilizing a probability-weighted cash flow approach.
Current accounting guidance defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, and requires certain disclosures about fair value measurements. The valuation techniques included in the guidance are based on observable and unobservable inputs. Observable inputs reflect readily obtainable data from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect market assumptions and are classified into the following fair value hierarchy:
•
Level 1-Observable inputs-quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities.
•
Level 2-Observable inputs other than the quoted prices in active markets for identical assets and liabilities-such as quoted prices for similar instruments, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in inactive markets, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
•
Level 3-Unobservable inputs-includes amounts derived from valuation models where one or more significant inputs are unobservable and require the company to develop relevant assumptions.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, as amended, or JOBS Act, permits emerging growth companies such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
On January 1, 2021, we adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2019-12 Income Taxes (Topic 740), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes. The adoption of the new guidance did not materially affect our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
There have been no new pronouncements issued during the year ended December 31, 2021, which could be expected to materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements.