ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing novel medicines for patients affected by central nervous system, or CNS, disorders. Our lead product, OLINVYK™ (oliceridine) injection, or OLINVYK, was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, in August 2020. In October 2020, we announced that OLINVYK had received scheduling from the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, or DEA, and was classified as a Schedule II controlled substance. We initiated commercial launch of OLINVYK in the first quarter of 2021. Our commercial strategy at launch is to focus on a subset of core specialties and the clinically challenging patient (for example, those patients with certain co-morbidities, elderly, obese or renal impairment). We will evolve that focus as customers gain experience with OLINVYK. OLINVYK is an opioid agonist for use in adults for the management of acute pain severe enough to require an intravenous opioid analgesic and for whom alternative treatments are inadequate. We are also developing a pipeline of product candidates based on our proprietary product platform, including TRV027 for the treatment of acute lung injury contributing to acute respiratory distress syndrome and abnormal blood clotting in patients with COVID-19; TRV045 for diabetic neuropathic pain and epilepsy; TRV250 for acute migraines; and TRV734 for moderate-to-severe acute and chronic pain and opioid use disorders.
Since our incorporation in late 2007, our operations have included organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, discovering and developing our product candidates, and establishing our intellectual property portfolio. We have financed our operations primarily through private placements and public offerings of our
equity securities and debt borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $494.1 million. Our net loss was $51.6 million and $29.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our ability to become and remain profitable depends on our ability to generate revenue or sales. We do not expect to generate significant revenue or sales unless and until we or a collaborator successfully commercialize OLINVYK or obtain marketing approval for and commercialize TRV027, TRV250, TRV734, or TRV045.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to commercialize OLINVYK and continue the development and clinical trials of our other product candidates. We will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other sources, including potential collaborations. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue our operations, development programs, and/or any future commercialization efforts.
Recent Developments
$40 million OLINVYK ex-U.S. Royalty Based Financing with R-Bridge Healthcare Fund
On March 30, 2022, we entered into a royalty-based financing with R-Bridge Healthcare Fund, an affiliate of CBC Group, which we refer to as the R-Bridge Financing. In connection with this financing, we will receive an upfront amount of $15.0 million, plus $15.0 million upon first commercial sale of OLINVYK in China. The Company will also receive an additional $10.0 million upon achievement of either a commercial or financing milestone.
The R-Bridge Financing will be repaid through assignment to R-Bridge of all royalties from our license with our partner in China, Jiangsu Nhwa Pharmaceutical, or Nhwa, and through a 4% net revenue interest in U.S. net sales of OLINVYK. This U.S. revenue interest will be capped at $10.0 million if Chinese approval occurs by year-end 2023. In the event Chinese approval does not occur by that time, the U.S. revenue interest will increase to 7% and will continue until certain combined totals of U.S. revenue interest and Chinese royalties are repaid. We retain all milestones from our partnership with Nhwa, including a $3.0 million milestone on Chinese approval.
We provided a negative pledge of all of our assets until Chinese approval of OLINVYK in connection with the R-Bridge Financing. Following Chinese approval, the R-Bridge Financing will be non-recourse to us, other than the Chinese royalty and capped U.S. revenue interest.
Positive topline data from OLINVYK Respiratory Physiology study
On March 31, 2022 we announced positive topline data from a study evaluating the physiologic impact of OLINVYK on respiratory function in high-risk subjects including elderly and obese subjects (mean age of 71.2 years). In this study OLINVYK, at similar levels of analgesia compared to IV morphine, demonstrated a statistically significant reduced impact on respiratory depression. The study was initiated in July 2021 and led by a recognized expert in risk/benefit analysis, Albert Dahan, M.D., Ph.D., Professor of Anesthesiology at the Leiden University Medical Center. The data from this study is consistent with prior data involving younger (mean age of 26.9 years) subjects showing a favorable risk/benefit profile for OLINVYK compared to IV morphine.
TRV027 for COVID-19 - International Expansion
In March 2022, we were informed that our ongoing NIH ACTIV study for TRV027, our novel AT1 receptor selective agonist, would be expanded to include hospitalized COVID-19 patients at international sites, in addition to the currently enrolling U.S. sites. We intend to focus our efforts on supporting the continued enrollment in the NIH ACTIV study and believe the data will help position TRV027 as a treatment option for hospitalized COVID-19 patients, as well as for respiratory indications not related to COVID-19. As a result of this international expansion, and due to the need to allocate resources efficiently, we have also elected to withdraw TRV027 from the international REMAP-CAP study in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. REMAP-CAP had selected TRV027 for inclusion in April 2021, but to date no patients have been dosed with TRV027 in this study.
Submission of NDA in China
In January 2022, our licensing agreement partner in China, Jiangsu Nhwa Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., or Nhwa received acceptance of their New Drug Application (NDA) for oliceridine injection from China’s National Medical Products Administration (NMPA). Their submission followed completion by Nhwa of a Phase 3 bridging trial for OLINVYK (oliceridine) injection, a novel IV analgesic that has been approved in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in adults for the management of acute pain severe enough to require an intravenous opioid analgesic and for whom alternative treatments are inadequate.
The results of the Phase 3 bridging study show that the safety and pharmacokinetic profile of oliceridine in Chinese patients is consistent with the data from global studies and demonstrates safety and tolerability in Chinese populations. The launch of OLINVYK in China, if approved by the NMPA, will help to address the significant unmet need in acute pain management.
Trevena executed an exclusive License Agreement in 2018 with Nhwa to develop, manufacture, and commercialize OLINVYK in China and is eligible to receive regulatory and commercial milestone payments as well a 10% royalty on net sales in China.
TRV045 Program for Diabetic Neuropathic Pain
In December 2021, the FDA approved a three-part randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled study of TRV045 for diabetic neuropathic pain. The primary objective of the study is to evaluate the safety and tolerability of TRV045 in healthy adult subjects. The study will also assess the pharmacokinetics (PK) of TRV045 and determine whether TRV045 is associated with changes in lymphocyte counts, hemodynamic function, and QTcF interval. Enrollment began in the first quarter of 2022.
In nonclinical studies, TRV045 was not associated with lymphopenia and produced no changes in blood pressure, heart rate, or respiratory function at or above pharmacologically active doses, unlike existing S1P receptor modulators, which are currently only approved by the FDA to treat multiple sclerosis and in one instance to treat moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in adults. To date, there have been no head-to-head clinical studies of TRV045 compared to existing S1P receptor modulators.
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and on our business continues to be a fluid situation. We responded quickly across our organization to guard the health and safety of our team and participants in our clinical trials, support our partners and vendors and mitigate risk. Thus far, our employees have rapidly adapted to working remotely and we are monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic on a daily basis to ensure we have all necessary plans in place for mitigating disruptions in our operations. Our commercial launch was impacted by the pandemic via a lack of traditional access to our customers and delayed formulary review processes. Many of our customers experienced capacity constraints as a result of COVID-19 and this frequently limited their ability to fully assess the clinical profile of OLINVYK. Like other companies, our clinical trials have experienced some degree of disruption due to access limitations to institutions currently impacted, and we may need to make further adjustments to clinical trials in the future to comply with evolving FDA guidance or otherwise. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our efforts to commercialize OLINVYK and to achieve market acceptance is uncertain and will depend upon future developments.
We continue to proactively assess, monitor and respond to domestic and international developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and we will implement risk-mitigation plans as needed to minimize the impact on our clinical trials and business operations, including our commercialization efforts of OLINVYK.
Senior Secured Tranched Term Loan Credit Facility
In September 2014, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Oxford Finance LLC and Pacific Western Bank (formerly Square 1 Bank), or the lenders, pursuant to which the lenders agreed to lend us up to $35.0 million in a three-tranche series of term loans, or the Term Loans. We were required to make payments of interest only on borrowings under the loan agreement on a monthly basis through and including January 1, 2018. Payments of principal in equal monthly installments and accrued interest began on January 1, 2018 and continued until the loan matured on March 1, 2020. On March 2, 2020, we made our final payment under the loan and security agreement with the lenders. Upon the last payment date of the amounts borrowed under the agreement, we were required to pay a final payment fee of $1.9 million, equal to 6.6% of the aggregate amounts borrowed.
In connection with entering into the agreement, we issued to the lenders and the placement agent certain warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,678 shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, warrants exercisable for 5,728 shares of common stock remain outstanding. These warrants were exercisable upon issuance and have an exercise price of $5.8610 per share. The warrants may be exercised on a cashless basis and will terminate on the earlier of September 19, 2024 or the closing of a merger or consolidation transaction in which we are not the surviving entity. In connection with our draw of the second term loan tranche, we issued to the lenders and the placement agent additional warrants to purchase an aggregate of 34,961 shares of our common stock. These warrants have substantially the same terms as those noted above and have an exercise price of $10.6190 per share and an expiration date of December 23, 2025. In connection with our draw of the third term loan tranche, we issued to the lenders and placement agent additional warrants to purchase an aggregate of 62,241 shares of our common stock. These warrants have substantially the same terms as those noted above and have an exercise price of $3.6150 per share and an expiration date of March 31, 2027. These detachable warrant instruments qualified for equity classification and were allocated based upon the relative fair value of the base instrument and the warrants, according to the guidance of ASC 470-20-25-2.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, we believe that the following accounting policies are important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and we have accordingly included them in this discussion.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with FASB’s ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, we recognize revenue when its customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i) identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii) determine the transaction price;
(iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We apply the five-step model to contracts when we determine that it is probable we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Product Revenue
Product revenue is recognized at the point in time when our performance obligations with our customers have been satisfied. At contract inception, we determine if the contract is within the scope of ASC Topic 606 and then evaluate the contract using the following five steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue at the point in time when the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Revenue is recorded at the transaction price, which is the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products to a customer. We determine the transaction price based on fixed consideration in our contractual agreements, which includes estimates of variable consideration, and the transaction price is allocated entirely to the performance obligation to provide pharmaceutical products. In determining the transaction price, a significant financing component does not exist since the timing from when we deliver product to when the customers pay for the product is less than one year and the customers do not pay for product in advance of the transfer of the product.
We record product revenue net of any variable consideration, which includes estimated chargebacks, prompt pay discounts, returns and distribution service fees. We utilize the expected value method to estimate chargebacks and returns and we utilize the most likely method to estimate prompt pay discounts and distribution service fees. The variable consideration is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time revenues are recognized. We will only recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period. These estimates may differ from actual consideration amount received and we will re-assess these estimates each reporting period to reflect known changes in factors.
Distributor Chargebacks
When a product is sold to a third party that is subject to a contractual price agreement, the difference between the price paid to us by the wholesaler and the price under the specific contract is charged back to us by the wholesaler. Utilizing this information, we estimate a chargeback percentage for each product and record an allowance for chargebacks as a reduction to revenue when we record our sale of the products. We reduce the chargeback allowance when a chargeback request from a wholesaler is processed. Reserves for chargebacks are included in accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheet.
Prompt Payment (Cash) Discounts
We provide customers with prompt payment discounts which may result in adjustments to the price that is invoiced for the product transferred, in the case that payments are made within a defined period. Our prompt payment discount reserves are based on actual net sales and contractual discount rates. Reserves for prompt payment discounts are included in accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheet.
Distribution Service Fees
We pay distribution service fees to our customers based on a fixed percentage of the product price. These fees are not in exchange for a distinct good or service and therefore are recognized as a reduction of the transaction price. We reserve for these fees based on actual net sales, contractual fee rates negotiated with the customer and the mix of the products in the distribution channel that remain subject to fees. Reserves for distribution service fees are included in accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheet.
Product Returns
Generally, our customers have the right to return any unopened product during the eighteen (18) month period beginning six (6) months prior to the labeled expiration date and ending twelve (12) months after the labeled expiration date in addition to slow moving or discontinued products. Six (6) months following the launch of OLINVYK, our customers may have the right to return inventory remaining from their initial purchase, if any, subject to certain terms and conditions. Since we currently do not have a history of OLINVYK returns, we estimate returns based on industry data for comparable products in the market. As we distribute our product and establish historical sales over a longer period of time (i.e., two to three years), we will be able to place more reliance on historical purchasing, demand and return patterns of our customers when evaluating our reserves for product returns. OLINVYK has a forty-eight (48) month shelf life.
We recognize the amount of expected returns as a refund liability, representing the obligation to return the customer’s consideration. Since the returns primarily consist of expired and short dated products that will not be resold, we do not record a return asset for the right to recover the goods returned by the customer at the time of the initial sale (when recognition of revenue is deferred due to the anticipated return). Accrued product return estimates are recorded in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
License Revenues
Our licensing agreements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: nonrefundable, up-front license fees; regulatory and commercial milestone payments; payments for manufacturing supply services; materials shipped to support development; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
We also assess whether there is an option in a contract to acquire additional goods or services. An option gives rise to a performance obligation only if the option provides a material right to the customer that it would not receive without entering into that contract. Factors that we consider in evaluating whether an option represents a material right include, but are not limited to: (i) the overall objective of the arrangement, (ii) the benefit the collaborator might obtain from the arrangement without exercising the option, (iii) the cost to exercise the option (e.g. priced at a significant and incremental discount) and (iv) the likelihood that the option will be exercised. With respect to options determined to be
performance obligations, we recognize revenue when those future goods or services are transferred or when the options expire.
Our licensing revenue arrangements may include the following:
Up-front License Fees: If a license is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from nonrefundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of an agreement that includes regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether each milestone is considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the control of the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. At each reporting period, we assess the probability of achievement of each milestone under our current agreements.
Research and Development Activities: Under our current collaboration and license arrangements, if we are entitled to reimbursement for costs for services that we provided, we expect such reimbursement would be an offset to research and development expenses.
Royalties: If we are entitled to receive sales-based royalties from our collaborator, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, provided the reported sales are reliably measurable, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Manufacturing Supply and Research Services: Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of drug substance or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the licensee’s discretion are generally considered as options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the licensee and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations.
We receive payments from our licensees based on schedules established in each contract. Upfront payments are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred. Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, personnel expenses, clinical trial supplies, fees for clinical trial services, manufacturing costs, consulting costs, and allocated overhead.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors with respect to their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the
terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as the case may be.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical research organizations and consultants, and under clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate trial expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We may account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by subject progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through financial models taking into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of consummation of trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no material adjustments to our prior period estimates of accrued expenses for clinical trials.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have equity incentive plans under which various types of equity-based awards including, but not limited to, incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, and restricted stock unit awards, may be granted to employees, non-employee directors, and non-employee consultants. We also have an inducement plan under which various types of equity-based awards, including non-qualified stock options and restricted stock unit awards, may be granted to new employees.
At December 31, 2021, we had two stock-based compensation plans, which are more fully described in Note 8 to the financial statements included in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have applied the fair value recognition provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, or ASC 718, to account for stock-based compensation for employees.
We recognize compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for all stock-based awards based on the estimated grant-date fair values. For restricted stock unit awards to employees, the fair value is based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention of paying cash dividends. We elected an accounting policy to record forfeitures as they occur.
See Note 8 to the financial statements included in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the assumptions we used in determining the grant date fair value of options granted under the Black-Scholes option pricing model, as well as a summary of the stock option activity under our stock-based compensation plan for all years presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the financial statements included in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on recent accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
(in thousands, except per share data)
Revenue
To date, we have derived revenue mainly from activities pursuant to our licensing agreements related to the development and commercialization of OLINVYK in China and South Korea. We have not generated material revenue from commercial product sales. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded $0.5 million and $0.1 million, respectively, in product revenue from the shipment of drug product to wholesalers.
License revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to materials shipped to Nhwa to support the development of oliceridine efforts in China. There was $3.0 million of license revenue recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to the milestone payment that became payable by Nhwa upon FDA approval of OLINVYK.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold for product revenue includes third party logistics costs, shipping costs, and indirect overhead costs which are recorded as period costs in the period incurred.
We expensed the cost of producing validation batches of OLINVYK that we are using in the commercial launch as research and development expense prior to the regulatory approval and DEA scheduling of OLINVYK. We expect cost of sales to increase as we deplete these inventories.
The following table provides information regarding cost of goods sold during the periods indicated, including percent changes (dollar amounts in thousands):
Cost of goods sold increased by $0.8 million, or 424% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, primarily related to a reserve for a commercial batch that is not salable based on the Company’s quality requirements and a full year of distribution and indirect costs following the regulatory approval and DEA scheduling of OLINVYK.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in our executive, finance, commercial, and other administrative areas, including expenses associated with stock-based compensation and travel. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include professional fees for legal, field sales organization, medical affairs, market research, consulting, and accounting services.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $18.9 million, or 98%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, primarily related to increases in commercialization activities and the launch of our customer-facing sales team.
Research and development expense
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for research and the development of our product candidates, including costs associated with the regulatory approval process. In addition, research and development expenses include salaries and related costs for our research and development personnel and stock-based compensation expense and travel expenses for such individuals. Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size, complexity and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and are tracked by discovery program and subsequently by product candidate once a product candidate has been selected for development. We record costs for some development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development expenses increased by $0.3 million, or 2% in 2021 as compared to 2020. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses (in thousands):
The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by higher expenditures on TRV027 and TRV045 partially offset by decreased spending on OLINVYK following FDA approval.
Total other income
Total other income decreased by $0.1 million, or 19%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower interest income and lower bond accretion due to the repayment of the term loan during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically funded substantially all of our operations through the sale and issuance of our equity securities, debt securities and borrowings under debt facilities. We have also received an aggregate of $8.8 million pursuant to licensing agreements for the development and commercialization of OLINVYK in China and South Korea.
At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $494.1 million, working capital of $61.5 million, cash and cash equivalents of $66.9 million, restricted cash of $1.3 million, and no marketable securities. In November 2020, we filed a $250.0 million shelf registration statement, which includes the HCW ATM Program, of which there was approximately $41.9 million of available capacity as of December 31, 2021.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist of research and development expenditures, commercialization expenditures, and other selling, general and administrative expenditures. We anticipate these expenses to increase in 2022, given that we continue to commercialize OLINVYK. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in accounts payable and accrued expenses. Net cash used in operating activities was $50.2 million and $21.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We incurred net losses of $51.6 million and $29.4 million for those same periods.
Our success is dependent on the successful commercialization of OLINVYK and obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until we become profitable. We expects that our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 is sufficient to fund operations through the fourth quarter of 2022, but not for more than one year after the date of this filing and therefore management has concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $50.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of $18.9 million as a result of the launch of OLINVYK. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of a net loss of $51.6 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of
$3.9 million partially offset by non-cash expenses for stock compensation of $4.4 million, depreciation of $0.4 million, and change in right-of-use asset of $0.4 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a net loss of $29.4 million partially offset by non-cash expenses for stock compensation of $3.3 million and a $3.4 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to purchases of property, plant and equipment, as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which was primarily related to maturities of marketable securities.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $95.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to net proceeds of $7.9 million from the HCW ATM Program.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net proceeds of approximately $53.7 million from our August 2020 underwritten public offering of 25.0 million shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $2.30 per share, and net proceeds of $47.3 million from the sale of common stock through our HCW ATM Program, partially offset by principal repayments on our Term Loans of $3.2 million and an additional final fee payment of $1.9 million.
Leases
The Company currently leases approximately 8,231 square feet of developed office space on the first floor and 40,565 square feet of developed office space on the second floor in Chesterbrook Pennsylvania. The lease term for this space extends through May 2028. On October 11, 2018, the Company entered into an agreement with The Vanguard Group, Inc., or Vanguard, whereby Vanguard agreed to sublease the 40,565 square feet of space on the second floor for an initial term of 37 months. On October 2, 2020, Vanguard notified the Company that they exercised the first option to extend the sublease term for three years through November 30, 2024. Vanguard has a second option to extend the sublease term for an additional three years through November 30, 2027. The sublease provides for rent abatement for the first month of the term; thereafter, the rent payable to the Company by Vanguard under the sublease is (i) $0.50 less during months 2 through 13 of the sublease and (ii) in month 14 and thereafter of the sublease, $1.00 less than the base rent payable by the Company under its master lease with Chesterbrook Partners, L.P. Vanguard also is responsible for paying to the Company all tenant energy costs, annual operating costs, and annual tax costs attributable to the subleased space during the term of the sublease. In 2022, we expect to pay approximately $1.4 million for our operating lease obligations. Future rent streams of $1.1 million to be collected in less than one year and $2.1 million to be collected between one and three years are not offset against operating lease obligations. See “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 9 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II of this Form 10-K for information about our operating lease obligations, including maturities of such obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable SEC regulations.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur net losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. We expect our cash expenditures to continue to be significant in the near term as we begin to commercialize OLINVYK, advance clinical development of TRV027,
continue clinical development of TRV250, and continue IND-enabling work for TRV045. Over the next twelve months, we anticipate that our total operating expenses will increase compared to the previous twelve months.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, together with interest thereon, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the fourth quarter of 2022, but not for more than one year after the date of this filing and as a result, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the year from the date of this filing. Our anticipated operating expenses involve significant risks and uncertainties and are dependent on our current assessment of the extent and costs of activities required to commercialize OLINVYK and advance our other product candidates. In the future, we anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional financing to fund our operations. To meet these requirements, we may seek to sell equity or convertible securities in public or private transactions that may result in significant dilution to our stockholders. We may offer and sell shares of our common stock under the existing registration statement or any registration statement we may file in the future. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible securities, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations.
Ultimately, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● our ability to successfully commercialize OLINVYK and our other product candidates;
● our ability to generate sales and other revenues from OLINVYK or any of our other product candidates, once approved, including setting an acceptable price for and obtaining adequate coverage and hospital formulary acceptance of such products;
● the size and growth potential of the markets for OLINVYK and our ability to serve those markets;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates or any future product candidates, both in the United States and in territories outside the United States;
● the number and development requirements of any other product candidates that we may pursue;
● our ability to enter into collaborative agreements for the development and/or commercialization of our product candidates, including for OLINVYK;
● the costs, timing, and outcome of any regulatory review of OLINVYK and any future product candidates, both in the United States and in territories outside the United States;
● the costs, timing, and extent of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● any product liability or other lawsuits, including the recently filed class action complaints, related to our products or us;
● the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel; and
● the costs involved in preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending our intellectual property-related claims, both in the United States and in territories outside the United States.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Other Commitments
In the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. We can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We also could enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and even long-term commitments of cash.
We have no material non-cancelable purchase commitments with contract manufacturers or service providers as we have generally contracted on a cancelable basis.