ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. You should review the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and in Part I, Item 1A,“Risk Factors”, for a discussion of factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We are an autonomous technology company that is revolutionizing the estimated $4 trillion global truck freight market. We have developed industry-leading autonomous technology specifically designed for semi-trucks, which has enabled us to build the world’s first Autonomous Freight Network (“AFN”) in partnership with world-class shippers, carriers, railroads, freight brokers, fleet asset owners, and truck hardware partners. We believe that our technology and our AFN will make long haul trucking significantly safer as well as more reliable, efficient, and environmentally friendly, creating significant benefits for all who rely on the freight ecosystem to deliver essential goods.
Our AFN provides autonomous freight capacity as a service through multiple service models based on users’ needs. We believe that allowing our users the flexibility to select different service models is critical to our superior customer experience and will help drive rapid adoption of our network.
•Carrier-Owned Capacity. Shippers, carriers, and railroads that prefer to own their fleet will be able to purchase our purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-truck from a semi-truck original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”) partner and subscribe to TuSimple Path-a comprehensive turnkey product to enable autonomous operations across our network. TuSimple Path includes features such as our on-board autonomous driving software, TuSimple Connect cloud-based autonomous operations oversight system, HD digital route mapping support, and emergency roadside assistance. Users will pay TuSimple a per mile, usage-based fee for access to TuSimple Path and benefit from lower overall freight costs, which we believe will offer a payback period of less than one year on their upfront incremental capital investment to purchase our purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-trucks.
•TuSimple Capacity. Our fleet of purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-trucks, financed through third party fleet asset owners, will serve users that desire access to safe, reliable, low cost, and more environmentally friendly freight transportation without owning semi-truck assets. Users of TuSimple Capacity can range from relatively smaller users of freight logistics to large shippers, carriers, and railroads seeking to supplement their own captive fleet for incremental freight capacity. We will charge users of TuSimple Capacity a per mile rate to ship freight, which we expect will be at a meaningful discount to prevailing market freight rates. We believe that our competitive advantage in terms of pricing will be enabled by our anticipated cost structure, which is expected to be significantly lower than that of human-operated semi-trucks. We believe users will benefit directly from lower shipping costs compared to conventional truck freight.
We are also working in partnership with a leading semi-truck Original Equipment Manufacturer ("OEM"), TRATON Group ("TRATON"), specifically with its Navistar and Scania semi-truck brands, as well as components partners to build a purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-truck to be operated exclusively on our network. We believe that this collaborative approach to create semi-trucks designed and built with integrated auto-grade components and sensors will increase our AFN’s reliability at scale. Vertically integrating through partnerships with OEMs and Tier 1 suppliers allows us to maintain strong supply chain and hardware design control while remaining capital light and primarily focusing on developing proprietary autonomous technology.
We have developed a robust ecosystem of shippers, carriers, railroads, freight brokers, fleet asset owners, and third party service providers, including UPS, McLane, U.S. Xpress, Werner, Schneider, Ryder, DHL, Union Pacific, and CN, that provide critical validation and enhance the network effect benefits of our approach. We believe that our partnership network creates a significant and sustainable competitive advantage, especially as we work with shippers, carriers, and railroads to strategically locate our AFN terminals near their distribution centers. The continued growth of our AFN infrastructure and partnerships will continue to improve our user experience and drive more users to our platform which will allow us to further densify our strategic terminal network and reinforce rapid network growth. We currently expect to initially commercialize in the “Texas triangle”, a major freight area running between Dallas, San Antonio, and Houston, under our TuSimple Capacity, by the end of 2023.
Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) Impact
The extensive impact of the pandemic caused by COVID-19 and the measures taken in response thereto has resulted and will likely continue to result in significant disruption to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world. In an effort to halt the outbreak of COVID-19, a number of countries, states, counties and other jurisdictions have imposed, and may impose in the future, various measures, including but not limited to, voluntary and mandatory quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, limitations on gatherings of people, reduced operations, extended closures of businesses and vaccine requirements.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures to prevent its spread have had the following impact on our business:
•Our Workforce. Employee health and safety is our priority. In response to COVID-19, we established new protocols to help protect the health and safety of our workforce. We will continue to stay up-to-date and follow county and CDC guidelines regarding requirements for a healthy work environment.
•Operations and Supply Chain. As a result of COVID-19, we experienced some delays in our supply chains which temporarily limited our ability to outfit semi-trucks with key components during the second quarter of 2020; however, we have not experienced material disruptions in our shipping activity or in our ability to continue developing our AFN to date. In the future, we may experience supply chain disruptions from third party suppliers and any such supply chain disruptions could cause delays in our development timelines. We will continue to monitor the situation for any potential adverse impacts and execute appropriate countermeasures, as necessary.
While we have not experienced significant disruptions to our business due to the COVID-19 pandemic to date, the broader and long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the measures taken in response thereto, on our workforce, operations and supply chain, user demand, results of operations, and overall financial performance remain uncertain.
See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the possible impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Operational Highlights
(1) The total miles our autonomous trucks have run on open public roads. We use this metric to track progress on the development of our L4 autonomous semi-trucks.
(2) The total reservations for our purpose-built L4 semi-trucks. We use this metric to track our customer relationships and demand for our purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-trucks that are in development.
(3) The cumulative unique miles on the AFN which we have built a map compatible with our autonomous driving software. We use this metric to track progress on the development of our AFN.
(4) The total miles our autonomous trucks have run during the years presented that generates revenues. We use this metric to track our revenue growth.
(5) Revenue Miles presented above are non-cumulative and represent activity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021
Highlights for 2021
In 2021, we completed the world's first driverless semi-truck runs on open public roads and continued driver-out operations scaling for commercial viability currently targeted by the end of 2023.
Cumulative Road Miles driven and Total Mapped Miles increased 117% and 195%, respectively, to approximately 6.3 million and approximately 11,200, respectively, as of December 31, 2021 as we continued expansion of our AFN.
We experienced strong growth in our TuSimple Capacity operations, achieving approximately 3.4 million Revenue Miles, an increase of 153%, as we expanded our operations and continued to grow our customer base.
Demand for our planned purpose-built L4 autonomous semi-trucks continued to grow as our Carrier-Owned Capacity reservations increased 49%, totaling approximately 6,975 as of December 31, 2021.
Our Patents Issued increased 57% as we continued to add world-class talent to our R&D team.
We ended 2021 with $1.3 billion in cash and cash equivalents.
Initial Public Offering ("IPO")
On April 14, 2021, our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-254616) related to our IPO was declared effective by the SEC and our Class A common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Stock Exchange on April 15, 2021. Our IPO closed on April 19, 2021.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, all of our revenue recognized has been from freight capacity services provided through the TuSimple Capacity service model on our AFN. Revenue is recognized over time as the goods are transported from one location to another based on the number of miles traveled. Shipments are completed within a short period of time, typically spanning one to two days. As we continue to grow and improve our technology, we expect a new revenue stream through our Carrier-Owned Capacity service model. We expect to derive revenue from per-mile fees charged to users of Carrier-Owned Capacity on our AFN. Recognition of this future revenue will be subject to the terms of any arrangements with our partners or users, which have not yet been negotiated. To date, we have not recorded any revenue under the Carrier-Owned Capacity service model.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists primarily of fuel costs, insurance costs, depreciation of property and equipment (including semi-trucks acquired under capital leases), labor costs, and other costs directly attributable to the provision of freight capacity services. Currently, we operate a large portion of our semi-trucks with two occupants, a safety engineer and a safety driver. We expect to gradually lower the average number of occupants in our semi-trucks as we continue to improve our autonomous technology and to the extent we ultimately remove all occupants upon achievement of full driver-out, L4 autonomous operations.
Research and Development
Research and development costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation costs, associated with software developers and engineering personnel and consultants responsible for the design, development, and testing of our autonomous truck driving solutions, depreciation of equipment used in research and development, and allocated overhead costs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we increase our investment in scaling our AFN through our proprietary technologies and as we continue to expand our technical workforce, which would impact our personnel-related and stock-based compensation costs.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation costs, associated with our sales, marketing, management and administration activities, professional service fees, advertising expenses, sponsorship, public relations and other related marketing activities, and other general corporate expenses.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars from period to period as we further scale our AFN, educate market participants on the benefits of autonomous trucking and our autonomous trucking solutions, increase our marketing activities, grow our domestic and international operations, build brand awareness, and continue to incur costs related to operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and stock exchange listing standards, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our selling, general and administrative function and to continue to expand our workforce, which would impact our personnel-related and stock-based compensation costs, to support the growth of our business.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants Liability
The change in the fair value of warrants liability consists of the net changes in the fair value of our outstanding warrants to purchase redeemable convertible preferred stock that are remeasured at the end of each reporting period and upon their exercise or expiration. All outstanding warrants were exercised or expired during 2021 and we recorded one final remeasurement at fair value as of the exercise date.
Change in Fair Value of Related Party Convertible Loan
The change in the fair value of related party convertible loan consists of the net changes in the fair value of our related party convertible loan that was remeasured at the end of each reporting period and upon their redemption. The related party convertible loan was converted into Series E-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock during December 2020 and a final remeasurement was recorded as of the conversion date.
Gain on Loan Extinguishment
The gain on loan extinguishment was a result of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness by the lender.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents, interest expense on our related party borrowings, and foreign currency exchange gains (losses), net of remeasurement of transactions and monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currency at the end of the period.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and, accordingly, have not recorded a provision for income taxes for any of the periods presented.
We have a full valuation allowance for net deferred tax assets, including federal and state net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations data for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands)
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021
Revenue
2020 compared to 2021. Revenue increased by $4.5 million, or 240%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to growth in our U.S. business from an increase in paid miles through increased commercial utilization of TuSimple fleets and partners' fleets (brokerage) that supplement our capacity and increases in our rate per mile charged. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we expanded our revenue-miles by 153% from the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of expanded routes and commercial partnerships.
2019 compared to 2020. Revenue increased by $1.1 million, or 160%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the expansion of our AFN, including the growth of our L4 autonomous semi-truck fleet, AFN terminals, and HD digital mapped routes.
Cost of Revenue
2020 compared to 2021. Cost of revenue increased by $7.1 million, or 134%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased operating costs associated with the generation of revenue. Gross loss margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 98%, an improvement from the gross loss margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 of 187%. This improvement is a result of increased revenue-miles per truck, improved leverage through better fixed cost utilization, and an increase in the number of semi-trucks in our TuSimple fleet.
2019 compared to 2020. Cost of revenue increased by $3.7 million, or 232%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to increased operating costs associated with the generation of revenue. Gross loss margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 187%, an increase from the gross loss margin for the year ended December 31, 2019 of 125%. This increase is a result of increased spend while growing our customer base and a significant increase in the number of semi-trucks in our TuSimple fleet prior to reaching the necessary scale to achieve improved leverage through better fixed cost utilization.
Research and Development
2020 compared to 2021. Research and development expenses increased by $155.2 million, or 118%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $146.4 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in employee headcount and increased stock-based compensation expense of $70.3 million. The stock-based compensation expense for this period includes a one-time charge of $21.9 million incurred in connection with the IPO, with the remaining increase due to time-based vesting and additional grants in the period. The remainder of the increase in research and development expense was primarily driven by an increase of $13.3 million in equipment, supplies, and materials, an increase of $11.0 million in depreciation and allocated facility costs, driven by an increase in headcount and expansion of our facilities, an increase of $9.9 million in research and development costs incurred under our joint development agreements, primarily driven by costs incurred under the Joint Development Agreement ("JDA") with Navistar, which was entered into in July 2020, and an increase of $7.0 million in vehicle and equipment-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in the number of semi-trucks in our fleet. These increased costs were partially offset by a one-time, non-cash charge of $32.3 million related to the excess fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants issued over the cash proceeds received in conjunction with the issuance of shares of Series D-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants to TRATON recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020.
2019 compared to 2020. Research and development expenses increased by $68.4 million, or 107%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to a one-time, non-cash charge of $32.3 million related to the excess fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants issued over the cash proceeds received in conjunction with the issuance of shares of Series D-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants to TRATON, an increase of $25.1 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in employee headcount and increased stock-based compensation of $0.9 million, an increase of $6.5 million in depreciation and allocated facility costs, driven by an increase in headcount and expansion of our facilities, an increase of $2.5 million in vehicle and equipment-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in the number of semi-trucks in our fleet, and an increase of $2.0 million in joint development cost, mainly driven by our JDA with Navistar.
Selling, General and Administrative
2020 compared to 2021. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $79.5 million, or 206%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $58.4 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in employee headcount and increased stock-based compensation expense of $39.5 million. The stock-based compensation expense for this period includes a one-time charge of $20.7 million incurred in connection with the IPO, with the remaining increase due to time-based vesting and additional grants in the period. The remainder of the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for the period was primarily driven by an increase of $12.1 million in office and facility-related costs, driven by the acquisition of director and officer insurance and the expansion of facility and operations, an increase of $3.6 million in legal, accounting and other professional services, driven by increased usage of professional service firms to prepare for public company reporting and other complex matters, and an increase of $2.5 million in sales and marketing expenses as we continue to expand our business.
2019 compared to 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $15.8 million, or 70%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $16.7 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by an increase in employee headcount and an increased stock-based compensation of $11.8 million, and an increase of $1.3 million in legal, accounting and other professional services, driven mainly by additional rounds of financing, partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in office and facility-related costs, driven primarily by the transition to a remote working situation and a decrease of $1.6 million in travel costs, driven mainly by reduced traveling due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Change in Fair Value of Related Party Convertible Loan
* Percentage not meaningful
Loss from the change in fair value of related party convertible loan of $5.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by the remeasurement of the related party convertible loan at fair value each period until its conversion into Series E-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock during December 2020. There were no such outstanding convertible loans in the years ended December 31, 2019 or 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants Liability
* Percentage not meaningful
2020 compared to 2021. Loss from the change in fair value of warrants liability of $326.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by the remeasurement of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants at fair value immediately prior to their exercise dates during the period.
2019 compared to 2020. Gain from the change in fair value of warrants liability of $1.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by the remeasurement of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants at fair value each period. There were no such warrants outstanding in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on Loan Extinguishment
* Percentage not meaningful
2020 compared to 2021. Gain on loan extinguishment of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by the forgiveness of the PPP loan by the lender.
Other Income (Expense), Net
2020 compared to 2021. Other income (expense), net increased by $1.5 million, from expense of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to income of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents.
2019 compared to 2020. Other income (expense), net decreased by $2.5 million, or 103%, from income of $2.4 million in 2019 to expense of $0.1 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in income from government grants and decreased interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents.
Key Metric and Non-GAAP Financial Measure
* Percentage not meaningful
(1) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. For more information regarding our use of this financial measure and a reconciliation of this financial measure to the most comparable GAAP measure, see “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measure”.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure that our management uses to assess our operating performance in our business. Since Adjusted EBITDA facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use this measure for business planning purposes. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management team and board of directors.
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as loss from operations, adjusted to exclude:
•depreciation and amortization;
•stock-based compensation expense;
•capital lease interest expense included within cost of sales.
For more information regarding the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of loss from operations to Adjusted EBITDA, see the section titled "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measure."
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We use Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluated the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare this measure with other companies’ non-GAAP measures having the same or similar names. In addition, other companies may not publish similar metrics. Furthermore, this measure has certain limitations in that it does not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations that are necessary to run our business. Thus, our Adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The following table provides a reconciliation of reported net loss from operations determined in accordance with GAAP to non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through the sale of capital stock, which has historically been sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were $1.3 billion of cash and cash equivalents, exclusive of restricted cash of $1.5 million. In April 2021, we closed our IPO and concurrent private placement, resulting in net proceeds of $1.0 billion and $35.0 million, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of cash on deposit with banks, certificates of deposit and money market funds. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that the net proceeds from our IPO and concurrent private placement, together with our existing cash and cash equivalents and anticipated cash generated from sales of our services, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the rate of our growth, our ability to attract and retain users and their willingness to pay for our services, and the timing and extent of spending to support our efforts to develop our L4 autonomous semi-trucks and AFN. Further, we may enter into future arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services, strategic partnerships, and technologies. As such, we may be required to seek additional equity and/or debt financing. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased fixed obligations and could result in operating covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are unable to maintain sufficient financial resources, our business, financial condition and results of operations may be materially and adversely affected.
Material Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, there were future minimum lease payments of $5.0 million and $49.7 million for capital and operating leases, respectively. See Note 7. Commitments and Contingencies of Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $76.3 million, $103.8 million, and $259.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to net loss of $84.9 million, offset slightly by non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization expense of $5.6 million and favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities of $2.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to net loss of $177.9 million, offset by a one-time, non-cash charge of $32.3 million related to the excess fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants issued over proceeds received in conjunction with the issuance of Series D-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants to TRATON, non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $12.8 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $7.7 million, non-cash loss from change in fair value of related party convertible loan of $5.6 million, and favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities of $17.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to net loss of $732.7 million, offset by a non-cash charge for changes in the fair value of the warrants liability of $326.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $122.6 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $9.5 million, and favorable changes in operating assets and liabilities of $18.9 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.4 million, $4.4 million, and $13.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively, as we continue to invest in technological assets and equipment to expand our AFN.
Additionally, non-cash acquisitions of property and equipment included in liabilities were $0.3 million, $2.8 million, and $10.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $51.8 million, $356.5 million, and $1.3 billion for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively, driven primarily by our continued financing rounds.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock of $52.3 million, partially offset by principal payments on capital lease obligations and principal payments on related party loans.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock of $291.7 million, proceeds from issuance of related party convertible loan of $50.0 million, proceeds from issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants of $11.9 million, proceeds from related party loans of $5.0 million, proceeds from the Small-Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans of $4.1 million, and proceeds of $2.5 million from the exercise of warrants for Series D-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock. These were partially offset by principal payments on related party loans of $7.9 million,
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net proceeds from the sale of Class A common stock in our IPO and concurrent private placement of approximately $1.0 billion, net of issuance costs, proceeds from the exercise of warrants for redeemable convertible preferred stock of $183.0 million, and proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock of $54.7 million, net of offering costs, offset slightly by principal payments on related party loans of $4.4 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue primarily from providing freight capacity services. Revenue is recognized when the customer obtains control of promised services in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those services.
Satisfaction of Performance Obligation
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the basis of revenue recognition in accordance with GAAP. To determine the proper revenue recognition method for contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance. For most of our contracts, the customer contracts with us to provide distinct services within a single contract, such as freight capacity services. The majority of our contracts with customers for freight capacity services include only one performance obligation, the freight capacity services. However, if a contract is separated into more than one performance obligation, we allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised goods or services underlying each performance obligation. We frequently sell standard freight capacity services with observable standalone sales prices. In these instances, the observable standalone sales are used to determine the standalone selling price.
For freight capacity services, revenue is recognized over time as we perform the services in the contract because of the continuous transfer of control to the customer. Our customers receive the benefit of our services as the goods are transported from one location to another. If we were unable to complete delivery to the final location, another entity would not need to reperform the transportation service already performed. As control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. As control transfers over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. Management estimates the progress based on mileage completed to total mileage to be transported. Revenues are recorded net of value-added taxes and surcharges.
Contract Modification
Contracts may be modified to account for changes in the rates we charge our customers or to add additional distinct services. We consider contract modifications to exist when the modification either creates new enforceable rights and obligations or alters the existing arrangement. Contract modifications that add distinct goods or services are treated as separate performance obligations. Contract modifications that do not add distinct goods or services typically change the price of existing services. These contract modifications are accounted for prospectively as the remaining performance obligations are executed.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
Contract assets include billed and unbilled amounts resulting from in-transit packages, as we have an unconditional right to payment only once all performance obligations have been completed (e.g., packages have been delivered). Contract assets are generally classified as current and the full balance is converted each quarter based on the short-term nature of the transactions. Our contract liabilities consist of advance payments and billings in excess of revenue. The full balance of contract liabilities is converted each quarter based on the short-term nature of the transactions.
Payment Terms
Under the typical payment terms of our customer contracts, the customer pays at periodic intervals (i.e. every 14 days, 30 days etc.) for shipments included on invoices received. It is not customary business practice to extend payment terms past 90 days, and as such, we do not have a practice of including a significant financing component within its contracts with customers.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the fair value recognition and measurement provisions of GAAP, which requires compensation cost for the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards to be recognized over the requisite service period. We determine the fair value of stock-based awards granted or modified on the grant date (or modification date, if applicable) at fair value, using appropriate valuation techniques.
Time-Based Service Awards
For stock-based awards with time-based vesting conditions only, generally being restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock options, stock-based compensation is recognized straight-line over the requisite service period, which is generally four years. The fair value of RSUs is measured on the grant date based on the fair value the underlying common stock. The fair value of stock option awards is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected stock price volatility over the term of the award, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, the risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the award and expected dividends. We account for forfeitures as they occur instead of estimating the number of awards expected to be forfeited.
Performance-Based Awards
We have granted RSUs, share value awards (“SVAs”), and stock options that vest only upon the satisfaction of both time-based service and performance-based conditions. The time-based service condition for these awards generally is satisfied over four years The performance-based conditions, other than with respect to the CEO Performance Award discussed in Note 9. Stock Based Compensation, are satisfied upon the occurrence of a qualifying event, defined as the earlier of (i) the closing of certain specific liquidation or change in control transactions, or (ii) an IPO. We record stock-based compensation expense for performance-based equity awards such as RSUs, SVAs, and stock options on an accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period, which is generally four years, and only if performance-based conditions are considered probable to be satisfied. Upon completion of the IPO, we recorded a cumulative one-time stock-based compensation expense determined using the grant-date fair values. Stock-based compensation related to remaining time-based service after the qualifying event is recorded over the remaining requisite service period. For performance-based RSUs and SVAs,we determine the grant-date fair value as the fair value of our common stock on the grant date. For performance-based stock options, we determine the grant-date fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model described above.
For the CEO Performance Award with a vesting schedule based entirely on the attainment of both performance and market conditions, stock-based compensation expense associated with each tranche is recognized over the longer of (i) the expected achievement period for the operational milestones for such tranche and (ii) the expected achievement period for the related market capitalization milestone determined on the grant date, beginning at the point in time when the relevant operational milestones are considered probable of being met. If such operational milestones become probable any time after the grant date, we will recognize a cumulative catch-up expense from the grant date to that point in time. If the related market capitalization milestone is achieved earlier than its expected achievement period, then the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized over the expected achievement period for the operational milestones, which may accelerate the rate at which such expense is recognized. The fair value of such awards is estimated on the grant date using Monte Carlo simulations. Refer to Note 9. Stock Based Compensation for further information.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act for the adoption of certain accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We expect to lose EGC status and meet all applicable criteria to become a large accelerated filer by December 31, 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.