Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis is intended to provide the reader with an overall understanding of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and sources and uses of cash. This section also includes general information about our business and a discussion of our management’s analysis of certain trends, risks and opportunities in our industry. In addition, we also provide a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements and our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Note About Forward-Looking Statements
This report includes estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives and expected operating results that are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements often discuss our current expectations and projections relating to our financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business. You can identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. See the section of this Annual Report titled, “Forward-Looking Statements” for further information regarding forward-looking statements.
OUR BUSINESS
Townsquare is a community-focused digital media and marketing solutions company with market leading local radio stations, principally focused outside the top 50 markets in the U.S. Our integrated and diversified products and solutions enable local, regional and national advertisers to target audiences across multiple platforms, including digital, mobile, social, video, streaming, e-commerce, radio and events. Our assets include a subscription digital marketing services business (“Townsquare Interactive”), providing website design, creation and hosting, search engine optimization, social platforms and online reputation management for approximately 26,800 small to medium sized businesses; a robust digital advertising division (“Townsquare Ignite,” or “Ignite”), a powerful combination of a) an owned and operated portfolio of more than 330 local news and entertainment websites and mobile apps along with a network of leading national music and entertainment brands, collecting valuable first party data and b) a proprietary digital programmatic advertising technology stack with an in-house demand and data management platform; and a portfolio of 321 local terrestrial radio stations in 67 U.S. markets strategically situated outside the Top 50 markets in the United States. Our portfolio includes local media brands such as WYRK.com, WJON.com and NJ101.5.com, and premier national music brands such as XXLmag.com, TasteofCountry.com, UltimateClassicRock.com, and Loudwire.com.
Our primary sources of net revenue are the sale of digital and broadcast advertising solutions on our owned and operated websites, radio stations’ online streams and mobile applications, and on third party websites through our in-house digital programmatic advertising platform. Through our digital programmatic advertising platform, we are able to hyper-target audiences for our local, regional and national advertisers by combining first and third party audience and geographic location data, providing them the ability to reach a high percentage of their online audience. Ignite delivers these solutions across desktop, mobile, connected TV, email, paid search and social media platforms utilizing display, video and native executions. We also offer subscription digital marketing solutions through Townsquare Interactive to small and mid-sized local and regional businesses in markets outside the top 50 across the United States, including, but not limited to the markets in which we operate radio stations. Our digital marketing solutions include traditional and mobile-enabled website development and hosting services, e-commerce platforms, search engine and online directory optimization services, online reputation monitoring, social media management, and website retargeting.
Our sales of advertisements are primarily affected by the demand for advertising from local, regional and national advertisers and the advertising rates we charge. Advertising demand and rates are based primarily on our ability to attract audiences to our various products in the demographic groups targeted by advertisers, as measured principally
by various services on a periodic basis. We endeavor to develop strong audience loyalty and believe that the original, local content on our websites, and the employment of local personalities on our radio stations contribute to our ability to retain and grow our audience. In addition, we believe that the diversification of formats on our radio stations and websites helps to insulate our local media assets from the effects of changes in musical tastes of the public with respect to any particular format.
Advertising revenue is highly correlated to changes in gross domestic product (“GDP”) as dollars spent on advertising has historically trended in line with, and in our experience often lags, changes in GDP. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce estimate as of January 27, 2022, U.S. GDP increased 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We strive to maximize our net revenue by managing our digital and broadcast advertising inventory and adjusting prices based on supply and demand and by broadening our base of advertisers and subscribers. Our selling and pricing activity is based on demand for our advertising inventory and, in general, we respond to this demand by varying prices rather than by varying our target inventory levels. The optimal number of advertisements available for sale depends on the platform and in the case of our radio stations, their online streams and mobile applications, the programming format of a particular radio station. Each of our advertising products has a general target level of available inventory. We seek to broaden our base of local advertisers in each of our markets by providing a wide array of digital and broadcast solutions to help clients growth their business and achieve their goals.
Our advertising contracts are generally short-term. In the media industry, companies, including ours, sometimes utilize barter agreements that exchange advertising time for goods or services such as travel or lodging, instead of cash.
Our most significant expenses are sales personnel, programming, digital, marketing and promotional, engineering, and general and administrative expenses. We strive to control these expenses by closely monitoring and managing each of our local markets and through efficiencies gained from the centralization of finance, accounting, legal and human resources functions and management information systems. We also use our scale and diversified geographic portfolio to negotiate favorable rates with vendors where feasible.
A portion of our expenses are variable. These variable expenses primarily relate to sales costs, such as commissions and inventory costs, as well as certain programming costs, such as music license fees, and certain costs related to production. Marketing and promotions expenses are discretionary and are primarily incurred in an effort to maintain and/or increase our audience share. Other programming, digital, engineering and general and administrative expenses are primarily fixed costs.
Our business enjoys strong cash flow generation owing to the relatively limited capital needs of our operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $12.4 million of capital expenditures, which represented 3.0% of net revenue during the same period. In addition, we benefit from certain tax attributes that generate tax deductions which have historically limited the amount of cash taxes we pay.
In December of 2021, the Company changed its reporting segments in order to reflect its strategic focus, organizational structure and the information reviewed by its CODM as a digital media and digital marketing solutions company with market leading radio stations. The Company has identified three segments, which are Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions, Digital Advertising and Broadcast Advertising, and the remainder of our business is reported in an Other category. The Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions segment includes our subscription digital marketing solutions business, Townsquare Interactive. The Digital Advertising segment, which we market externally as Townsquare Ignite, includes digital advertising on our owned and operated digital properties and our digital programmatic advertising platform. The Broadcast Advertising segment includes our local, regional and national advertising products and solutions delivered via terrestrial radio broadcast, and other miscellaneous revenue that is associated with our broadcast advertising platform. The Other category includes our owned and operated live events. We have presented segment information for the year ended December 31, 2020 in conformity with the current year’s segment information.
OVERVIEW OF OUR PERFORMANCE
Recent Transactions
6.875% Senior Notes Offering
On January 6, 2021, the Company completed the private offering and sale of $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior secured notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) at an issue price of 100.0%. The net proceeds from the 2026 Notes, together with cash on hand, were used to repay: (i) all outstanding borrowings under the 2015 senior secured credit facility, which included a seven year $275.0 million term loan facility (the "Term Loans") with $272.4 million principal amount outstanding and $2.1 million in accrued interest, (ii) all of the outstanding $273.4 million of principal amount of 6.5% Unsecured Senior Notes due in 2023 (the “2023 Notes”), a prepayment premium of $4.4 million, and $5.1 million in accrued interest, and (iii) fees and expenses related thereto. The Company also terminated its revolving credit facility and all other obligations thereunder were repaid effective January 6, 2021.
The Company incurred approximately $13.6 million of fees and expenses in connection with the issuance of the 2026 Notes, of which approximately $9.4 million were capitalized and are being amortized over the remaining term of the 2026 Notes using the effective interest method. The Company recognized a $4.9 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt during the three months ended March 31, 2021, due to a $3.1 million portion of the 2023 Notes prepayment premium and the write-off of $1.8 million of unamortized debt discount and deferred financing fees previously capitalized in connection with the senior secured credit facility and 2023 Notes. The Company recognized a $1.1 million loss on the modification of Terms Loans and 2023 Notes during the three months ended March 31, 2021, which is primarily related to a portion of fees and expenses incurred related to the issuance of the 2026 Notes.
Refer to Note 8, Long-term Debt, in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our 2026 Notes.
Stock Repurchase
On January 24, 2021, the Company entered into a stock repurchase agreement with certain affiliates of Oaktree Capital Management L.P. (“Oaktree”) to repurchase all of the outstanding securities held by Oaktree, including 1,595,224 shares of Class A Common Stock, 2,151,373 shares of Class B Common Stock and 8,814,980 warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $80.4 million, or $6.40 per security. See further details on the stock repurchase in Liquidity and Capital Resources.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
The U.S. economy and financial markets may continue to experience volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the development of COVID-19 variants, vaccination rates and government legislative and regulatory responses to any of these factors. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic began to impact our operations in early March 2020, and included significant advertising cancellations and material declines in the purchase of new advertising by our clients. Declines in forecasted traditional broadcast revenue in the markets in which we operate, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on market and economic conditions, and the corresponding impacts to our risk premium, contributed to approximately $107.1 million impairments to the carrying values of our FCC license intangible assets during the first half of 2020, of which $28.7 million and $78.4 million was recognized during the three months ended June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020, respectively. Additionally, we canceled nearly all live events beginning in March 2020. At the end of the first quarter of 2020, we reduced our workforce through the termination or layoff of approximately 135 full-time employees.
As local public health conditions improved, we experienced recoveries throughout 2021 in advertising revenue, following the sequential improvements we observed during each of the third and the fourth quarters of 2020. Throughout 2021, we continued the precautionary measures that were instituted in 2020 to address the potential impact to our consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations, and liquidity, including wage reduction efforts such as the temporary suspension of the Company’s match on employee contributions to the Company’s defined contribution plan, the deferral of the payment of certain payroll taxes until December 31, 2021 and 2022 under the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and controlling non-essential capital expenditures. Additionally, our board of directors determined to cease payment of quarterly cash dividends, following the payment of our 2020 first quarter dividend of $2.1 million, paid on May 15, 2020. Effective January 1, 2022, we reinstated our match on employee contributions to the Company’s defined contribution plan at twenty-five cents for each dollar contributed up to the first 4% of eligible compensation (for a total match of 1% of employee contributions).
The full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic impact will depend on future actions and outcomes, all of which remain fluid and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, the short-term and long-term economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic (including the continued effect on advertising activity, consumer discretionary spending and our employees in the markets in which we operate), further actions taken to mitigate the impact of the pandemic, and the pace of continued economic and financial market recovery when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, among others.
See Part I, Item 1A., “Risk Factors” for additional information on the current and potential impacts of COVID-19 and related risks and uncertainties to our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and stock price. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business.
Highlights of Our Financial Performance
Certain key financial developments in our business for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 are summarized below:
•Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $46.6 million, or 12.6%, primarily driven by an increase of $19.9 million in Digital Advertising net revenue and $13.3 million in Broadcast Advertising and net revenue, primarily as a result of increases in the purchase of new advertising by our clients, and an increase of $11.4 million in our Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions net revenue as a result of additional subscribers.
•Excluding revenue related to political advertising of $3.5 million and $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net revenue increased $59.1 million, or 16.6% to $414.5 million and Broadcast Advertising net revenue increased $25.8 million, or 13.9%, to $211.4 million.
•Operating income increased $149.4 million from an operating loss of $75.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to operating income of $74.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Operating income increased due to the increase in net revenue of $46.6 million as discussed above; a decrease of $107.1 million in total impairment charges; partially offset by an increase in direct operating expenses of $6.0 million. Broadcast Advertising reported operating income of $51.8 million, compared to an operating loss of $80.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a $13.3 million increase in net revenue as discussed above, a decrease in impairment charges of $106.6 million and a $12.9 million decrease in direct operating expenses. Our Digital Advertising segment reported operating income of $36.4 million, an increase of $11.1 million from 2020 and our Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions segment reported operating income of $22.9 million, an increase of $2.4 million from 2020.
•Cash and cash equivalents decreased $32.7 million from $83.2 million as of December 31, 2020 to $50.5 million as of December 31, 2021. Excluding the $80.4 million in cash consideration paid for the repurchase of the Oaktree securities, cash and cash equivalents increased $47.7 million at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our historical consolidated results of operations:
**Percent change not meaningful.
Segment Results
The following table presents the Company's reportable segment net revenue and direct operating expenses for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $46.6 million, or 12.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020. Our Digital Advertising revenue increased $19.9 million, or 20.5% as compared to 2020 and our Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions revenue increased $11.4 million, or 16.2% as compared to 2020, primarily due
to incremental net subscribers, including approximately 4,050 net subscribers for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in Broadcast Advertising Revenue of $13.3 million, or 6.6% was a result of increases in the purchase of new advertising by our clients, partially offset by a decrease in political advertising revenues of $12.5 million.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $6.0 million, or 2.1%, when compared with the same period in 2020. Our Digital Advertising direct operating expenses increased $9.3 million, or 13.2%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in variable expenses such as advertising inventory costs and sales commissions. Subscription Digital Marketing Solutions direct operating expenses increased $8.1 million, or 16.5%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in headcount related expenses to support revenue and subscriber growth. Our Broadcast Advertising direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $12.9 million, or 8.1%, as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by lower music license fees and lower provisions for bad debt.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased of $1.0 million or 5.0%, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to decreases in the amortization of software development costs as a result of the launch timing of new projects, and the disposal of certain long-lived assets previously utilized in the Live Events business in the third quarter of 2020.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses are of a general corporate nature or managed on a corporate basis. These costs (net of allocations to the business segments) primarily represent corporate stewardship and administration activities. Corporate expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.3 million, or 8.7%, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower compensation costs and professional fees.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $1.6 million, or 78.4%, as compared to same period in 2020, primarily due to options granted in December of 2020.
Transaction Costs
Transaction costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $1.8 million, or 68.1%, as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the $4.5 million payment related to the Settlement Agreement, partially offset by fees incurred in 2020 to amend the Company's Term Loans.
Business Realignment Costs
Business realignment costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.2 million, or 72.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily as a result of $2.6 million in employee-related costs incurred in 2020 due to of headcount reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic that did not recur in 2021.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets
The Company recorded impairment charges of $1.7 million related to FCC licenses in 1 of our 67 local markets during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $107.1 million of total impairment charges related to FCC licenses in the year ended December 31, 2020.
The $1.7 million impairment charge recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by a change in the assumption for market revenue growth rates due to the availability of market data for the affected market. During the three months ended June 30, 2020, the Company recorded a $28.7 million impairment charge related to FCC licenses in 35 of our 67 local markets, primarily driven by changes in the market data utilized in determining the discount rate applied in the valuation of our FCC licenses which drove an increase in the weighted average cost of capital. The changes in data were driven by an increase in market volatility and industry bond yields, a direct result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on market and economic conditions. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, the Company recorded a $78.4 million impairment charge related to FCC licenses in 46 of our 67 local markets due to declines in the purchase of advertising by our clients, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Unfavorable changes in key assumptions utilized in the impairment assessment of our FCC licenses may affect future testing results. For example, keeping all other assumptions constant, a 150-basis point increase in the weighted average cost of capital as of the date of our last quantitative assessment performed as of December 31, 2021 would have caused the estimated fair values of our FCC licenses to decrease by $99.4 million which would have resulted in an additional impairment charge of $5.5 million. Assumptions used to estimate the fair value of our FCC licenses are also dependent upon the expected performance and growth of our traditional broadcast operations. In the event that our broadcast revenue experiences actual or anticipated declines, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such declines will have a negative impact on the estimated fair value of our FCC licenses, and the Company could recognize additional impairment charges, which could be material.
The Company also recorded total impairment charges of $2.0 million related to long-lived assets in certain markets, including the disposal of certain long-lived assets previously utilized in the Live Events business during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss on Sale and Retirement of Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a $0.6 million loss on the sale of a portion of land in Portsmouth, NH.
Other Expense (Income)
The primary component of Other expense (income) in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is interest expense, net. The following table illustrates the components of our interest expense, net for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Loss / Gain on Extinguishment and Modification of Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a $4.9 million and a $1.1 million loss on the early extinguishment and modification of debt, respectively. The $4.9 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt is comprised of a $3.1 million portion of the 2023 Notes prepayment premium and the write-off of $1.8 million of unamortized debt discount and deferred financing fees previously capitalized in connection with the senior secured credit facility and the 2023 Notes. The $1.1 million loss on the modification of debt was primarily related to a portion of fees and expenses related to the issuance of the 2026 Notes.
On May 19, 2020, the Company voluntarily repurchased $4.7 million of its 2023 Notes at a market price below par, plus accrued interest, which were then canceled, recognizing a net gain of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, net
Other income, net includes unrealized gains related to measuring the fair value of one of the Company's investees. Based on the market price of the investee's common stock as of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the Company's investment in the common stock of the investee was approximately $3.4 million, resulting in a net unrealized gain of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company received a $0.2 million cash payment in connection with the completion of the transactions related to the investee's registration of its common stock. See Note 7, Investments, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion related to this investment.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
We recognized an income tax provision of $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to an income tax benefit of $23.9 million for the same period in 2020. Our effective tax rate for the period was approximately 35.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 22.85% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily driven by the $4.5 million paid under the terms of the Settlement Agreement and an increase in non-deductible executive compensation.
Our effective tax rate may vary significantly from period to period, and can be influenced by many factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes to statutory rates in the jurisdictions where we have operations and changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The difference between the effective tax rate and the federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily relates to certain non-deductible items, state and local income taxes, and the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $61.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $31.5 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily related to: net income in 2021 of $18.8 million, as compared to a net loss of $80.6 million in 2020; higher accrued interest due to the timing of the February 1, 2022 interest payment on the 2026 Notes; partially offset by changes in accounts receivable in 2021, as compared to 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on advertising revenue in the prior period and increases in payments for accrued expenses primarily due to the timing of payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $14.0 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to decreases in the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $83.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $18.9 million for the same period in 2020. Net cash used in financing activities during 2021 was due to: the repayment of $557.4 million of principal amount of the 2023 Notes and Term Loans, including total accrued interest of $7.2 million and a $4.4 million prepayment premium; cash consideration for the Company's repurchase of the outstanding shares and warrants of Oaktree in the amount of $80.4 million; offset by the issuance of $550.0 million of the 2026 Notes, net of fees and expenses and proceeds from stock option exercises. Net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 included the required $9.9 million 2019 excess free cash flow payment on our Term Loan and the May 2020 voluntary repurchase of $4.7 million of our 2023 Notes for $3.6 million and dividends.
Sources of Liquidity and Anticipated Cash Requirements
We fund our working capital requirements through a combination of cash flows from our operating, investing, and financing activities. Based on current and anticipated levels of operations and conditions in our markets and industry, we believe that our cash on hand and cash flows from our operating, investing, and financing activities will enable us to meet our working capital, capital expenditures, debt service, and other funding requirements for at least one year from the date of this report. These historical sources of funds have been and could continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Future capital requirements may be materially different than those currently planned in our budgeting and forecasting activities and depend on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. In particular during the period of uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have focused on and will continue to monitor our liquidity.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $541.5 million of outstanding indebtedness, net of deferred financing costs of $8.5 million.
On January 24, 2021, the Company entered into a stock repurchase agreement with certain affiliates of Oaktree to repurchase at least 606,484 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per shares, 2,151,373 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock, par value $0.01 per share, and 7,242,143 warrants to purchase Class A Common Stock. On March 9, 2021, the repurchase was consummated and the Company elected to repurchase all of the outstanding securities held by Oaktree, including 1,595,224 shares of Class A Common Stock, 2,151,373 shares of Class B Common Stock and 8,814,980 warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $80.4 million, or $6.40 per security. In connection with the closing under the stock repurchase agreement, on March 8, 2021, the Company and Oaktree entered into a settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Company agreed to pay $4.5 million to Oaktree as follows: (i) $1.5 million on April 1, 2021; (ii) $1.0 million on July 1, 2021; (iii) $1.0 million on October 1, 2021; and (iv) $1.0 million on November 10, 2021. The Settlement Agreement also included customary mutual releases from claims, demands, and damages related to the stock repurchase agreement. The $4.5 million due under the terms of the Settlement Agreement is reflected as a component of transaction costs for the year ended December 31, 2021. All amounts due under the terms of the Settlement Agreement were paid as of September 30, 2021.
On January 6, 2021, we completed the private offering and sale of $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior secured notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”). The proceeds from the 2026 Notes, together with cash on hand, was used to repay borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility and to redeem all of the outstanding 2023 Notes on January 14, 2021. Following the January 6, 2021 issuance of our 2026 Notes, we expect our debt service requirements to be approximately $38.0 million over the next twelve months. See Note 8, Long-Term Debt, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to our 2026 Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $50.5 million of cash and cash equivalents, $57.6 million of receivables from customers, which historically have had an average collection cycle of approximately 55 days. We had restricted cash of $0.5 million of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, that was held as collateral in connection with certain agreements. From time to time, such restricted funds could be returned to us or we could be required to pledge additional cash.
Our anticipated uses of cash in the near term include working capital needs, interest payments, other obligations, and capital expenditures. The Company believes that the cash generated by its operations should be sufficient to meet its liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months. However, our ability to fund our working capital needs, debt payments, other obligations, capital expenditures, and to comply with financial covenants under our debt agreements, depends on our future operating performance and cash flow, which are in turn subject to prevailing economic conditions, increases or decreases in advertising spending, changes in the highly competitive industry in which we operate, which may be rapid, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders, while the incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations. Such debt instruments also could also introduce covenants that might restrict our operations. We cannot assure you that we could obtain additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
Additionally, on a continuing basis, we evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions and divestitures to enhance our strategic and competitive position as well as our financial performance. Any future acquisitions, joint ventures or other similar transactions may require additional capital, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all.
We closely monitor the impact of capital and credit market conditions on our liquidity and our ability to refinance in the future. We also routinely monitor the changes in the financial condition of our customers and the potential impact on our results of operations.
COVID-19 Response
In response to the ongoing challenges and uncertainty in the economy, financial markets, and the Company’s business brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, we have maintained certain precautionary measures that were instituted in 2020 to address the potential impact to our consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations, and liquidity. These precautionary measures included the temporary suspension of the Company’s match on employee contributions to the Company’s defined contribution plan, the deferral of the payment of certain payroll taxes until December 31, 2021 and 2022 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) and controlling non-essential capital expenditures. Additionally, our board of directors determined to cease payment of quarterly cash dividends, following the payment of our first quarter dividend of $2.1 million on May 15, 2020.
Other Liquidity Matters
Below is a summary of additional liquidity matters. See the indicated Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details related to these and other matters affecting our liquidity and commitments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Accounting estimates and assumptions described in this section are those we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties. For all of these estimates, we note that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. Actual results could differ from such estimates. The following discussion summarizes our critical accounting estimates. Circumstances arising from the COVID-19 pandemic in the future may require our estimates to change, however, as new events occur and additional information is obtained, any such changes will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from such estimates, and any such differences may be material to our financial statements. Significant accounting policies used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements are discussed in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We reduce the carrying amount of accounts receivable by a valuation allowance that reflects our best estimate of the accounts that will not be collected. In addition to reviewing delinquent accounts receivable, we consider many factors in estimating our general allowance including historical data, collection experience, customer types, creditworthiness and economic trends. From time to time, we may adjust our assumptions for anticipated changes in any of those or other factors expected to affect collectability. We charge off account balances against the allowance when it is probable the receivable will not be recovered.
Long-lived assets
We record long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and capitalized software, at cost. For acquisitions of property, plant or equipment purchased as part of a business combination, the assets are valued at fair market value, as discussed below. We depreciate and amortize long-lived assets using useful lives determined by us based on historical experience and other information available to us. When we determine that long-lived assets will be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives, we estimate the revised useful lives and depreciate the assets over the revised period.
We evaluate the potential impairment of long-lived assets at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. To determine whether impairment may exist, we group our long-lived assets at the geographic market level (i.e., the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows), and then perform our evaluation based on various analyses, including the projection of undiscounted cash flows. If the carrying amount of an asset, or asset group, is determined to exceed its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the assets are written down to estimated fair value.
Acquisitions and Business Combinations
We allocate the total cost of acquisitions to the underlying identifiable net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values at the date of acquisition with limited exceptions allowed by GAAP. Acquisition costs are generally expensed as incurred and restructuring costs associated with a business combination are generally expensed subsequent to the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, including the amounts assigned to identifiable intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. In addition, we may establish liabilities related to acquired liabilities and qualifying restructuring costs and contingencies based on assumptions made at the time of acquisition. We evaluate these reserves on a regular basis to determine the adequacies of the amounts.
Goodwill arising from an acquisition is tested on an annual basis, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. We have elected to perform our annual goodwill impairment testing as of December 31st. Recoverability of goodwill is evaluated by comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value. For purposes of testing the carrying value of the Company's goodwill for impairment, the fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit contains significant assumptions incorporating variables that are based on past experiences and judgments about future performance using industry information. These variables would include, but are not limited to: (1) forecasted revenue growth rates; (2) profit margin; (3) estimated capital expenditures and working capital requirements during the projection period; (4) risk-adjusted discount rate; and (5) expected growth rates in perpetuity to estimate terminal values. These variables are susceptible to changes in estimates, which could result in significant changes to the fair value of the goodwill. Impairment of goodwill is calculated by comparing the fair value as described above to the carrying value of goodwill.
We continually monitor and evaluate business and competitive conditions that affect our operations and reflect the impact of these factors in our financial projections. If permanent or sustained changes in business or competitive conditions occur, they can lead to revised projections that could potentially give rise to impairment charges.
For further discussion of impairment charges, see Note 6, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets
We test for impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, as of December 31st, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. The most significant intangible asset we have is our FCC licenses, which have been deemed to have an indefinite life. The fair value of our FCC licenses is estimated to be the price that we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
We evaluate the fair value of our FCC licenses at the unit of account level. Each market's broadcasting licenses are combined into a single unit of accounting, in our case geographic markets, for purposes of testing for impairments.
We utilize a discounted cash flow method to perform our impairment test. Under this method, the income that is attributable to each FCC license is isolated and is based upon modeling a hypothetical “greenfield” build-up to a “normalized” enterprise that, by design, lacks inherent goodwill and assumes that the only asset of the hypothetical start-up business is the license. It is assumed that rather than acquiring indefinite-lived intangible assets as part of a going concern business, the buyer hypothetically develops indefinite-lived intangible assets and builds a new operation with similar attributes from scratch. Thus, the buyer incurs start-up costs during the build-up phase which are normally associated with going concern value. Initial capital costs are deducted from the discounted cash flow model which results in value that is directly attributable to the indefinite-lived intangible assets. The cash flows generated in the greenfield method are presumed to emanate from the one asset, or the FCC license, that exists at time zero. This cash flow stream is discounted to arrive at a value for the FCC license.
The key assumptions using the greenfield method are market revenue growth rates, market share, profit margin and duration and profile of the build-up period, the risk-adjusted discount rate and terminal values. This data is populated using industry normalized information representing an average FCC license within a market. The projections incorporated into our license valuations take into consideration the then current economic conditions. Each of these assumptions may change in the future based upon changes in general economic conditions, audience behavior, consummated transactions, and numerous other variables that may be beyond our control.
For further discussion on key assumptions utilized in the greenfield method, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Intangible Assets. For further discussion of impairment charges, see Note 6, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. The most significant estimates we use in accounting for leases include:
Expected lease term - Our expected lease term includes both contractual lease periods and cancellable option periods where failure to exercise such options would result in an economic penalty. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the lease term exceeds 75% of the leased asset's useful life. The expected lease term is also used in determining the depreciable life of the asset. An increase in the expected lease term will increase the probability that a lease may be considered a finance lease and will generally result in higher interest and depreciation expense for a leased property recorded on our balance sheet.
Incremental borrowing rate - The incremental borrowing rate is primarily used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments is greater than 90% of the fair market value of the property. An increase in the incremental borrowing rate decreases the net present value of the minimum lease payments and reduces the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, in determining the net present value of lease payments, management used judgment in order to estimate the appropriate incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow equivalent funds on a collateralized basis over a similar term in a similar economic environment.
Fair market value of leased asset - Equipment residual values are determined at the inception of the lease using estimates of fair value at the end of the lease term. Residual value estimates impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the fair market value of the leased property. A higher fair market value reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease. Fair value estimates of equipment at the end of the lease term are based on historical renewal experience, used equipment markets, competition and technological changes.
For further discussion of our lease commitments, see Note 9, Lease and Other Commitments, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee awards based on the fair value of the award on the grant date. The fair values of restricted stock awards are determined based on the fair market value of our common stock at the time of grant. We estimate the fair value of option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This model requires assumptions including the fair value of our common stock, expected volatility, expected term of the award, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized as the equity awards vest. We account for forfeitures as a reduction of compensation cost in the period when such forfeitures occur.
For further discussion on the fair value of option awards, see Note 11, Equity, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
We evaluate the need for valuation allowances to reduce the deferred tax assets to realizable amounts. Management evaluates all positive and negative evidence and uses judgment regarding past and future events, including operating results, to help determine when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets may not be realized. When appropriate, a valuation allowance is recorded against deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has recorded $55.1 million of valuation allowance against its net operating losses and tax credit carry forwards.
We follow the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. ASC Topic 740 clarifies the accounting for uncertainties in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. ASC Topic 740 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, disclosures and transition. As required by the uncertain tax position guidance in ASC Topic 740, we recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
For further discussion of valuation allowances and uncertain tax positions, see Note 10, Income Taxes, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingencies and Litigation
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our exposure related to contingencies and litigation and record a liability when available information indicates that a liability is probable and estimable. We also disclose significant matters that are reasonably possible to result in a loss that is expected to be material to our operations or financial results or are probable but not estimable.
New Accounting Standards and Accounting Changes
For a discussion of accounting standards updates that have been adopted or will be adopted in the future, please refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.