Item 7.	Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.” Please refer to our “Forward-Looking Statements” section on page 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Background
TechTarget, Inc. (“we”, “us” or “our”) is a global data and analytics leader and software provider for purchase intent-driven marketing and sales data which delivers business impact for business-to-business (“B2B”) companies. Our solutions enable B2B technology companies to identify, reach, and influence key enterprise technology decision makers faster and with higher efficacy. We offer products and services intended to improve information technology (“IT”) vendors’ abilities to impact highly targeted audiences for business growth using advanced targeting, first-party analytics and data services complemented with customized marketing programs that integrate content creation, demand generation, brand marketing, and advertising techniques.
Our goal is to enable enterprise technology and business professionals to navigate the complex and rapidly-changing enterprise technology landscape where purchasing decisions can have significant financial and operational consequences. Our content strategy includes three primary sources which enterprise technology and business professionals use to assist them in their pre-purchase research: independent content provided by our professionals, vendor-generated content provided by our customers and member-generated, or peer-to-peer, content. In addition to utilizing our independent editorial content, registered members and users appreciate the ability to deepen their pre-purchase research by accessing the extensive vendor-supplied content available across our virtual event and webinar channels and website network (collectively, our “Network”). Likewise, these members and users derive significant additional value from the ability our Network provides to seamlessly interact with and contribute to information exchanges in a given field. To advance our ability to provide purchase intent-driven marketing and sales data, we have been acquisitive over the last two years. During 2021, we acquired Xtelligent Healthcare Media, LLC, a leading healthcare business to business media company focusing on healthcare-related technology. Similarly, during 2020, we acquired BrightTALK Limited, a technology media company that provides customers with a platform to create, host and promote webinar and video content, The Enterprise Strategy Group, Inc., a leading provider of decision support content based on user research and market analysis for global enterprise companies, and Data Science Central, LLC, a digital publishing and media company focused on data science and business analytics.
We had approximately 29.1 million and 26.9 million registered members and users, which we refer to as our “audiences”, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. While the size of our audiences base does not provide direct insight into our customer numbers or our revenue, we believe the value of our services sold to our customers is a direct result of the breadth and reach of this content footprint. This footprint creates the opportunity for our clients to gain business leverage by targeting our audiences through customized marketing programs. Likewise, the behavior exhibited by these audiences enables us to provide our customers with data products to improve their marketing and sales efforts. The targeted nature of our audiences enables B2B technology companies to reach a specialized audience efficiently because our content is highly segmented and aligned with the B2B technology companies’ specific products.
Through our ability to identify, reach and influence key decision makers, we have developed a broad customer base and, in 2021, delivered marketing and sales services programs to over 2,800 customers.
COVID-19 Business Update
In the first quarter of 2020, we began to see the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. As local and national actions, such as stay at home mandates, took effect, we began to see the macro-economic uncertainty that the COVID-19 pandemic created, which impacted our customers’ purchasing decisions. We observed our customers navigate this economic uncertainty through a combination of strategies, including focusing their buying decisions on shorter duration contracts. Additionally, our ability to attract new customers to longer-term contracts (which we define as contracts in excess of 270 days) was impacted as a result of the general cautiousness related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our operations, the future course of the pandemic and any potential financial impact remain highly uncertain and continue to evolve. Even after the easing of governmental restrictions, as the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic lessens, we could experience further fluctuations in our results of operations and cash flows resulting from the ongoing global impacts of the pandemic and our customers’ realignment of their marketing and sales budgets.
Our priorities remain ensuring the health and safety of our employees, customers, vendors, members, stockholders, and other stakeholders, while delivering our content and services to our customers around the world and continuing to drive long-term growth.
Executive Summary
Revenue
Our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased approximately $115.1 million, to $263.4 million, or 78% compared with the same period in 2020. Revenue attributable to our acquisitions significantly contributed to our growth for the year ended December 31, 2021. As required under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), we recorded unearned revenue related to acquired contracts from acquired entities at fair value on the date of acquisition. As a result, we did not recognize certain revenue related to these acquired contracts that the acquired entities would have otherwise recorded as an independent entity. Revenues from our Priority Engine™ products increased 17% to $61.2 million in 2021, compared to 2020.
Adjusted Revenue
We define Adjusted Revenue as the sum of revenue and the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue related to services billed by an acquired company prior to its acquisition. Adjusted Revenue is a non-GAAP financial measure that management uses to evaluate growth of the business period over period, excluding the impact of adjustments due to purchase accounting. Adjusted Revenue should be considered in addition to Revenue, but should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, Revenue. In addition, our definition of Adjusted Revenue may not be comparable to the definitions as reported by other companies. We believe that it is important to evaluate growth on this basis. We expect our Adjusted Revenue to converge over time with our GAAP revenue.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted Revenue:
Longer-term contracts amounted to 35% of our revenue in the fourth quarter of 2021, which is up 1% from 34% in the fourth quarter of 2020. The amount of revenue that we derived from longer-term contracts in the fourth quarter of 2021 increased by approximately $12.4 million, an increase of 81% compared to the amount that we recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Gross profit percentage of 73% for 2021 was impacted by the amount of acquired unearned revenue we did not recognize. Gross profit percentage was 75% and 76% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Business Trends
The following discussion highlights key trends affecting our business.
•Macro-economic Conditions and Industry Trends. Because most of our customers are B2B technology companies, the success of our business is intrinsically linked to the health, and subject to the market conditions, of the IT industry. Despite the current uncertainty in the economy, there are several factors indicating positive IT spending over the next few years is likely. We believe there are several IT catalysts such as AI, security, data analytics, and cloud migrations, to name a few. Our growth continues to be driven in large part by the return on the investments we made in our data analytics suite of products, which continues to drive market share gains for us. While we will continue to invest in this growth area, management will also continue to carefully control discretionary spending such as travel and entertainment, and the filling of new and replacement positions, in an effort to maintain profit margins and cash flows.
•COVID-19. Throughout 2021, we have been impacted by COVID-19 in multiple ways; we noted an acceleration of our international revenue as customers in those regions moved from face-to-face events to online platforms; we noted a reticence among certain of our customers to enter into longer-term contractual relationships which had a negative impact on the percentage of revenue under longer-term contracts; we noted our ability to expand our new logo acquisition with our Priority Engine Express offering was negatively impacted. We anticipate certain of these trends to continue throughout 2022.
•Brexit. The United Kingdom’s June 2016 referendum, in which voters approved an exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union, commonly referred to as “Brexit,” resulted in significant general economic uncertainty as well as volatility in global stock markets and currency exchange rate fluctuations. In March 2017, the United Kingdom served notice to the European Council under Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty of its intention to withdraw from the European Union. As of January 30, 2020, the United Kingdom’s membership in the European Union was terminated and an eleven-month transition period began. In December 2020, the United Kingdom and the European Union agreed on a trade and cooperation agreement, under which the United Kingdom and the European Union will now form two separate markets governed by two distinct regulatory and legal regimes. The trade and cooperation agreement covers the general objectives and framework of the relationship between the United Kingdom and the European Union, including as it relates to trade, transport and visas. Notably, under the trade and cooperation agreement, United Kingdom service suppliers no longer benefit from automatic access to the entire European Union single market, United Kingdom goods no longer benefit from the free movement of goods and there is no longer the free movement of people between the United Kingdom and the European Union. Depending on the application of the terms of the trade and cooperation agreement, we could face new regulatory costs and challenges. The full effect of Brexit remains uncertain and depends on the application of the terms of the trade and cooperation agreement. Our revenue generated from customers who have billing addresses within the United Kingdom was approximately 14% of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Customer Demographics. In the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues from our legacy global customers (a static cohort comprised of our 10 historically largest on premises hardware technology companies), increased by approximately 59% compared to the prior year. Revenues from our remaining customers increased 95% from the prior year.
Our key strategic initiatives include:
•Geographic - During 2021, approximately 38% of our revenues were derived from international campaigns.
•Product -Purchase intent data continues to drive our product road strategy. During 2022, we intend to improve upon our sales use case by expanding our sales alerts and inbound converter features among other strategic objectives. We will also incorporate the purchase intent data from BrightTALK into Priority Engine™.
Our revenues were up 78% in 2021 compared to 2020, which was primarily driven by the increases noted above. We have looked extensively at the dynamics between IT Deal Alert™ and other offerings and have evaluated whether our growth in IT Deal Alert™ customers is taking away from other products for those same accounts. However, our data indicates that this is not the case, and while our sales team is leading with IT Deal Alert™, our sales team continues to emphasize the benefits of integration across our product offerings.
Sources of Revenues
Revenue for the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 by geo-target were as follows (in thousands):
We sell customized marketing programs to B2B technology companies targeting a specific audience within a particular enterprise technology or business sector or sub-sector. We maintain multiple points of contact with our customers to provide support throughout their organizations and their customers’ IT sales cycles. As a result, our customers often run multiple advertising programs with us in order to target their desired audience of enterprise technology and business professionals more effectively. There are multiple factors that can impact our customers’ marketing and advertising objectives and spending with us, including but not limited to, IT product launches, increases or decreases to their advertising budgets, the timing of key industry marketing events, responses to competitor activities and efforts to address specific marketing objectives such as creating brand awareness or generating sales leads. Our products and services are generally delivered under short-term contracts that run for the length of a given program, typically less than nine months. In the quarter ended December 31, 2021 approximately 35% of our revenues were from longer-term contracts.
Product and Service Offerings
We use our offerings to provide B2B technology companies with numerous touch points to identify, reach and influence key enterprise technology decision makers. The following is a description of the products and services we offer:
IT Deal Alert™. IT Deal Alert™ is a suite of products and services for B2B technology companies that leverages the detailed purchase intent data that we collect about end-user enterprise technology organizations. Through proprietary scoring methodologies, we use this insight to help our customers identify and prioritize accounts whose content consumption around specific enterprise technology topics indicates that they are “in-market” for a particular product or service. We also use the data directly to identify and further profile accounts’ upcoming purchase plans.
•IT Deal Alert™ . A suite of data and services for B2B technology companies that leverages the detailed purchase intent data that we collect on enterprise technology organizations and professionals researching IT purchases on our Network. Through proprietary scoring methodologies, we use this insight to help our customers identify and prioritize accounts and contacts whose content consumption around specific enterprise technology topics indicates that they are “in-market” for a particular product or service. The suite of products and services includes Priority Engine™, Qualified Sales Opportunities™, and Deal Data™. Priority Engine™ is a subscription service powered by our Activity Intelligence™ platform, which integrates with customer relationship management and marketing automation platforms from salesforce.com, Marketo, Eloqua, Pardot, and Integrate. The services are designed to deliver lead generation workflow solutions that enable marketers and sales forces to identify and understand accounts and individuals actively researching new technology purchases and then to engage those active prospects. Qualified Sales Opportunities™ is a product that profiles specific in-progress purchase projects, including information on scope and purchase considerations. Deal Data™ is a customized solution aimed at sales intelligence and data scientist functions within our customer organizations. It renders our Activity Intelligence™ data into one-time offerings directly consumable by the customer’s internal applications.
•Demand Solutions. Our offerings enable our customers to reach and influence prospective buyers through content marketing programs, such as white papers, webcasts, podcasts, videocasts, virtual trade shows, and content sponsorships, designed to generate demand for their solutions, and through display advertising and other brand programs that influence consideration by prospective buyers. We believe this allows B2B technology companies to maximize ROI on marketing and sales expenditures by capturing sales leads from the distribution and promotion of content to our audience of enterprise technology and business professionals.
•Brand Solutions. Our suite of brand solutions offerings provides B2B technology companies with direct exposure to targeted audiences of enterprise technology and business professionals actively researching information related to their products and services. We leverage our Activity Intelligence™ platform to enable significant segmentation and targeting of specific audiences that can be accessed through these programs. Components of brand programs may include on-network branding, off-network branding, and microsites and related formats.
•Custom Content Creation. We also at times create white papers, case studies, webcasts or videos to our customers’ specifications. These customized content assets are then promoted to our audience within both demand solutions and brand solutions programs.
•BrightTALK platform. Allows our customers to create, host and promote webinars, virtual events and video content.
Cost of Revenues, Operating Expenses and Other
Expenses consist of cost of revenues, selling and marketing, product development, general and administrative, depreciation, amortization, and interest and other expense, net. Personnel-related costs are a significant component of each of these expense categories except for depreciation, amortization and interest and other expense, net.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues consists primarily of: salaries and related personnel costs, member acquisition expenses (primarily keyword purchases from leading internet search sites), lead generation expenses, freelance writer expenses, website hosting costs; vendor expenses associated with the delivery of webcast, podcast, videocast and similar content and other offerings; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead.
Selling and Marketing. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; sales commissions; travel and entertainment-related expenses; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead. Sales commissions are recorded as expense when earned by the employee, based on recorded revenue.
Product Development. Product development includes the creation and maintenance of our network of websites and data analytics framework, advertiser offerings and technical infrastructure. Product development expense consists primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; facility expenses and related overhead; accounting, legal and other professional fees; transaction-related expenses; and stock-based compensation expenses.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense consists of the depreciation of our property and equipment and other capitalized assets. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, ranging from three to twelve years.
Amortization. Amortization expense consists of the amortization of intangible assets recorded in connection with our acquisitions, including changes in the value of contingent consideration in relation to certain of the acquisitions. Separable intangible assets that are not deemed to have an indefinite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from eighteen months to nineteen years, using methods that are expected to reflect the estimated pattern of economic use.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest costs, inducement expense and the related amortization of deferred issuance costs on our Notes and amounts borrowed under our current and our prior loan agreements and amortization of premiums on our investments, less any interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. We historically have invested our cash in money market accounts, municipal bonds, government agency bonds, U.S. Treasury securities, and corporate bonds. Other expense consists primarily of non-operating gains or losses, primarily related to realized and unrealized foreign currency gains and losses on trade assets and liabilities.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue, long-lived assets, goodwill, stock-based compensation, contingent liabilities, self-insurance accruals and income taxes. We base our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. See the notes to our consolidated financial statements for information about these critical accounting policies as well as a description of our other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We generate substantially all of our revenues from the sale of targeted marketing and advertising campaigns, which we deliver via our network of websites, event channels and data analytics solutions (see above “Product and Service Offerings”). We recognize revenue when performance obligations are satisfied by transferring promised goods and services to customers in an amount the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company enters into contracts that can include various combinations of its offerings which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as a separate performance obligation. When performance obligations are combined into a single contract, we utilize stand-alone selling price (“SSP") to allocate the transaction price among the performance obligations. Our estimates of SSP for each performance obligation require judgement that considers multiple factors such as historical pricing trends and pricing practices within different geographies.
Revenue from our brand and demand solutions is primarily recognized when the transfer of control occurs. Certain of the contracts within brand and demand solutions are duration-based campaigns which, in the event of customer cancellation, provide the Company with an enforceable right to a proportional payment for the portion of the campaign based on services provided. Accordingly, revenue from duration-based campaigns is recognized using a time-based measure of progress, which the Company believes best depicts how it satisfies its performance obligations in these arrangements as control is continuously transferred throughout the contract period. Revenue from microsites is recognized ratably over the life of the contract. Revenue from custom content creation is recognized over the expected period of performance using a single measure of progress, typically based on hours incurred. Payments received in advance of services being rendered are recorded as a component of contract liabilities.
Changes in judgements regarding these assumptions could impact the timing of revenue recognition.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment, capitalized software, goodwill, and other intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have arisen from our acquisitions. The amount assigned to intangible assets is subjective and based on our estimates of the future benefit of the intangible assets using accepted valuation techniques, such as discounted cash flow. Our long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which we determine based on the consideration of several factors including the period of time the asset is expected to remain in service. Intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from eighteen months to nineteen years, using methods of amortization that are expected to reflect the estimated pattern of economic use. The carrying amounts of our acquired intangible assets are periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the assets may not be recoverable or their useful life is shorter than originally estimated. Consistent with our determination that we have only one reporting segment, we have determined that there is only one reporting unit and test goodwill for impairment at the entity level. We evaluate the carrying value and remaining useful lives of long-lived assets, other than goodwill, whenever indicators of impairment are present. We evaluate the carrying value of goodwill annually using the two-step process required by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). The first step of the impairment test is to identify potential impairment by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its net book value (or carrying amount), including goodwill. The fair value is estimated based on a market value approach. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds it carrying amount, the reporting unit’s goodwill is not considered to be impaired and the second step of the impairment test is not performed. Whenever indicators of impairment are present, we would perform the second step and compare the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill, as defined by ASC 350, to it carrying value to determine the amount of the impairment loss, if any. As of December 31, 2021, there were no indications of impairment based on our analysis, and our estimated fair value exceeded our carrying value by a significant margin.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
The Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to allocate fair value to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The Company’s estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement and can include but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, and the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital.
During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. The Company continues to collect information and reevaluates these estimates and assumptions quarterly and records any adjustments to the Company’s preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that the Company is within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize stock-based compensation in our results of operations using the straight-line method over the vesting period of the award. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards. We calculated the fair values of the options granted using the following estimated weighted average assumptions:
The expected volatility of options granted in 2021, 2020, and 2019 was determined using a weighted average of the historical volatility of our stock for a period equal to the expected life of the option. The risk-free interest rate is based on a zero-coupon U.S. treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock options. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our shares of common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero. We applied an estimated annual forfeiture rate based on historical averages in determining the expense recorded in each period.
Internal-Use Software and Website Development Costs
We capitalize costs of materials, consultants and compensation and related expenses of employees who devote time to the development of internal-use software and website applications. We begin to capitalize our costs to develop software and website applications when planning stage efforts are successfully completed, management has authorized and committed project funding, and it is probable that the project will be completed, and the software will be used as intended. Our judgment is required in determining the point at which various projects enter the state at which costs may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, which is generally three years. To the extent that we change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our internal use software and websites, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal use software and website development costs we capitalize and amortize in future periods would be impacted. We review capitalized internal-use software and website development costs for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We would recognize an impairment loss only if the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. There were no impairments to internal-use software and website developments costs during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019. We capitalized internal-use software and website development costs of $11.5 million, $6.1 million, and $5.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in both U.S. and foreign jurisdictions, and we use estimates in determining our provision for income taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates expected to be in effect when such differences are settled.
Our net deferred tax liabilities are comprised primarily of book to tax differences on stock-based compensation, intangible asset basis, net operating loss carryforwards, valuation allowance and timing of deductions for right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, accrued expenses, depreciation, and amortization.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Impact of Acquisitions
The comparability of our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by our recent acquisitions, including the acquisition of BrightTALK Limited in December 2020.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”) increased 78% over the year ended December 31, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”), primarily due to customers increasing their spend for additional data-driven marketing products. Priority Engine™, lead generation and brand revenue each increased over prior year and contributed to our growth, as well as revenue attributed to our acquisitions, which significantly contributed to our growth. As required under GAAP, we recorded unearned revenue related to acquired contracts from acquired entities at fair value on the date of acquisition. As a result, we did not recognize certain revenue related to these acquired contracts that the acquired entities would have otherwise recorded as an independent entity.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues for fiscal 2021 increased by $33.9 million as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in cost of revenues in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by the increase in amortization attributable to acquired technology, variable costs attributable to contracted services costs related to fulfilling campaigns combined with additional costs from recent acquisitions.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is equal to the difference between our revenues and our cost of revenues for the period. Gross profit percentage was 73% for fiscal 2021 and 75% for fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily impacted by the amount of acquired unearned revenue we did not recognize in accordance with GAAP.
Operating Expenses and Other
Selling and Marketing. Sales and marketing costs increased by $40.3 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to the fiscal 2020 primarily as a result of an increase in headcount and salaries, related to our acquisitions, and other related costs (including an increase in stock compensation of $8.0 million).
Product Development. Product development costs increased by $3.8 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. Pay and benefit costs increased by $1.3 million, primarily due to our increased headcount associated with our acquisitions. Additionally, the stock-based compensation costs increased by $1.2 million, primarily due to increase in stock price and the additional awards to new employees following our recent acquisitions.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs increased by $16.0 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to a $10.8 million increase in stock-based compensation and labor related expenses also increased $4.1 million.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense in fiscal 2021 increased by $0.8 million as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to increased capital expenditures.
Amortization. Amortization expense in fiscal 2021 increased by $8.7 million as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to intangible assets acquired in 2020 and 2021 and changes to contingent consideration from certain of our acquisitions.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest and other expense, net in fiscal 2021 increased by $23.0 million as compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to the increase in inducement expense of $21.2 million incurred in connection with the retirement of approximately $149.9 million aggregate principal amount of our 2025 Notes (the “Inducement Expense”).
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate was 91.0% and 24.2% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The higher rate in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases in non-deductible expenses, driven mainly by the non-deductible Inducement Expense, and offset, in part, by an increase in excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences of non-deductible expenses, excess tax deductions from stock-based compensation, state income taxes, and foreign income taxes.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 11% over the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenues was mainly due to increases in our lead generation business and our growth in international revenue due to shifts in marketing spend resulting from the impacts of COVID-19. Priority Engine™ revenues were up 5% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues for fiscal 2020 increased by $5.5 million as compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in cost of revenues in fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by the increase in variable costs attributable to contracted services costs related to fulfilling campaigns.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is equal to the difference between our revenues and our cost of revenues for the period. Gross profit percentage was 75% for fiscal 2020 and 76% for fiscal 2019.
Operating Expenses and Other
Selling and Marketing. Sales and marketing costs increased by $3.0 million for fiscal 2020 as compared to the fiscal 2019 primarily as a result of an increase in salaries and related costs (including an increase in stock compensation of $1.6 million).
Product Development. Product development costs decreased by $0.3 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. Pay and benefit costs decreased by $0.5 million, primarily due to an increase in the amount of labor costs capitalized as internal use software. Decrease was offset by stock-based compensation costs increasing by $0.1 million primarily due to increase in stock price and costs of services and software increasing by $0.1 million.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs increased by $4.9 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to higher legal and professional fees relating to our acquisitions and other matters of approximately $4.3 million and an increase in stock-based compensation costs of $0.6 million.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation expense in fiscal 2020 increased by $1.2 million as compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to depreciation relating to new additions placed in service during 2020 and an increase in amortization expense relating to acquired intangibles.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest and other expense, net in fiscal 2020 decreased by $0.4 million as compared to fiscal 2019. Primarily due to the increase in interest expense of $0.2 million from our issuance of convertible notes and the related amortization of costs associated with the offering and the amortization of the amount of the convertible note categorized into equity offset by foreign currency-related gains of $0.7 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to $51 thousand in fiscal 2019. The foreign currency-related gains and losses were due to changes in exchange rates in currencies where we record accounts receivable and accounts payable in the normal course of business, largely the United Kingdom and Australia.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate was 24.2% and 23.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The higher rate in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to higher income and increase in non-deductible expenses and offset by increase in excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences of non-deductible expenses, excess tax deductions from stock-based compensation, state income taxes, and foreign income taxes.
Seasonality
The timing of our revenues is affected by seasonal factors. Our revenues are seasonal primarily as a result of the annual budget approval process of many of our customers, the normal timing at which our customers introduce new products, and the historical decrease in advertising in summer months. The timing of revenues in relation to our expenses, much of which do not vary directly with revenues, has an impact on the cost of revenues, selling and marketing, product development, and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues in each calendar quarter during the year.
The majority of our expenses are personnel-related and include salaries, stock-based compensation, benefits and incentive-based compensation plan expenses. As a result, we have not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations in the timing of our expenses period to period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Resources
Our cash and investments at December 31, 2021 totaled $381.7 million, a $299.0 million increase from December 31, 2020, primarily driven by cash generated from operations and a portion of the net proceeds from our December 2021 convertible debt offering of the 2026 Notes, offset in part by investments in property and equipment of $12.6 million. We believe that our existing cash and investments, and our cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months and beyond. Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the operations of our existing business, our potential strategic expansion internationally, future acquisitions we might undertake and any expansion into complementary businesses. To the extent that our cash and investments and cash flow from operating activities are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may raise additional funds through bank credit arrangements or public or private equity or debt financings. We may utilize the capacity available under our existing $75 million line of credit, raise additional funds in the event we determine in the future to effect one or more additional acquisitions of businesses.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments
Our cash, cash equivalents and investments at December 31, 2021 were held for working capital purposes and were invested primarily in pooled bond fund. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes.
Accounts Receivable, Net
Our accounts receivable balance fluctuates from period to period, which affects our cash flows from operating activities. The fluctuations vary depending on the timing of our service delivery and billing activity, cash collections, and changes to our allowance for doubtful accounts. We use days sales outstanding (“DSO”) as a measurement of the quality and status of our receivables. We define DSO as net accounts receivable at quarter end divided by total revenues for the applicable period, multiplied by the number of days in the applicable period. DSO was 60 days at December 31, 2021, 57 days at December 31, 2020 and 69 days at December 31, 2019. The net accounts receivable days for 2020, exclude our December 2020 acquisitions. The change in DSO year over year is primarily due to the timing of payments from all classes of customers.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities primarily consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items including depreciation and amortization, the provision for bad debt, stock-based compensation, deferred income taxes, and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of increases in non-cash stock compensation of $21.7 million, a $13.5 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, a $21.2 million increase in induced conversion expense and changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by a $13.8 million decrease in accrued expenses.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily the result of increases in non-cash stock compensation of $2.6 million, a $1.9 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense and changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by a $7.0 million increase in accrued expenses and a $2.9 million increase in other liabilities.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily the result of increases in non-cash stock compensation of $5.1 million, a $3.9 million increase in net income as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by a $2.5 million increase in income taxes payable and a $2.6 million decrease in accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $57.0 million; which consisted of $12.6 million for the purchase of property and equipment and other capitalized assets, primarily made up of computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs, $20 million for the acquisition of certain investment holdings, and $24.3 million for the purchase of Xtelligent Healthcare Media, LLC during July 2021.
Cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $175.7 million; which consisted of $6.7 million for the purchase of property and equipment and other capitalized assets, primarily made up of computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs, and $174.0 million for the purchase of various businesses during 2020, offset in part by $5.0 million from sales of short-term investments.
Cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $10.8 million; which consisted of $6.3 million for the purchase of property and equipment and other capitalized assets, primarily made up of computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs, and $5.0 million for the purchase of investments, offset in part by $0.5 million from the maturity of short-term investments.
Capital Expenditures. We have made capital expenditures primarily for computer equipment and related software needed to host our websites, internal-use software development costs, as well as for leasehold improvements and other general purposes to support our growth. Our capital expenditures totaled $12.6 million, $6.7 million, and $6.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. A majority of our capital expenditures in 2021, 2020, and 2019 were internal-use software and website development costs and, to a lesser extent, computer equipment and related software.
We anticipate that we will spend approximately $15 million in capital expenditures in 2022, primarily for internal-use software and website development costs and computer equipment and related software. We are not currently party to any purchase contracts related to future capital expenditures. We believe we can fund these future additions through cash generated from operations.
Financing Activities
During 2021, we received net proceeds from our 2026 Notes offering of approximately $414 million, offset by $147 million used for repurchase and conversion of a portion of the outstanding 2025 Notes. We utilized $0 million, $14.8 million, and $7.1 million for the repurchase of shares under our stock repurchase programs in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, as well as $0.4 million, $3.5 million, and $2.8 million related to tax withholdings on net share settlements in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Common Stock Repurchase Programs
On November 7, 2018, we announced a stock repurchase program (the “November 2018 Stock Repurchase Program”) whereby we were authorized to repurchase up to an aggregate amount of $25.0 million of the shares of our common stock from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions at prices and in a manner that may be determined by management. We repurchased 736,760 and 411,849 shares at an aggregate purchase price of $14.8 million and $7.1 million at an average share price of $20.10 and $17.1 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, under the November 2018 Stock Repurchase Program. We terminated the November 2018 Stock Repurchase Program in May 2020.
In May 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors had authorized a $25.0 million stock repurchase program (the “May 2020 Repurchase Program”) whereby we are authorized to repurchase shares of our common stock from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions at prices and in the manner that may be determined by management. No amounts were repurchased under this plan during 2021.
Repurchased shares were recorded under the cost method and are reflected as treasury stock in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. All repurchased shares were funded with cash on hand (see Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Convertible Senior Notes and Contractual Commitments
In December 2021, the Company issued $414 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.00% convertible senior notes (“2026 Notes”) due December 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased by the Company or converted by the holder pursuant to their terms. Special interest, if any, is payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year.
The 2026 Notes are governed by an Indenture between the Company, as issuer, and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee. The 2026 Notes are unsecured and rank senior in right of payment to the Company’s future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the 2026 Notes and equal in right of payment to the Company’s unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated.
Upon conversion, the Company will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company’s election.
The 2026 Notes have an initial conversion rate of 7.6043 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2026 Notes. This represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $131.50 per share of common stock and 3,148,180 shares issuable upon conversion. Throughout the term of the 2026 Notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. Holders of the 2026 Notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest, if any, upon conversion of a 2026 Note.
Proceeds from the 2026 Notes were utilized to retire $149.9 million of the 2025 Notes and for general corporate purposes.
In December 2020, the Company issued $201.3 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.125% convertible senior notes (the “2025 Notes”) due December 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased by the Company or converted by the holder pursuant to their terms. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, which commenced on June 15, 2021.
The 2025 Notes are governed by an indenture between the Company, as issuer, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (the “Indenture”). The 2025 Notes are unsecured and rank senior in right of payment to the Company’s future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Notes and equal in right of payment to the Company’s unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated.
Upon conversion, the Company will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company’s election.
The 2025 Notes have an initial conversion rate of 14.1977 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Notes. This represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $70.43 per share of common stock and 2,857,447 shares issuable upon conversion of the full aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes. Throughout the term of the 2025 Notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. As of December 31, 2021, no such adjustment has occurred. Holders of the 2025 Notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest, if any, upon conversion of a Note, except in limited circumstances. Accrued but unpaid interest will be deemed to be paid by cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of the Company’s common stock paid or delivered, as the case may be, to the holder upon conversion of the Notes.
After the induced conversion of $149.9 million aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes in December 2021, approximately $51 million of aggregate principal and 1,021,285 shares issuable upon conversion of the full aggregate principal amounts of the remaining 2025 Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal contractual commitments consist of obligations under leases for office space and our Convertible Debt. The offices are leased under non-cancelable operating lease agreements that expire through 2029.
See Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Notes and Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information with respect to our operating leases.
Line of Credit
On October 29, 2021, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Western Alliance Bank, as administrative agent and collateral agent for the lenders, and the banks and other financial institutions or entities from time to time party thereto as lenders (the “2021 Loan Agreement”). The 2021 Loan Agreement provides for a $75 million revolving credit facility with a $5 million letter-of-credit sublimit and a maturity date of October 29, 2023. The 2021 Loan Agreement is secured by substantially all of the Company’s assets. Borrowings under the 2021 Loan Agreement bear interest at a rate equal to one (1) month U.S. LIBOR, plus a spread based upon the Company’s leverage (as defined by 2021 Loan Agreement), which may vary between 2.00% and 2.75%. The 2021 Loan Agreement is subject to various leverage and non-financial covenants. No amounts were outstanding under the 2021 Loan Agreement as of the date of this filing.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for recent accounting pronouncements that could have an effect on us.