Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Business Overview
We are an in vitro diagnostics company and leader in the rapid detection of sepsis-causing pathogens and antibiotic resistance genes. We are dedicated to improving patient care and reducing the cost of care by helping clinicians effectively treat patients faster than ever before. We have developed innovative products that offer a rapid, sensitive and simple alternative to existing diagnostic methodologies. We are developing a broad set of applications aimed at improving patient outcomes, reducing the cost of healthcare, and lowering mortality rates by helping medical professionals make earlier targeted treatment decisions. Our technology enables rapid detection of pathogens, biomarkers and other abnormalities in a variety of unpurified patient sample types, including whole blood, plasma, serum, saliva, sputum and urine, and can detect cellular targets at limits of detection as low as one colony forming unit per milliliter, or CFU/mL. We are currently targeting a range of critically underserved healthcare conditions, focusing initially on those for which a rapid diagnosis will serve an important dual role - saving lives and reducing costs. Our current development efforts primarily target sepsis, which is an area of significant unmet medical need in which existing therapies could be more effective with improved diagnostics.
Our primary commercial products include the T2Dx® Instrument, the T2Candida® Panel, the T2Bacteria® Panel, the T2Resistance® Panel, and the T2SARS-CoV-2™ Panel.
We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our accumulated deficit at December 31, 2021 was $472.2 million and we have experienced cash outflows from operating activities over the past years. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We have incurred significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution of our FDA-cleared products, the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida Panel and T2Bacteria Panel. In addition, we will continue to incur significant costs and expenses as we continue to develop other product candidates, improve existing products and maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio. We may seek to fund our operations through public equity or private equity or debt financings, as well as other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements if and when needed would have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition and our ability to develop, commercialize and drive adoption of the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida, T2Bacteria, T2Resistance, T2SARS-CoV-2 and future products.
We are subject to a number of risks similar to other early commercial stage life science companies, including, but not limited to commercially launching our products, development and market acceptance of our product candidates, development by our competitors of new technological innovations, protection of proprietary technology, and raising additional capital.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations. We have established protocols for continued manufacturing, distribution and servicing of our products with safe social distancing and personal protective equipment measures and for remote work for employees not essential to on-site operations. To date these measures have been mostly successful but may not continue to function should the pandemic escalate and further impact our personnel. In 2020, our hospital customers restricted our sales team’s access to their facilities and as a result, we had significantly reduced our commercial and general and administrative staffing levels at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce expenses. We have since hired sales, marketing, and medical and clinical affairs personnel. Although we did not see any material impact to accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2021, our exposure may increase if our customers continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including as a result of the spread of variants of the virus. Customers may reduce their purchases of products, depending on their needs and cash flow, which could negatively impact revenue. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with BARDA and should BARDA reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects, our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted. Our shipping carrier’s ability to deliver our products to customers may be disrupted. We have reviewed our suppliers and quantities of key materials and believe we have sufficient stocks and alternate sources of critical materials should our supply chains become disrupted, although raw materials and plastics for the manufacturing of reagents and consumables are in high demand, and interruptions in supply are difficult to predict. At the onset of the pandemic, we believed that the pandemic’s impact on our sales would affect the recoverability of the value of our T2-owned instruments and components. In early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly, which resulted in an additional charge to cost of product revenue for excess inventories.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $33.8 million at December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to fund our current operating plan at least a year from issuance of these financial statements unless additional funds are raised. Certain elements of our operating plan cannot be considered probable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, management implemented a cost improvement strategy which is focused on reducing operating expenses and improving cost of goods sold.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“CRG”) (Note 6) has certain covenants which require us to achieve certain annual revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments, and maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. In June 2021, we achieved the revenue covenant for the twenty-four month period beginning January 1, 2020. There can be no assurances that we will continue to be in compliance with the cash covenant in future periods without additional funding. In February 2022 CRG amended the Term Loan Agreement extending the interest only period and maturity to December 30, 2023.
On November 5, 2021, we received a letter from The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) indicating that, for the last thirty consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below the minimum $1.00 per share requirement for continued listing on the Nasdaq Global Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). Under Nasdaq rules, we have 180 days (May 4, 2022) to regain compliance by increasing the stock price to over $1.00. The Company plans to regain compliance by executing on its operating plans to organically drive the share price to compliance. The Company currently has no plan for a reverse stock split.
These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Management's plans to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt include raising additional funding, earning payments pursuant to our contract with BARDA, delaying certain research projects and capital expenditures and eliminating certain future operating expenses in order to fund operations at reduced levels for us to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. Management has concluded the likelihood that its plan to successfully obtain sufficient funding from one or more of these sources or adequately reduce expenditures, while reasonably possible, is less than probable. Accordingly, we have concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of our products, related services, reagent rental agreements and government contributions.
Grants received, including cost reimbursement agreements, are assessed to determine if the agreement should be accounted for as an exchange transaction or a contribution. An agreement is accounted for as a contribution if the resource provider does not receive commensurate value in return for the assets transferred.
Product revenue is generated by the sale of instruments and consumable diagnostic tests predominantly through our direct sales force in the United States and distributors in geographic regions outside the United States. We do not offer product return or exchange rights (other than those relating to defective goods under warranty) or price protection allowances to its customers, including its distributors. Payment terms granted to distributors are the same as those granted to end-user customers and payments are not dependent upon the distributors’ receipt of payment from their end-user customers. We either sell instruments to customers and international distributors, or retain title and place the instrument at the customer site pursuant to a reagent rental agreement. When the instrument is placed under a reagent rental agreement, our customers generally agree to fixed term agreements, which can be extended, and incremental charges on each consumable diagnostic test purchased. Shipping and handling costs are billed to customers in connection with a product sale.
Fees paid to member-owned group purchasing organizations (“GPOs”) are deducted from related product revenues.
Direct sales of instruments include warranty, maintenance and technical support services typically for one year following the installation of the purchased instrument (“Maintenance Services”). Maintenance Services are separate performance obligations as they are service based warranties and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the service delivery period. After the completion of the initial Maintenance Services period, customers have the option to renew or extend the Maintenance Services typically for additional one-year periods in exchange for additional consideration. The extended Maintenance Services are also service based warranties that represent separate purchasing decisions.
We warrant that consumable diagnostic tests will be free from defects, when handled according to product specifications, for the stated life of the product. To fulfill valid warranty claims, we provide replacement product free of charge.
Our current sales strategy is to drive adoption of our test platform installed base in hospitals, to increase test use by our existing hospital customers, and to expand T2SARS-CoV-2 customers to sepsis testing. Accordingly, we expect the following to occur:
•
recurring revenue from our consumable diagnostic tests will increase; and
•
become a more predictable and significant component of total revenue; and
•
we will gain manufacturing economies of scale through the growth in our sales, resulting in improving gross margins and operating margins.
We believe the COVID-19 pandemic hindered our U.S. and international sales growth. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with BARDA and should BARDA reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects, our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue includes the cost of materials, direct labor and manufacturing overhead costs used in the manufacture of our consumable diagnostic tests sold to customers and related license and royalty fees. Cost of product revenue also includes depreciation on the revenue-generating T2Dx instruments that have been placed with our customers under reagent rental agreements; costs of materials, direct labor and manufacturing overhead costs on the T2Dx instruments sold to customers; and other costs such as customer support costs, warranty and repair and maintenance expense on the T2Dx instruments that have been placed with our customers under reagent rental agreements. We manufacture the T2Dx instruments and part of our consumable diagnostic tests in our facilities. We outsource the manufacturing of components of our consumable diagnostic tests to contract manufacturers.
We expect cost of product revenue to decrease as a percentage of revenue as a result of the cost of product revenue improvement initiatives that we initiated in 2021 and 2020.
At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believed that the pandemic would reduce product sales and impair our ability to recover the cost of our T2-owned instruments and components. We assessed the impact on the related cash flows of the instruments and reduced their carrying values by $0.6 million during the quarter ended March 31, 2020, which was recorded as cost of product revenue impairment expense. We took an additional $0.6 million charge to cost of product revenue during the quarter ended March 31, 2020 primarily for excess inventories as the COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly.
Research and development expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs, incurred for the development of our technology and product candidates, technology improvements and enhancements, clinical trials to evaluate the clinical utility of our product candidates, and laboratory development and expansion, and include salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation, research-related facility and overhead costs, laboratory supplies, equipment and contract services. Research and development expenses also include costs of delivering products or services associated with research and contribution revenue. We expense all research and development costs as incurred.
We anticipate our overall research and development expenses to remain consistent or increase in support of increased activity under the BARDA agreement. We expect to continue developing additional product candidates, improving existing products, and conducting ongoing and new clinical trials. We have a significant development contract with BARDA and should BARDA reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects, our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted.
Customer service personnel provide customer product support as well as field installation, training and T2Dx system maintenance. Time spent in the field servicing customers with service maintenance contracts and for installation and training is considered services and included in cost of goods sold. Time spent providing customer support is now considered a commercial support activity and is included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Previously, customer support was considered a development phase activity and was included in research and development expense. Prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. The reclassification increased selling, general and administrative expenses by $0.8 million and decreased research and development expenses by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The reclassification had no impact on total costs and expenses, loss from operations, net loss or net loss per share.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs for our sales and marketing, finance, legal, human resources, business development and general management functions, as well as professional services, such as legal, consulting and accounting services. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in future periods. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, fees and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents, clinical and economic studies and publications, marketing expenses, and travel expenses. We expense the majority of selling, general and administrative expenses as incurred.
As noted under research and development expenses, the reclassification of customer support increased selling, general and administrative expenses by $0.8 million and decreased research and development expenses by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense on our notes payable, changes in fair value of our derivative liability and the amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount.
Other income, net
Other income, net, consists of dividend and other investment income.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Product revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, product revenue totaled $16.6 million, compared to $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4.9 million. The increase was driven by higher consumable sales of $6.1 million primarily driven by sales of our T2SARS-CoV-2 and Sepsis product, and higher revenue under our service agreements of $0.2 million, offset by lower T2Dx instrument sales of $1.3 million.
Research revenue
Research revenue was zero for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $11 thousand pertaining to an immaterial agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contribution revenue
Contribution revenue totaled $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.0 million. All contribution revenue relates to the BARDA contract, which began in September 2019. The increase was driven by increased contract activity.
Cost of product revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of product revenue totaled $20.7 million, compared to $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.6 million. The decrease in cost was driven by a $3.2 million decrease in cost attributable to lower T2Dx sales, $0.6 million from a COVID-19 related impairment charge of our T2-owned instruments and components recorded early in 2020, and $0.2 million of lower T2-owned instrument depreciation primarily as a result of lower carrying value of T2-owned instruments subsequent to the impairment charge in the first quarter of 2020. These decreases are partially offset by $1.3 million of costs related to higher consumables sales primarily from T2SARSCoV-2, $1.4 million of increased costs due to increased T2Dx production levels in 2021 compared to 2020, a $0.3 million of higher service and repair costs, $0.2 million of royalties, and $0.2 million of increased quality control testing.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.7 million. The increase was driven by a $1.5 million increase in higher payroll costs due to increased headcount, an increase of $1.5 million in lab and facility expenses primarily for the BARDA contract, an increase of $1.0 million in information technology support, an increase of $0.9 million in consulting expenses related to our BARDA agreement, an increase of $0.6 million due to higher materials costs and an increase of $0.2 million due to increased internal usage for research and development projects.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.4 million. The increase is driven by an increase in payroll related expenses of $2.9 million due to increased headcount, an increase of $2.7 million in stock-based compensation expense largely due to modifications related to Mr. McDonough’s resignation agreement, an increase of $0.9 million due to increased information technology support, an increase of $0.6 million of increased marketing research and tradeshow and conference expenses, an increase of $0.3 million of increased investor relations for the Annual Shareholder Meeting, an increase of $0.2 million of increased director fees primarily from to the payment associated with Mr. McDonough’s resignation, an increase of $0.2 million of Service software and support fees, an increase of $0.1 million of dues & subscriptions, and an increase of $0.1 million of increased Service travel related expenses. These increases were partially offset by $0.7 million of lower consulting expenses primarily driven by less temporary help related to final cyber-recovery efforts in early 2020 and less work incurred for Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and a Board members search, a decrease of $0.5 million related to an impairment charge of a vacated operating lease that was recorded in 2020, and a decrease of $0.4 million of fewer legal expenses related to financings and the CEO transition.
Interest income
Interest income was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $0.1 million was due to the maturity of our marketable securities.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense increased by $1.1 million primarily due to increased interest compounding associated with the CRG Term Loan Agreement, and a lower change in fair value of the derivative associated with the Agreement.
Other income, net
Other income, net, was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $0.1 million increase is immaterial.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $472.2 million and $423.0 million, respectively. Having obtained clearance from the FDA to market the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida Panel, and T2Bacteria Panel in the US and CE marked the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida Panel, T2Bacteria Panel and T2Resistance Panel in the EU, we have incurred significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We may seek to continue to fund our operations through public equity or private equity or debt financings, as well as other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements if and when needed would have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition and our ability to develop and commercialize T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida Panel, T2Bacteria Panel, T2Resistance Panel, and T2SARS-CoV-2 Panel and other product candidates.
Historically, we have funded our operations primarily through our August 2014 initial public offering, our December 2015 public offering, our September 2016 private investment in public equity (“PIPE”) financing, our September 2017 public offering, our June 2018 public offering, our July 2019 establishment of an Equity Distribution Agreement and Equity Purchase Agreement (Note 7), our March 2021 establishment of an Equity Distribution Agreement (Note 7), private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock and debt financing arrangements.
In July 2021, our shareholders approved of an increase in the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 200,000,000 to 400,000,000.
Equity Distribution Agreement
On July 30, 2019, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Original Sales Agreement”) with Canaccord Genuity LLC, as agent (“Canaccord”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of common stock in an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act, for aggregate gross sale proceeds of up to $30.0 million from time to time through Canaccord. On March 9, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Original Sales Agreement to increase the aggregate gross sales amount from $30.0 million to $65.0 million. On April 8, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Original Sales Agreement to increase the aggregate gross sales amount from $65.0 million to $95.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 101,606,667 shares of common stock with an aggregate gross sales amount of $95.0 million.
On March 31, 2021, we entered into another Sales Agreement with Canaccord (“New Sales Agreement”), as agent, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of common stock, for aggregate gross sale proceeds of up to $75.0 million from time to time from the effective date of the respective registration statement through Canaccord. We sold 16,809,424 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $20.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We agreed to pay Canaccord for its services of acting as agent 3% of the gross proceeds from the sale of the shares pursuant to the New Sales Agreement. Legal and accounting fees are reclassified to share capital upon issuance of shares under the New Sales Agreements.
Purchase Agreement
On July 29, 2019, we entered into a $30.0 million purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which we were able to sell and issue to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park was obligated to purchase, up to $30.0 million in value of its shares of common stock from time to time over a 36-month period starting from the effective date of the respective registration statement. On April 7, 2020, we terminated the Purchase Agreement, effective April 8, 2020.
In consideration for the execution and delivery of the Purchase Agreement, we issued 413,349 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park.
Plan of operations and future funding requirements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of approximately $22.2 million and $16.8 million, respectively. Our marketable securities of $10.0 million as of December 31, 2021 are held in U.S. treasury securities. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, costs related to our products, clinical trials, laboratory and related supplies, supplies and materials used in manufacturing, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs, beyond what is currently available or on hand, through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and revenue from existing and potential research and development and other collaboration agreements. If we raise additional funds in the future, we may need to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations. We have established protocols for continued manufacturing, distribution and servicing of our products with safe social distancing and personal protective equipment measures and for remote work for employees not essential to on-site operations. To date these measures have been mostly successful but may not continue to function should the pandemic escalate and further impact our personnel. In 2020, our hospital customers restricted our sales team’s access to their facilities and as a result, we had significantly reduced our commercial and general and administrative staffing levels at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to reduce expenses. We have since hired sales and marketing personnel. Although we did not see any material impact to accounts receivable during the year ended December 31, 2021, our exposure may increase if our customers continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including as a result of the spread of variants of the virus. Customers may reduce their purchases of products, depending on their needs and cash flow, which could negatively impact revenue. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with BARDA and should BARDA reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects, our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted. Our shipping carrier’s ability to deliver our products to customers may be disrupted. We have reviewed our suppliers and quantities of key materials and believe we have sufficient stocks and alternate sources of critical materials should our supply chains become disrupted, although raw materials and plastics for the manufacturing of reagents and consumables are in high demand, and interruptions in supply are difficult to predict. At the onset of the pandemic, we believed that the pandemic’s impact on our sales would affect the recoverability of the value of our T2-
owned instruments and components. In early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly, which resulted in an additional charge to cost of product revenue for excess inventories.
Going Concern
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $33.8 million at December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to fund our current operating plan at least a year from issuance of these financial statements. Certain elements of our operating plan cannot be considered probable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, management implemented a cost improvement strategy which is focused on reducing operating expenses and improving cost of goods sold.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“CRG”) (Note 6) has certain covenants which require us to achieve certain annual revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments, and maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. In June 2021, we achieved the revenue covenant for the twenty-four month period beginning January 1, 2020. There can be no assurances that we will continue to be in compliance with the cash covenant in future periods without additional funding. In February 2022 CRG amended the Term Loan Agreement extending the interest only period and maturity to December 30, 2023.
On November 5, 2021, we received a letter from The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) indicating that, for the last thirty consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below the minimum $1.00 per share requirement for continued listing on the Nasdaq Global Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). Under Nasdaq rules, we have 180 days (May 4, 2022) to regain compliance by increasing the stock price to over $1.00. We plan to regain compliance by executing on its operating plans to organically drive the share price to compliance. We currently have no plan for a reverse stock split.
These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Management's plans to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt include raising additional funding, earning payments pursuant to our contract with BARDA, delaying certain research projects and capital expenditures and eliminating certain future operating expenses in order to fund operations at reduced levels for us to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. Management has concluded the likelihood that its plan to successfully obtain sufficient funding from one or more of these sources or adequately reduce expenditures, while reasonably possible, is less than probable. Accordingly, we have concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of the uncertainties described above.
Cash flows
The following is a summary of cash flows for each of the periods set forth below:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $38.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $49.2 million, an adjustment for non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense of $7.1 million, non-cash interest expense of $3.8 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $1.3 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.3 million, a change in fair value of derivative of $1.0 million, amortization of bond premium of $0.2 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $2.2 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $1.2 million, a decrease in deferred revenue of $0.1 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.5 million primarily related to deposits made and software subscription renewals, and an increase in inventories of $1.9 million due to bulk materials purchases for favorable pricing, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $0.8 million due to timing of payments, and an increase in accrued expenses of $0.8 million, mostly due to increased employee costs.
Net cash used in operating activities was $43.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $46.8 million, an adjustment for non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense of $3.9 million, non-cash interest expense of $3.2 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $1.7 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.5 million, a change in fair value of derivative of $1.4 million, COVID-19 related impairment charge of $0.6 million of our T2-owned instruments and components, an impairment of one of our operating lease assets of $0.5 million, amortization of bond premium of $0.1 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $2.7 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $2.2 million due to higher consumable and instrument sales shipped near quarter end, a decrease in accounts payable of $1.6 million due to timing of payments, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.1 million primarily related to order deposits with our contract manufacturer and increased software subscriptions, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $0.4 million primarily from bonus, $0.4 million of a decrease in inventory primarily due to increased sales and an increase in deferred revenue of $0.3 million primarily due to warranty and service performance obligations associated with the recent instrument sales.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted of $25.3 million of proceeds from the maturities of marketable securities, offset by $0.5 million of costs to acquire property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted of $50.7 million of purchases of marketable securities and $0.8 million of costs to acquire property and equipment, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $15.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $20.0 million under the Sales Agreement, and net proceeds of $0.6 million from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $85.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $85.0 million under the Sales Agreement, net proceeds of $0.3 million under the Purchase Agreement and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan of $0.3 million.
Borrowing Arrangements
Term Loan Agreement
In December 2016, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement with CRG. We borrowed $40.0 million pursuant to the Term Loan Agreement, which has a six-year term with three years (through December 30, 2019) of interest-only payments, which period was extended to four years (through December 30, 2020) upon achieving the Approval Milestone, after which quarterly principal and interest payments would be due through the December 30, 2022 maturity date. In February 2022, we amended our agreement with CRG to extend the maturity date from December 30, 2022 to December 30, 2023. Interest on the amounts borrowed under the Term Loan Agreement accrues at an annual fixed rate of (a) prior to the Approval Milestone, 12.50%, 4.0% of which may be deferred during the interest-only period by adding such amount to the aggregate principal loan amount and (b) following the Approval Milestone, 11.50%, 3.5% of which may be deferred during the interest-only period by adding such amount to the aggregate principal loan amount. In addition, if we achieve certain financial performance metrics, the loan will convert to interest-only until the December 30, 2023 maturity, at which time all unpaid principal and accrued unpaid interest will be due and payable. We are required to pay CRG a financing fee based on the loan principal amount drawn. We are also required to pay a final payment fee of 8%, subsequently amended to 10%, of the principal outstanding upon repayment. We are accruing the final payment fee as interest expense and it is included as a non-current liability at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 on the balance sheet.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG is classified as a non-current liability at December 31, 2021 as we have the intent and ability to refinance the short-term obligation on a long-term basis. The Term Loan Agreement is classified as a non-current liability at December 31, 2020 as we have sufficient cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities such that the minimum liquidity covenant would not be triggered.
We have assessed the classification of the note payable as non-current based on facts and circumstances as of the date of this filing, specifically as it relates to achieving the minimum liquidity and revenue covenants. In June 2021, we achieved the twenty-four month revenue covenant for the period beginning January 1, 2020. Management continues to reassess at each balance sheet and filing date based on facts and circumstances and can provide no assurances regarding the probability of meeting its minimum liquidity covenant in future periods.
We may prepay all or a portion of the outstanding principal and accrued unpaid interest under the Term Loan Agreement at any time upon prior notice subject to a certain prepayment fee during the first five years of the term and no prepayment fee thereafter. As security for our obligations under the Term Loan Agreement, we entered into a security agreement with CRG whereby we granted a lien on substantially all of its assets, including intellectual property. The Term Loan Agreement also contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for a credit facility of this size and type, including a requirement to maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. The Term Loan Agreement also requires us to achieve certain revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments.
In 2019, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to reduce minimum revenue targets, extend the interest-only period and extend the principal repayment. The final payment fee was increased from 8% to 10% of the principal amount outstanding upon repayment. We issued to CRG warrants to purchase 568,291 shares of the Company’s common stock (“New Warrants”) (Note 9) at an exercise price of $1.55, with typical provisions for termination upon a change of control or a sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Company. We also reduced the exercise price for the warrants previously issued to CRG to purchase an aggregate of 528,958 shares of our common stock to $1.55. All of the New Warrants are exercisable any time prior to September 9, 2029, and all of the previously issued warrants are exercisable any time prior to December 30, 2026.
In January 2021, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to extend the interest-only payment period through December 30, 2022, to extend the initial principal repayment to December 30, 2022, and to significantly reduce the revenue covenant for the 24-month period beginning on January 1, 2020. We did not pay or provide any consideration in exchange for this amendment. We accounted for the January 2021 amendment as a modification to the Term Loan Agreement.
In February 2022, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to extend the interest-only payment period through December 30, 2023, and to extend the initial principal repayment to December 30, 2023. We did not pay or provide any consideration in exchange for this amendment. We will account for the February 2022 amendment as a modification to the Term Loan Agreement.
The Term Loan Agreement includes a subjective acceleration clause whereby an event of default, including a material adverse change in the business, operations, or conditions (financial or otherwise), could result in the acceleration of the obligations under the Term Loan Agreement. Under certain circumstances, a default interest rate of an additional 4.0% per annum will apply at the election of CRG on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default. CRG has not exercised its right under this clause.
We assessed the terms and features of the Term Loan Agreement, including the interest-only period dependent on the achievement of the Approval Milestone and the acceleration of the obligations under the Term Loan Agreement under an event of default, of the Term Loan Agreement in order to identify any potential embedded features that would require bifurcation. In addition, under certain circumstances, a default interest rate of an additional 4.0% per annum will apply at the election of CRG on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default, we concluded that the features of the Term Loan Agreement are not clearly and closely related to the host instrument, and represent a single compound derivative that is required to be re-measured at fair value on a quarterly basis.
The fair value of the derivative at December 31, 2020 is $1.0 million and is classified as a non-current liability on the balance sheet at December 31, 2020 to match the classification of the related Term Loan Agreement. In June 2021, we achieved the revenue covenant for the twenty-four month period beginning January 1, 2020 and therefore have no derivative liability at December 31, 2021.
Contingent Liabilities and Commitments, Including Tax Matters
We have net deferred tax assets of $84.8 million as of December 31, 2021, which have been fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. The deferred tax assets are primarily composed of federal net operating loss (“NOL”), tax carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $267.9 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any. Out of the total NOL carryforwards of $267.9 million, $78.7 million begin to expire in 2036 and $189.2 million carryforward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, we had state NOL carryforwards of $284.4 million, of which $250.8 million expire at various dates through 2041 and $33.6 million is carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal tax credit carryforwards of $1.6 million and state tax credit carryforwards of $1.5 million which expire at various dates through 2041 and 2036, respectively.
In 2020, we completed a 382 study of our cumulative net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. As a result, there were limitations placed on the use of our loss and credit carryforwards from 2019 and prior periods. In 2021, we completed a study with no changes to the 2020 study. If we experience a Section 382 ownership change in connection as a result of future changes in our stock ownership, some of which changes are outside of our control, the tax benefits related to the NOL and tax credit carryforwards may be limited or lost.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our accounting policies and significant judgments.