Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part IV, Item 15(a) in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Background
We are one of the original off-price retailers and a leading destination for unique home and lifestyle goods, selling high-quality products at prices generally below those found in boutique, specialty and department stores, catalogs, and on-line retailers. Our customers come to us for an ever-changing, exceptional assortment of brand names at great prices. Our strong value proposition has established a loyal customer base, who we engage regularly with social media, email, and digital media.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse effect on our business operations, store traffic, employee availability, financial conditions, results of operations, liquidity and cash flow. On March 25, 2020, we temporarily closed all of our stores nationwide, severely reducing revenues, resulting in significant operating losses and the elimination of substantially all operating cash flow. In May 2020, we filed voluntary petitions under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. During the pendency of our Chapter 11 proceedings, we continued to operate our businesses as “debtors-in-possession” under the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court. As allowed by state and local jurisdictions, our stores gradually reopened as of the end of June 2020. In accordance with our bankruptcy plan of reorganization, described below, we completed the permanent closure of 197 stores in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and the closure of our Phoenix, Arizona distribution center (“Phoenix distribution center”) in second quarter of fiscal 2021. In addition, as part of our restructuring, we secured financing to pay creditors in accordance with the plan of reorganization and to fund planned operations and expenditures. We emerged from our Chapter 11 proceedings on December 31, 2020. See Notes 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 and 11 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our Chapter 11 proceedings and related financings.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition will depend on future developments, including future surges in incidences of COVID-19 and the severity of any such resurgence, the rate and efficacy of vaccinations against COVID-19, the length of time that impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic continue, how fast economies will fully recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, the timing and extent of further impacts on traffic and consumer spending in our stores, the extent and duration of ongoing impacts to domestic and international supply chains and the related impacts on the flow, and availability and cost of products.
Refinancing Transactions
•Since the Company’s emergence from bankruptcy in December 2020, the Company’s results of operations have been negatively impacted by a variety of factors, including pandemic-related disruptions to supply chains and higher supply chain costs resulting from higher freight costs and other supply chain conditions, and reduced store traffic and sales as a result of increased fuel prices. In order to bolster the Company’s liquidity, on May 9, 2022, the Company, Borrower and each other subsidiary of the Company entered into the New ABL Credit Agreement. The New ABL Credit Agreement replaced the asset-based revolving credit facility the Company entered into upon its emergence from bankruptcy. The New ABL Credit Agreement provides for (i) a revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount of $110.0 million (the “New ABL Facility”), which includes a $10.0 million sublimit for swingline loans and a $25.0 million sublimit for letters of credit, (ii) a first-in last-out term loan facility in an aggregate amount of $5.0 million (the “FILO A Facility”) and (iii) an additional first-in last-out term loan facility in an aggregate amount of $5.0 million (the “FILO B Facility” and, collectively with the New ABL Facility and the FILO A Facility, the “New Facilities”). In addition, under the original terms of the New ABL Credit Agreement, the Borrower had the right, on and following November 9, 2022, to request (x) an additional incremental loan under the FILO B Facility in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5.0 million (the “FILO B Delayed Incremental Loan”), and (y) additional incremental commitments from the FILO B lenders to make additional loans in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5.0 million, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions.
•On May 9, 2022, the Company, the Borrower and certain subsidiaries of the Company entered into the May 2022 Term Loan Amendment. Pursuant to the May 2022 Term Loan Amendment, among other things, (1) the Company agreed, among things, to repurchase a portion of the outstanding principal amount of the outstanding indebtedness (the “Term Loan”) under the Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Loan Repurchase”) and concurrently with the consummation of the Loan Repurchase, each Consenting Lender agreed to waive and forgive an amount of the accrued and unpaid interest owed to such Consenting Lender, and (2) the Term Loan Credit Agreement was amended to, among other things, (a) provide that the Borrower and its subsidiaries shall not permit the borrowing availability under the New ABL Facility to be less than the greater of (A) $7.5 million and (B) 7.5% of the Modified Revolving Loan Cap (as defined in the New ABL Credit Agreement), and (b) require the Company’s compliance with a total secured net leverage ratio commencing with the 12-month period ending September 30, 2023.
•Subsequent to May 2022, the Company experienced a further significant deterioration in its financial condition and liquidity. On the July 11, 2022, the Company, the Borrower, certain other subsidiaries of the Company entered into the July 2022 ABL Amendment. Pursuant to the July 2022 ABL Amendment, the lenders agreed to make the $5 million FILO B Delayed Incremental Loan to the Borrower on July 11, 2022. The July 2022 ABL Amendment also provides that, until certain minimum borrowing availability levels are satisfied as described in the July 2022 ABL Amendment, the Borrower will be subject to additional reporting obligations, the Borrower will retain a third-party business consultant acceptable to the administrative agent, and the administrative agent may elect to apply amounts in controlled deposit accounts to the repayment of outstanding borrowings under the New ABL Facility. In addition, pursuant to the July 2022 ABL Amendment, certain subsidiaries of the Borrower agreed to enter into and maintain a supply agreement with Gordon Brothers Retail Partners, LLC (the “Program Agent”), an affiliate of a FILO B lender, pursuant to which the Program Agent supplies inventory to the Borrower and certain of its subsidiaries. In connection with the July 2022 ABL Amendment, the Term Loan Credit Agreement was further amended to make certain conforming changes.
For additional information regarding the New ABL Credit Agreement and the Term Loan Credit Agreement, see Notes 3 and 12 to our consolidated financial statements.
•Over the last three months, the Company also has engaged in an extensive process to obtain additional financing to support the Company’s capital needs. On September 20, 2022, the Company and the Borrower entered into the Note Purchase Agreement, which provided for the $35 million Private Placement. On September 20, 2022, the Private Placement closed with the SPV purchasing (i) $7.5 million in aggregate principal amount of the FILO C Convertible Notes, and (ii) $24.5 million in aggregate principal amount of the SPV Convertible Notes. In addition, members of the Company’s management team purchased $3.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Management Convertible Notes.
•The Convertible Debt is convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $0.077 per share, subject to anti-dilution adjustments. A portion of the Convertible Debt issued to the SPV was immediately convertible for up to 90 million shares of the Company’s common stock. On September 21, 2022, the SPV elected to immediately convert a portion of the Convertible Debt into 90 million shares of the Company's common stock, and the SPV acquired a majority of the Company’s outstanding common stock. Upon conversion in full of the Convertible Debt and based on the Company's outstanding shares on a fully diluted basis as of September 21, 2022, the SPV would hold approximately 75% of the total diluted voting power of the Company’s common stock (not including any additional Convertible Debt that may be issued if the Company is required or elects to make in-kind payments of interest during the two-year period following closing of the Private Placement).
•In accordance with the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement, the SPV designated each of Tai Lopez, Alexander Mehr, Maya Burkenroad, Sandip Patel and James Harris (collectively, the “SPV Designees”) to serve as directors of the Company effective upon the closing of the Private Placement on September 20, 2022. In connection with the election the SPV Designees to the Company’s board of directors, each of Douglas J. Dossey, Frank M. Hamlin, W. Paul Jones, John Hartnett Lewis and Sherry M. Smith resigned from the Company’s board of directors. Each of the remaining incumbent directors Fred Hand, Anthony F. Crudele, Marcelo Podesta and Reuben E. Slone continued to serve on the board following the closing of the Private Placement. Each of Messrs. Crudele, Podesta and Slone are expected to resign from the Company’s board of directors following the filing of this Annual Report, and three additional independent directors will be elected to the board in accordance with the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement.
•The Nasdaq Stock Market rules would normally require stockholder approval prior to closing the Private Placement; however, the Company requested and received a financial viability exception to the stockholder approval requirement pursuant to Nasdaq Stock Market Rule 5635(f). The financial viability exception allows an issuer to issue securities upon prior written application to Nasdaq when the delay in securing stockholder approval of such issuance would seriously jeopardize the financial viability of the company. As required by Nasdaq rules, the Company’s Audit Committee, which is comprised solely of independent and disinterested directors, expressly approved reliance on the financial viability exception in connection with the Private Placement and related transactions.
•As a result of the Private Placement, a change of control of the Company occurred, which is triggering event for Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code, its impact on the realization of positive tax attributes will be evaluated immediately. It is expected to result in likely restrictions on the Company’s ability to use its net operating losses and certain other tax
attributes in future periods.
•In connection with the Private Placement, certain amendments were made to the New ABL Credit Agreement and the Term Loan Credit Agreement to permit the Private Placement.
For additional information regarding the Private Placement, see Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements.
Key Metrics for Fiscal 2022
Key operating metrics for continuing operations for the year ended July 2, 2022, include:
•Net sales for fiscal 2022 were $749.8 million, an increase of $59.0 million or 8.5%, compared to $690.8 million for the same period last year, concurrent with an increase in comparable store sales of 11.3%.
•Gross margin for fiscal 2022 was 25.6%, compared to 29.8% for fiscal 2021.
•Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2022 decreased $3.3 million to $240.9 million, from $244.2 million for fiscal 2021.
•Restructuring, impairment, and abandonment charges were $2.5 million during fiscal 2022, compared to $10.8 million during fiscal 2021, related to the executive severance and employee retention cost of $0.5 million, and software abandonment charges of $2.0 million.
•Reorganization items were a net cost of $1.0 million during fiscal 2022 related primarily to $0.6 million in claims related costs, and $0.4 million in related professional and legal fees.
•Our net loss for fiscal 2022 was $59.0 million, or diluted net loss per share of $0.70 compared to net earnings for fiscal 2021 of $3.0 million, or diluted net earnings per share of $0.05.
•As shown under the heading “Non-GAAP Financials Measures” below, EBITDA was negative $38.4 million for fiscal 2022 compared to $26.9 million for fiscal 2021. Adjusted EBITDA was negative $30.5 million for fiscal 2022 compared to negative $20.3 million for fiscal 2021.
Key balance sheet and liquidity metrics for the year ended July 2, 2022, include:
•Cash and cash equivalents at July 2, 2022, increased $1.3 million to $7.8 million from $6.5 million at June 30, 2021. Cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, at July 2, 2022 decreased $21.1 million to $7.8 million from $28.9 million at June 30, 2021. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents including restricted cash were driven by payments for bankruptcy court approved petition claims, legal and professional fees and payments to the Company vendors for inventory. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•As of July 2, 2022, total liquidity, defined as cash and cash equivalents plus $10.3 million availability for borrowing under the New ABL Facility, and less $6.3 million in credit card receivables was $11.8 million. In addition, we had $57.2 million of borrowings outstanding under the New ABL Facility and, $14.6 million of letters of credit outstanding.
•Inventory levels at July 2, 2022, increased $3.4 million to $148.5 million from $145.1 million at June 30, 2021. Inventory levels at July 2, 2022, were low driven by our conservative approach to merchandise receipts given the uncertainty of the macroeconomic environment and the potential impact on our sales. Inventory turnover for the trailing five quarters as of July 2, 2022, was 3.8 turns, a decrease from the trailing five quarter turnover as of June 30, 2021, of 3.9 turns, and was un-favorably impacted by merchandise sell-through rates.
Store Data
The following table presents information with respect to our stores in operation during each of the fiscal periods:
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, selected statement of operations data, expressed as a percentage of net sales. There can be no assurance that the trends in sales or operating results will continue in the future.
See Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements herein for a discussion of restructuring, impairment, and abandonment charges, as well as reorganization items.
2022 Compared with 2021
Net sales for fiscal 2022 were $749.8 million, an increase of 8.5%, compared to $690.8 million for the same period last year, primarily due to COVID-19 pandemic which negatively impacted the first six months of fiscal year 2021. New stores are included in the same store sales calculation starting with the sixteenth month following the date of the store opening. A store that relocates within the same geographic market or modifies its available retail space is generally considered the same store for purposes of this computation. Stores that are closed are included in the computation of comparable store sales until the month of closure. The increase in comparable store sales was due to 8.8% increase in average ticket and 1.9% increase in customer transactions. Further, we experienced store level inventory challenges due in part to an ongoing effort to overhaul the supply chain processes, and mitigations for the global disruptions to the supply chain. Non-comparable store sales increased by a total of $59.0 million. Non-comparable store sales include the net effect of sales from new stores and sales from stores that have closed. We expect inventory levels to increase throughout the fall and expect supply chain costs to remain elevated due to higher freight costs and other supply chain conditions.
Gross margin for fiscal 2022 was $191.8 million, a decrease of 6.9% compared to $206.0 million for fiscal 2021. As a percentage of net sales, gross margin decreased to 25.6% in fiscal 2022 compared with 29.8% in fiscal 2021. The decrease in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of higher supply chain and transportation costs recognized in the current year, partially offset by lower markdowns.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) decreased $3.3 million to $240.9 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $244.2 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease was due to lower store expenses on a smaller store base, including a significant decrease in store rents for both closed stores and renegotiated rents for the ongoing store base. Subsequent to the filing of the Chapter 11 proceedings, we commenced negotiations with our landlords on substantially all of our ongoing leases, resulting in significant modifications and reduced lease costs. Labor costs and depreciation were also lower on the smaller base. Also contributing to the favorable comparison were reduced advertising costs and lower corporate expenses. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A decreased 320 basis points to 32.1% for fiscal 2022, compared to 35.3% in fiscal year 2021.
Restructuring, impairment, and abandonment charges were $2.5 million during fiscal 2022, compared to $10.8 million during fiscal 2021, related to a software impairment charge of $2.0 million as well as $0.5 million in employee retention costs. These costs during fiscal 2021, were charges primarily related to executive severance and employee retention cost of $3.6 million, and intangible impairment charge of $1.6 million, as well as abandonment costs of $5.6 million related to the permanent closure of our stores and the Phoenix distribution center. Decisions regarding store closures and the Phoenix distribution center were made in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, prior to filing the Chapter 11 Cases; however, the closure of the Phoenix distribution center was not completed until the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Our operating loss was $51.5 million during fiscal 2022 as compared to an operating loss of $49.0 million for fiscal 2021, an increase of $2.5 million. The operating loss in the current year was primarily the result of higher net sales, being driven by increased sales, lower restructuring, impairment, and abandonment charges, offset by lower margins from higher supply chain and transportation costs as discussed above.
Interest expense decreased $1.0 million to $7.2 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $8.2 million in the prior year. The decrease in fiscal 2022 primarily due to the amortization of financing fees incurred on our new revolving credit facility and our debtor-in-possession financing agreements, and accrued interest on our term loan. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Reorganization items were a net expense of $1.0 million for fiscal 2022 compared to a net benefit of $60.0 million in fiscal 2021. The net expense during fiscal 2022 related primarily to $0.6 million loss of claims related cost and $0.4 million of professional and legal fees related to our reorganization. For fiscal 2021, reorganization items related primarily to a $66.2 million net gain from store lease terminations and the termination of our Phoenix distribution center lease under our permanent closure plan and a $49.6 million gain due from the sale-leaseback transactions pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization. These benefits were partially offset by $34.6 million in professional and legal fees related to our reorganization as well as $20.0 million in non-cash charges related to execution of our Rights Offering.
Income tax expense for fiscal 2022 was $0.1 million compared to $0.3 million in fiscal 2021. The effective tax rates for fiscal 2022 and 2021 were (0.1%) and 8.9%, respectively. We currently believe the expected effects on future year effective tax rates to continue to be nominal until the cumulative losses and valuation allowance are fully utilized. A full valuation allowance is currently recorded against substantially all of our net deferred tax assets at July 2, 2022. The total valuation allowance at the end of fiscal years 2022, and 2021, was $68.0 million and $53.7 million, respectively. A deviation from the customary relationship between income tax benefit and pretax income results from utilization of the valuation allowance.
Our net loss for fiscal 2022 was $59.0 million, or diluted net loss per share of $0.70 compared to net earnings for fiscal 2021 of $3.0 million, or diluted net earnings per share of $0.05.
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2021, Compared to Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020
For a discussion of fiscal 2021 results of operations as compared to fiscal 2020 results of operations, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, filed with the SEC on September 13, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We define EBITDA as net income or net loss before interest, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA reflects further adjustments to EBITDA to eliminate the impact of certain items, including certain non-cash items and other items that we believe are not representative of our core operating performance. These measures are not presentations made in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income or loss as a measure of operating performance. In addition, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not presented as a measure of liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by such adjustments. We believe it is useful for investors to see these EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA measures that management uses to evaluate our operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures are included to supplement our financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and because we use these measures to monitor and evaluate the performance of our business as a supplement to GAAP measures and we believe the presentation of these non-GAAP measures enhances investors’ ability to analyze trends in our business and evaluate our performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. The non-GAAP measures presented may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table reconciles net earnings (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure (in thousands):
1)Adjustment includes charges related to share-based compensation programs, which vary from period to period depending on volume, timing and vesting of awards. We adjust for these charges to facilitate comparisons from period to period.
2)For the year ended July 2, 2022, adjustments include restructuring and abandonment costs primarily related to a software impairment charge of $2.0 million and $0.5 million in employee retention costs. For the year ended June 30, 2021, adjustments include restructuring and abandonment costs primarily related to $3.6 million to executive severance and employee retention cost, intangible impairment charge of a $1.6 million as well as abandonment cost of $5.6 million related to the permanent closure of our stores and the Phoenix distribution center. Decisions regarding store closures and the Phoenix distribution center were made in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, prior to filing the Chapter 11 Cases; however, the closure of the Phoenix distribution center was not completed until the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
3)For the year ended July 2, 2022, reorganization items net charges is $1.0 million from claims-related costs including professional and legal fees. For the year ended June 30, 2021, adjustments include a net $66.2 million gain due to the leases for store locations related to our permanent closure plan, as well as the lease for our Phoenix distribution center, which were rejected and the related lease liabilities were reduced to the amount of estimated claims allowable by the Bankruptcy Court (See note 1) as well as a $49.6 million gain due to the execution of a sale-leaseback agreement during the second quarter of 2021 on our owned real estate as part of our Plan of Reorganization (see note 1 and note 8). These were partially offset by reorganization costs primarily related to $34.6 million in professional & legal fees related to our reorganization as well as $20.0 million in non-cash charges related to the execution of our Rights Offering (see Note 1 and 7).
4)For the year ended July 2, 2022, adjustments included non-cash benefit recognized related to cash settled awards in our long-term incentive plan, as well as gain on refinancing of the Post-Emergence ABL Facility (see Note 3).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In fiscal 2022, cash used in operating activities was $61.6 million, compared to cash used in operating activities of $158.1 million in the prior fiscal year. Net cash used in operations in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by inventory purchases and payments of operating expenses as part of ordinary course of business. In fiscal 2021, net cash used in operations was primarily driven by payments for bankruptcy court approved pre-petition claims, legal and professional fees and payments to the Company’s vendors for inventory.
Cash flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended July 2, 2022, of $6.5 million related primarily to capital expenditures in enhancements to our store fleet and new stores, as well as investments in technology. Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2021 of $66.7 million related primarily to $68.6 million of proceeds from the sale of our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties in a sale-leaseback transaction under our Plan of Reorganization, along with $1.9 million of property and equipment sold at the 197 stores that we permanently closed and was partially offset by $3.8 million of capital expenditures.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $47.1 million for fiscal 2022 related primarily to the proceeds of $55.2 million from borrowings of $921.5 million and repayments of $866.3 million on our new revolving credit facility, partially offset by the repurchase of a portion of the outstanding principal amount of the Term Loan for $5.0 million and the payment of financing fees of $3.1 million. For additional information regarding our new revolving credit facility and the term loan, see Notes 2, 3 and 7 to our consolidated financial statements. Net cash provided by financing activities of $73.6 million for fiscal 2021 related primarily to the proceeds of $12.0 million from borrowings of $811.1 million and repayments of $799.1 million on our new revolving credit facility, $25.0 million from a term loan and $40.0 million from the Rights Offering, partially offset by the payment of financing fees of $3.2 million.
Capital Resources and Plan of Operation and Funding
Historically, we have financed our operations with funds generated from operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, and borrowings under an asset-based, senior secured revolving credit facility. During the pendency of our bankruptcy proceedings, we financed our operations with funds generated from operating activities and available cash and cash equivalents, and also had in place debtor-in-possession financing arrangements. We made no borrowings under our debtor-in-possession financing arrangements, and both were terminated on December 31, 2020, in connection with our legal emergence from bankruptcy.
Since the Company’s emergence from bankruptcy in December 2020, the Company’s results of operations have been negatively impacted by a variety of factors, including pandemic-related disruptions to supply chains and higher supply chain costs resulting from higher freight costs and other supply chain conditions, reduced store traffic and sales as a result of decades high inflation including increased fuel prices.
As described above, the Company entered into the New ABL Credit Agreement in May 2022 in order to bolster the Company’s liquidity. As of July 2, 2022, cash, and cash equivalents, excluding restricted cash, were $7.8 million and total liquidity, defined as cash and cash equivalents plus the $10.3 million availability for borrowing under the New ABL Facility and less $6.3 million in credit card receivables was $11.8 million.
As described above, the Company made an early borrowing of $5 million under the FILO B Delayed Incremental Loan in July 2022. Subsequent to the July 2022 borrowing, the Company experienced a further deterioration in its financial condition and liquidity and began to withhold payments from vendors beginning in late August 2022 and until completion of the Private Placement on September 20, 2022. The proceeds of the Private Placement were used (i) repay $7.5 million of the FILO A term loans and FILO B term loans under the New ABL Credit Agreement; (ii) repay of a portion of the Borrower’s revolving loans under the New ABL Credit Agreement; and (iii) pay transaction costs not to exceed approximately $5.0 million. In addition, remaining proceeds will be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes of the Company and its subsidiaries.
Going forward, and after giving effect to the proceeds of the Private Placement, we expect to fund our operations with funds generated from operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, and borrowings under the New ABL Facility. For a discussion of material cash requirements, see “Contractual Obligations” below.
Our liquidity may continue to be impacted going forward by factors such as higher supply chain costs resulting from higher freight costs and other supply chain conditions, and reduced store traffic and sales as a result of general economic and inflationary conditions.
Capital expenditures are anticipated to be $5.0 million for fiscal year 2023.
We do not presently have any plans to pay dividends or repurchase shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the New ABL Credit Agreement and the Term Loan and the Convertible Debt, we are subject to restrictions on our ability to pay dividends or repurchase shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the New ABL Credit Agreement and Term Loan, we must maintain certain minimum levels of borrowing availability, and do not anticipate any cash flows would be available for dividend payments.
Debt Covenants
The New ABL Credit Agreement includes conditions to borrowings, representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants, and events of default customary for financings of this type and size. Pursuant to the New ABL Credit Agreement, the Borrower and its subsidiaries must maintain borrowing availability under the New ABL Facility at least equal to the greater of (i) $7.5 million and (ii) 7.5% of the Modified Revolving Loan Cap (as defined in the New ABL Credit Agreement). The Term Loan also includes this minimum borrowing availability covenant.
At July 2, 2022, we were in compliance with covenants in the New ABL Facility and Term Loan respectively. After giving effect to completion of the Private Placement, the Company expects to remain in compliance with such covenants over the next 12 months.
Impact of Inflation
Global inflation has increased significantly over the past year. In the United States, the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers increased 9.1% over the twelve months ended June 30, 2022, as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Company has experienced inflationary impacts as the dollar declines in value, customers' concerns heighten to preserve existing cash to cover for essential needs, which then lead to decline in revenue and increased inventory. Supply chain costs such as freight and shipping are particularly subject to inflationary pressures. We will continue to actively monitor the impact of inflation and the broader economic outlook on our operations and financial results and will take actions as deemed necessary.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our audited year end 2022 consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On a recurring basis, we evaluate our significant estimates which are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets-We evaluate long-lived assets, principally property and equipment, and intangible assets, as well as lease right-of-use ("ROU") assets, for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying values may not be recoverable. Management's judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market conditions and financial performance. Indicators of impairment may also include the planned closure of a store or facility, among others.
Impairment is indicated when the sum of the estimated future cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, is less than the asset’s (asset group’s) carrying amount. Then, when the fair value of the estimated future cash flows, on a discounted basis, is less than carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded. The testing of an asset group for recoverability involves assumptions regarding the future cash flows of the asset group, the growth rate of those cash flows, and the remaining useful life over which an asset group is expected to generate cash flows. In the event we determine an asset group is not recoverable, the measurement of an estimated impairment loss involves a number of management judgments, including the selection of an appropriate discount rate, as well as various unobservable inputs incorporated in valuation techniques used to determine fair value. These assumptions are required to be consistent with market participant assumptions. Fair value determinations require considerable judgment and are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions and factors. Key market participant assumptions used for purposes of determining the fair value of our long-lived assets, including lease ROU assets, in connection with the fiscal 2021 impairment discussed above included market rent assumptions and the discount rate.
If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used to calculate estimated future cash flows, we may be exposed to impairment losses that could be material. Additionally, we can provide no assurance that we will not have additional impairment charges in future periods as a result of changes in our operating results or assumptions.
Asset impairment and abandonment charges totaled $2.0 million and $5.6 million for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively, which were the result of a software abandonment charge, and our closing plans for stores and the Phoenix distribution center.
Our property and equipment, combined with our operating lease ROU assets totaled $185.4 million as of July 2, 2022, or approximately 52.3% of total assets, compared to $231.0 million as of June 30, 2021, or approximately 55.3% of total assets.
Inventory- Our inventories consist of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method for store inventory and the specific identification method for warehouse inventory. We have a perpetual inventory system that tracks on-hand inventory and inventory sold at a stock-keeping unit (“SKU”) level. Inventory is relieved and cost of goods sold is recorded based on the current calculated cost of the item sold. Buying, distribution, freight and certain other costs are capitalized as part of inventory and are charged to cost of sales as the related inventory is sold. The retail inventory method, which is used by a number of our competitors, involves management estimates with regard to items such as markdowns. Such estimates may significantly impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the amount of gross margin recognized.
Our stores conduct annual physical inventories, staggered during the second half of the fiscal year. During periods in which physical inventory observations do not occur, we utilize an estimate for recording inventory shrink based on the historical results of our previous physical inventories. We have loss prevention and inventory controls programs that we believe minimize shrink. The estimated shrink rate may require a favorable or unfavorable adjustment to actual results to the extent that our subsequent actual physical inventory results yield a different result. Although inventory shrink rates have not fluctuated significantly in recent years, if the actual rate were to differ from our estimates, then an adjustment to inventory shrink would be required.
Markdowns-We utilize markdowns to promote the effective and timely sale of merchandise which allows us to consistently provide new merchandise to our customers. We also utilize markdowns coupled with promotional events to drive traffic and stimulate sales. Markdowns may be temporary or permanent. Temporary markdowns are for a designated period of time with markdowns recorded to cost of sales based on quantities sold during the period. Permanent markdowns and damaged goods are recorded to inventory and charged to cost of sales immediately based on the total quantities on hand at the time of the markdown. Markdowns and damages were 4.2% in fiscal 2022 and were 4.3% in fiscal 2021. Markdowns may vary throughout the quarter or year in timing.
The effect of a 0.5% markdown in the value of our inventory at July 2, 2022 would result in a decline in Gross margin and a reduction in our diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2022, of $0.7 million and $0.01 respectively.
Leases- Upon the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” starting in fiscal 2020, we determine whether an agreement contains a lease at inception based on our right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of the identified asset and the right to direct the use of the identified asset. Lease liabilities represent the present value of future lease payments, and the ROU assets represent our right to use the underlying assets for the respective lease terms.
The operating lease liability is measured as the present value of the unpaid lease payments and the ROU asset is derived from the calculation of the operating lease liability. As our leases do not generally provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate to calculate the present value of lease payments. The incremental borrowing rate represents an estimate of the interest rate that would be required to borrow over a similar term, on a collateralized basis in a similar economic environment.
Rent escalations occurring during the term of the leases are included in the calculation of the future minimum lease payments and the rent expense related to these leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. In addition to minimum lease payments, certain leases require payment of a proportionate share of real estate taxes and certain building operating expenses allocated on a percentage of sales in excess of a specified base. These variable lease costs are not included in the measurement of the ROU asset or lease liability due to unpredictability of the payment amount and are recorded as lease expense in the period incurred. We include the lease renewal option periods in the calculation of our operating lease assets and liabilities when it is reasonably certain that we will renew the lease.
Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves-We use a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential liabilities associated with workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Our stop loss limits per claim are $0.5 million for workers’ compensation, $0.3 million for general liability, and $0.2 million for medical. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by us are estimated, in part, by historical claims experience, severity factors and the use of loss development factors by third-party actuaries.
The insurance liabilities we record are primarily influenced by the frequency and severity of claims and include a reserve for claims incurred but not yet reported. Our estimated reserves may be materially different from our future actual claim costs, and, when required adjustments to our estimated reserves are identified, the liability will be adjusted accordingly in that period. Our self-insurance reserves for workers’ compensation, general liability and medical were $6.9 million, $0.6 million, and $1.0 million, respectively, at July 2, 2022 and $7.3 million, $1.2 million, and $1.0 million, respectively, at June 30, 2021.
We recognize insurance expenses based on the date of an occurrence of a loss including the actual and estimated ultimate costs of our claims. Claims paid reduce our reserves and our current period insurance expense is adjusted for the difference in prior period recorded reserves and actual payments. Current period insurance expenses also include the amortization of our premiums paid to our insurance carriers. Expenses for workers’ compensation, general liability and medical insurance were $2.3 million, $3.4 million, and $7.0 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended July 2, 2022; $1.4 million, $3.7 million and $7.8 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; and $2.7 million, $3.3 million and $8.7 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020.
Income taxes- We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in our consolidated balance sheets. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that such assets will be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, all available evidence is considered including past operating results, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, estimates of future income and tax planning strategies. We have elected to utilize the “with and without” method for purposes of determining when excess tax benefits will be realized. We are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions, including the United States, various states and localities. At any point in time, we may not be subject to audit by any of the various jurisdictions; however, we record estimated reserves for uncertain tax benefits for potential domestic tax audits. The timing of these audits and negotiations with taxing authorities may affect the ultimate settlement of these issues. If different assumptions had been used, our tax expense or benefit, assets and liabilities could have varied from recorded amounts. If actual results differ from estimated results or if we adjust these assumptions in the future, we may need to adjust our reserves for uncertain tax benefits or our deferred tax assets or liabilities, which could impact our effective tax rate.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of July 2, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
We have 489 stores with total rent expense of $77.3 million, $73.5 million, and $118.3 million in fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020 respectively. Our distribution center rent for fiscal 2022 was $9.1 million compared to $9.6 million in fiscal 2021 and $7.3 million in fiscal 2020. This is due to our having sold our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties and land, in a sale-leaseback transaction and the additional rent incurred by that change and partially offset by a decrease in rent associated with Phoenix distribution center.
Contractually required payments for maintenance, insurance and taxes on our leased properties are estimated as a percentage of rent based on historical trends. These amounts can vary based on multiple factors including inflation, macroeconomic conditions, various local tax rates and appraised values of our rental properties. The operating lease obligations include the lease obligations of our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
We do not consider most merchandise purchase orders to be contractual obligations due to designated cancellation dates on the face of the purchase order.
On May 9, 2022, the Company entered into the New ABL Credit Agreement and used a portion of the proceeds from borrowings under the New Facilities to repay all outstanding indebtedness under the Post-Emergence ABL Facility, along with accrued interest, expenses, and fees. As of July 2, 2022, we had $57.2 million of borrowings outstanding under the New ABL Facility and, $14.6 million of letters of credit outstanding. On July 11, 2022, pursuant to the Amendment of the New ABL Facility, the FILO B Lenders agreed to make the FILO B Delayed Incremental Loan to the Company in an aggregate amount of $5.0 million on July 11, 2022, instead of November 9, 2022.
On December 31, 2020, the Company, Alter Domus (US), LLC, as administrative agent, and the lenders named therein including Tensile Capital Partners Master Fund LP and affiliates of Osmium Partners, LLC, entered into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, which provided for a Term Loan of $25.0 million to the Company.
Pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Term Loan has a maturity date of December 31, 2024, and bears interest at a rate of 14% per annum, with interest payable in-kind. The Term Loan is subject to optional prepayment after the first anniversary
of the date of issuance at prepayment price equal to the greater of (1) the original principal amount of the Term Loan plus accrued interest thereon, and (2) 125% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan. The Term Loan is subject to mandatory prepayment in connection with a change of control of the Company as described in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also includes customary covenants and events of default. As of July 2, 2022, the outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan was $24.0 million, net of debt issuance costs. For additional information regarding the New ABL Facility and the Term Loan, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
On September 20, 2022, the Company incurred $7.5 million in borrowings under the FILO C Convertible Notes and $27.5 million of borrowings under the Junior Convertible Notes. The FILO C Convertible Notes and the Junior Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of SOFR plus 6.50%. Interest on the Convertible Debt is payable semiannually. Under the terms of the Convertible Debt, during the two-year period following the closing of the Private Placement, the Borrower may elect to pay interest on the Convertible Debt “in kind” by increasing the principal of the Convertible Debt by the amount of any such interest payable. The provisions of the intercreditor agreements relating to the Convertible Debt and other outstanding indebtedness of the Company require such payments to be made “in-kind” subject to certain limited exceptions applicable after the second anniversary of the closing of the Private Placement. On September 21, in connection with the SPV’s election to immediately convert a portion of the Junior Convertible Notes for 90,000,000 shares of the Company’s commons stock, $6,930,000 in aggregate principal amount of the Junior Convertible Notes were retired.
Though our self-insurance reserves represent an estimate of our future obligation and not a contractual payment obligation, we have disclosed our self-insurance reserves under "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves."
Seasonality
Our business is subject to seasonality, with a higher level of our net sales and operating income generated during the quarter ending December 31, which includes the holiday shopping season. Net sales in the quarters ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 accounted for approximately 34%, 29%, and 37% of our annual net sales for fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The rate for fiscal 2022 is impacted by the change in calendar year as defined above.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.