Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following is a discussion of the results of operations for 2021, 2020, and 2019 and changes in financial condition during 2021 and 2020. This information should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Report.
The Company primarily designs innovative, functional, and environmentally responsible products to help store, serve, and prepare food. The core of the Tupperware brand product line consists of design-centric preparation, storage, and serving solutions for the kitchen and home, in addition to lines of cookware, knives, microwave products, microfiber textiles, water-filtration related items, and an array of products for on-the-go consumers. Products are primarily sold directly to independent distributors, directors, managers, and dealers (the "sales force") throughout the world. Sales force members purchase products at a discount from the Company and then sell them to their customers. Sales methods can differ based on the market. The Company is largely dependent upon the sales force and individuals to reach the end customer, and any significant disruption of this distribution network would have a negative financial impact on the Company and its ability to generate sales, earnings, and operating cash flows. The Company’s primary business drivers are the size, activity, diversity and productivity of its independent sales organizations. In 2021, the Company continued to sell directly and/or through its sales force as well as to end consumers via the internet and through business-to-business transactions, in which it sells products to a partner company.
As the impacts of foreign currency translation are an important factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons, the Company believes the presentation of results on a local currency basis, as a supplement to reported results, helps improve the readers’ ability to understand the Company’s operating results and evaluate performance in comparison with prior periods. The Company presents local currency information that compares results between periods as if current period exchange rates had been used to translate results in the prior period. The Company uses results on a local currency basis as one measure to evaluate performance. The Company generally refers to such amounts as calculated on a "local currency" basis, or "excluding the foreign exchange impact." These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with GAAP. Results on a local currency basis may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
COVID-19 impact in 2021 was most pronounced in Asia Pacific and Europe where the Company experienced partial or country-wide lockdowns of operations in various markets which affected financial results and liquidity. While the duration and severity of this pandemic continues to be uncertain due to the new variants, the Company currently expects that its results of operations in the first quarter of 2022 may also be negatively impacted by COVID-19. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts the Company’s business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity may differ from management’s current estimates due to inherent uncertainties regarding the duration and further spread of the outbreak, its severity, actions taken to contain the virus or treat its impact, availability and distribution of vaccines, additional and new variants of the virus, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
In line with the strategy of the Turnaround Plan, as described in Note 3: Re-engineering Charges, the Company decided to dispose of the operations of certain key brands of the Company's beauty business including Avroy Shlain, House of Fuller, Nutrimetics, and Nuvo in order to better focus on the core business. The Company completed the sale of Avroy Shlain in the first quarter of 2021, and as of the fourth quarter, has entered into a definitive purchase agreement for the sale of the House of Fuller business. This transaction is subject to customer closing conditions and is expected to close in the first quarter of 2022. The Company previously had a letter of intent with a potential buyer for Nutrimetics that did not progress into a definitive agreement. The Company has since received non-binding offers from several interested parties and expects to execute a new letter of intent by the second quarter of 2022. The Company is actively exploring strategic alternatives for Nuvo.
The Company has determined that these dispositions represent a strategic shift that will have a major effect on its results of operations. The Company has reflected the results of the beauty businesses as discontinued operations including all comparative prior period information in these Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain costs previously allocated to the beauty business for segment reporting purposes do not qualify for classification within discontinued operations and have been reallocated to continuing operations. See Note 13, Held for Sale Assets and Discontinued Operations, for additional information.
Estimates included herein are those of the Company’s management and are subject to the risks and uncertainties as described in the section entitled Forward-Looking Statements in