ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for 2021 as compared to 2020 are discussed below, and should be read in conjunction with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements, including the notes thereto. For a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for 2020 as compared to 2019, please refer to Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, except as set forth below.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company headquartered in San Diego, California, focused on identifying, developing and delivering life-changing therapies to people living with rare kidney, liver, and metabolic diseases.
Uncertainty Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic
While the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, we have been monitoring the developments and assessing areas where there is potential for our business to be impacted. As of December 31, 2021, the majority of our labor force is remote, which could, among other things, negatively impact our ability to conduct research and development activities, engage in sales-related initiatives, or efficiently conduct day-to-day operations. Remote work operations also heighten the risk of cyber-attacks and make it more difficult for companies to protect their confidential information. Circumstances arising from the pandemic have slowed and could continue to slow the pace of enrollment in our clinical trials or otherwise hinder patients' abilities to comply with the clinical trial protocols and could ultimately delay the availability of results and analysis of outcomes. Disruptions in the supply chain could negatively impact our ability to source materials or manufacture and distribute product. While to date we have not experienced a material reduction in demand for our commercialized products as a result of the pandemic, we could experience a decrease in new patient identification and increased requests for patient assistance due to increased levels of unemployment, either of which would negatively impact our revenues and hinder our cash flows. Similarly, we could face challenges with regard to healthcare programs, including access and changes in coverage. Growth in revenue could also be impeded by these factors. The financial markets have been subject to significant volatility that could impact our ability to enter into, modify, and negotiate favorable terms and conditions relative to equity and debt financing activities. We had $552.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities as of December 31, 2021, which we believe provides sufficient capital to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. While we have not yet experienced a material impact to date, the full magnitude of the pandemic cannot be measured at this time, and therefore any of the aforementioned circumstances, as well as other factors, may cause our results of operations to vary substantially from year to year and quarter to quarter.
License and Collaboration Agreement with Vifor Pharma
On September 15, 2021, we entered into a License Agreement with Vifor Pharma, pursuant to which we granted an exclusive license to Vifor Pharma for the commercialization of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories. Under the terms of the License Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $55.0 million in September 2021, and will be eligible for up to $135.0 million in aggregate regulatory and market access related milestone payments and up to $655.0 million in aggregate sales-based milestone payments for a total potential value of up to $845.0 million. We are also entitled to receive tiered double-digit royalties of up to 40 percent of annual net sales of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories.
The Agreement includes a sublicense to Vifor Pharma under our license agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Ligand”). We remain obligated to make payments to Ligand upon achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, as well as an escalating annual royalty between 15 percent and 17 percent of global net sales of licensed products.
Acquisition of Orphan Technologies Limited
In November 2020, we completed the acquisition of Orphan Technologies Limited (“Orphan”), including Orphan’s rare metabolic disorder drug pegtibatinase (TVT-058). We acquired Orphan by purchasing all of the outstanding shares. In exchange for the shares, we made an upfront cash payment at closing of $90.0 million plus closing adjustments, net liabilities assumed, and transaction expenses of $1.2 million, $1.8 million, and $4.2 million, respectively. Under the Agreement, we have also agreed to make contingent cash payments up to an aggregate of $427.0 million based on the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercialization events as set forth in the Agreement, as well as additional tiered mid-single digit royalty payments based upon future net sales of any pegtibatinase products in the US and Europe, subject to certain reductions as set forth in the Agreement, and a contingent payment in the event a pediatric rare disease voucher for any pegtibatinase product is granted. In December 2021, Orphan was re-domiciled and renamed Travere Therapeutics Switzerland Gmbh ("TTSG").
Research and Development
Sparsentan
Sparsentan, a Dual Endothelin Angiotensin Receptor Antagonist (DEARA), is a novel investigational product candidate. Pre-clinical data have shown that blockade of both endothelin type A and angiotensin II type 1 pathways in forms of rare chronic kidney disease, reduces proteinuria, protects podocytes and prevents glomerulosclerosis and mesangial cell proliferation. Sparsentan has been granted Orphan Drug Designation for the treatment of FSGS and IgAN in the U.S. and Europe. Sparsentan is currently being evaluated in two pivotal Phase 3 clinical studies in rare kidney diseases, including:
•Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis ("FSGS") is a leading cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) and nephrotic syndrome. There are currently no United States Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") approved pharmacologic treatments for FSGS and there remains a high unmet need for patients living with FSGS as off-label treatments such as ACE/ARBs, steroids, and immunosuppressant agents are effective in only a subset of patients and use of some of these off-label treatments may be further inhibited by their safety profiles. Every year approximately 5,400 patients are diagnosed with FSGS and we estimate that there are more than 40,000 FSGS patients in the United States and a similar number in Europe with approximately half of them being candidates for sparsentan. In 2016, we generated positive data from our Phase 2 DUET study in FSGS. In 2018, we announced the initiation of the Phase 3 DUPLEX study of sparsentan in FSGS. The DUPLEX Study is a global, randomized, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-arm, active-controlled clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of sparsentan in 371 patients. The DUPLEX Study protocol provided for an unblinded analysis of at least 190 patients to be performed after 36 weeks of treatment to evaluate the interim efficacy endpoint - the proportion of patients achieving a FSGS partial remission of proteinuria endpoint (FPRE), which is defined as urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (Up/C) ≤1.5 g/g and a >40% reduction in Up/C from baseline, at week 36. In February 2021, we announced that the ongoing Phase 3 DUPLEX Study achieved its pre-specified interim FSGS partial remission of proteinuria endpoint following the 36-week interim period. After 36 weeks of treatment, 42.0 percent of patients receiving sparsentan achieved FPRE, compared to 26.0 percent of irbesartan-treated patients (p=0.0094). A preliminary review of the results from the interim analysis suggest that to date in the study, sparsentan has been generally well-tolerated and the overall safety results in the study to date have been generally comparable between treatment groups. The confirmatory primary endpoint of the DUPLEX Study to support full regulatory approval is the rate of change in eGFR over 108 weeks of treatment. As of the time of the interim analyses, available long-term eGFR data for the confirmatory endpoint were limited. Consistent with the DUPLEX Study protocol, patients will continue in a blinded manner to assess the treatment effect on eGFR slope over 108 weeks in the confirmatory endpoint analysis. The DUPLEX Study is fully enrolled and topline results from the confirmatory endpoint are expected in the first half of 2023.
In May 2021, we provided a regulatory update regarding the sparsentan FSGS program, including feedback from the FDA that additional data would be needed to potentially support a submission for accelerated approval under subpart H. At a subsequent Type A meeting, we and the FDA reached alignment on a pathway for us to proceed with a submission for accelerated approval, pending additional supportive eGFR data. We intend to provide the FDA with additional eGFR data from the ongoing DUPLEX Study in the first half of 2022, and if such data are supportive, submit an application for accelerated approval in the U.S. in mid-2022.
In mid-2022, we and Vifor (International) Ltd. ("Vifor Pharma"), with whom we entered into a license and collaboration agreement ("License Agreement") in September 2021, plan to submit an application for conditional marketing authorization ("CMA") of sparsentan for the treatment of FSGS and IgAN in Europe. If sparsentan receives marketing authorization in any of the licensed territories, Vifor Pharma will be responsible for all commercialization activities in such licensed territories. We remain responsible for the clinical development of sparsentan and will retain all rights to sparsentan in the United States and rest of world outside of the licensed territories, provided that Vifor Pharma has a right of negotiation to expand the licensed territories into Canada, China, Brazil and/or Mexico.
•Immunoglobulin A nephropathy ("IgAN") is characterized by hematuria, proteinuria, and variable rates of progressive renal failure. With an estimated prevalence of more than 100,000 people in the United States and greater numbers in Europe and Asia, IgAN is the most common primary glomerular disease. Most patients are diagnosed between the ages of 16 and 35, with up to 40% progressing to end stage kidney disease within 15 years. There are currently no non-immunosuppressive treatments for IgAN approved by the FDA. The current standard of care is renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system ("RAAS") blockade with immunosuppression also being commonly used
for patients with significant proteinuria or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. In 2018, we announced that the first patient had been dosed in the PROTECT Study, a global, randomized, multicenter, double-blind, parallel-arm, active-controlled pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of sparsentan in 404 patients with IgAN.
The PROTECT Study protocol provided for an unblinded analysis of at least 280 patients to be performed after 36 weeks of treatment to evaluate the primary efficacy endpoint - the change in proteinuria (urine protein-to-creatinine ratio) at week 36 from baseline. Secondary efficacy endpoints include the rate of change in eGFR following the initiation of randomized treatment over 58-week and 110-week periods, as well as the rate of change in eGFR over 52-week and 104-week periods following the first six weeks of randomized treatment in approximately 380 patients. In August 2021, we announced positive topline interim results from the ongoing Phase 3 PROTECT Study. The PROTECT Study met its pre-specified interim primary efficacy endpoint with statistical significance. After 36 weeks of treatment, patients receiving sparsentan achieved a mean reduction in proteinuria from baseline of 49.8 percent, compared to a mean reduction in proteinuria from baseline of 15.1 percent for irbesartan-treated patients (p<0.0001). We believe that preliminary eGFR data available at the time of the interim analysis are indicative of a potential clinically meaningful treatment effect after two years of treatment. Preliminary results at the time of the interim assessment suggested that sparsentan had been generally well-tolerated to date in the study and consistent with its overall observed safety profile. The PROTECT Study is fully enrolled and is scheduled to continue as planned on a blinded basis to assess the treatment effect on eGFR slope over 110 weeks in the confirmatory endpoint analysis. Topline results from the confirmatory endpoint analysis are expected in the second half of 2023.
Subsequent to the announcement of the interim results from the PROTECT Study, we conducted pre-NDA interactions with the FDA, during which we confirmed alignment with our plan to submit in the first quarter of 2022 an NDA for accelerated approval of sparsentan for IgAN.
In mid-2022, we and Vifor Pharma plan to submit a combined application for conditional marketing authorization ("CMA") of sparsentan for the treatment of FSGS and IgAN in Europe.
Pegtibatinase (TVT-058)
Pegtibatinase (TVT-058) is a novel investigational human enzyme replacement candidate being evaluated for the treatment of classical homocystinuria (HCU). Classical HCU is a rare metabolic disorder characterized by elevated levels of plasma homocysteine that can lead to vision, skeletal, circulatory and central nervous system issues. It is estimated that there are at least 3,500 people living with HCU in the United States with similar numbers in Europe. Pegtibatinase has been granted Rare Pediatric Disease and Fast Track designations by the FDA, as well as orphan drug designation in the United States and European Union. Pegtibatinase is currently being evaluated in the Phase 1/2 COMPOSE Study, a double blind, randomized, placebo-controlled dose escalation study to assess its safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and clinical effects in patients with classical HCU.
In December 2021, we announced positive topline results from the Phase 1/2 COMPOSE Study. Pegtibatinase demonstrated dose-dependent reductions in total homocysteine (tHcy) during the 12 weeks of treatment, and in the highest dose cohort to date evaluating 1.5mg/kg of pegtibatinase twice weekly (BIW), treatment with pegtibatinase resulted in rapid and sustained reductions in total homocysteine (tHcy) through 12 weeks of treatment, including a 55.1% mean relative reduction in tHcy from baseline as well as maintenance of tHcy below a clinically meaningful threshold of 100 μmol. Additionally, in a dose-dependent manner in the study to date, methionine levels were substantially reduced and cystathionine levels were substantially elevated following treatment with pegtibatinase, suggesting that pegtibatinase acts in a manner similar to the native CBS enzyme. To date in the study, pegtibatinase has been generally well-tolerated, with no discontinuations due to treatment-related adverse events.
Based on these results, the Company is in the process of engaging with regulators to establish next steps for a pivotal development program to ultimately support potential approvals of pegtibatinase for the treatment of HCU. In parallel, the Company has initiated one additional cohort in the COMPOSE Study to inform and refine formulation work for future development and commercial purposes and to further evaluate the dose response curve for pegtibatinase.
We acquired pegtibatinase as part of the November 2020 acquisition of Orphan Technologies Limited.
Chenodal
Chenodal (chenodeoxycholic acid or CDCA) is a naturally occurring bile acid that is approved for the treatment of people with radiolucent stones in the gallbladder. While indicated for radiolucent stones in the gallbladder, Chenodal has been recognized as the standard of care for cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) for more than three decades, although it is not currently labeled for this indication. CTX is a rare, progressive and underdiagnosed bile acid synthesis disorder affecting many parts of the body. In January 2020, we randomized the first patients in our Phase 3 RESTORE Study to evaluate the effects of Chenodal in adult and pediatric patients with CTX, and the study enrollment remains open. The pivotal study is intended to support an NDA submission for marketing authorization of Chenodal for CTX in the United States.
Preclinical Programs
We are a participant in two Cooperative Research and Development Agreements ("CRADAs"), which form a multi-stakeholder approach to pool resources with leading experts, and incorporate the patient perspective early in the therapeutic identification and development process. We have partnered with the National Institutes of Health’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences ("NCATS") and leading patient advocacy organizations, CDG Care and Alagille Syndrome Alliance, aimed at the identification of potential small molecule therapeutics for NGLY1 deficiency and Alagille syndrome ("ALGS"), respectively. There are no treatment options currently approved for these diseases.
Approved Products
Thiola and Thiola EC (tiopronin)
Thiola and Thiola EC are approved by the FDA for the treatment of cystinuria, a rare genetic cystine transport disorder that causes high cystine levels in the urine and the formation of recurring kidney stones. Due to the larger stone size, cystine stones may be more difficult to pass, often requiring surgical procedures to remove. More than 80 percent of people with cystinuria develop their first stone by the age of 20. More than 25 percent will develop cystine stones by the age of 10. Recurring stone formation can cause loss of kidney function in addition to substantial pain and loss of productivity associated with renal colic and stone passage. While a portion of people living with the disease are able to manage symptoms through diet and fluid intake, the prevalence of cystinuria in the US is estimated to be 10,000 to 12,000, indicating that there may be as many as 4,000 to 5,000 affected individuals with cystinuria in the US that would be candidates for Thiola or Thiola EC.
In June 2019 we announced that the FDA approved 100 mg and 300 mg tablets of Thiola EC, an enteric-coated formulation of Thiola, to be used for the treatment of cystinuria. Thiola EC offers the potential for administration with or without food, and the ability to reduce the number of tablets necessary to manage cystinuria. Thiola EC became available to patients in July 2019.
In May 2021, a generic option for the 100 mg version of the original formulation of Thiola (tiopronin tablets) became available. While the impact to our business has been minimal to date, we are not able to estimate any future impact, including the impact of additional generic entrants, if any.
Cholbam (cholic acid)
The FDA approved Cholbam (cholic acid capsules) in March 2015, the first FDA-approved treatment for pediatric and adult patients with bile acid synthesis disorders due to single enzyme defects, and for adjunctive treatment of patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorder-Zellweger spectrum disorder. The effectiveness of Cholbam has been demonstrated in clinical trials for bile acid synthesis disorders and the adjunctive treatment of peroxisomal disorders. An estimated 200 to 300 patients are current candidates for therapy.
Chenodal (chenodiol)
Chenodal is a synthetic oral form of chenodeoxycholic acid ("CDCA"), a naturally occurring primary bile acid synthesized from cholesterol in the liver. The FDA approved Chenodal for the treatment of people with radiolucent stones in the gallbladder. In 2010, Chenodal was granted orphan drug designation for the treatment of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis ("CTX"), a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disease. We acquired Chenodal in March 2014.
While Chenodal is not labeled for CTX, it received a medical necessity determination in the US by the FDA and has been used as the standard of care for more than three decades. We are working to obtain FDA approval of Chenodal for the treatment of CTX and initiated a Phase 3 clinical trial for this indication in January 2020. The prevalence of CTX is estimated in the literature to be as high as 1 in 70,000 in the overall population. Pathogenesis of CTX involves deficiency of the enzyme 27-hydroxylase (encoded by the gene CYP27A1), a rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of primary bile acids, including CDCA, from cholesterol. The disruption of primary bile acid synthesis in CTX leads to toxic accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol in most tissues. Patients may present with intractable diarrhea, premature cataracts, tendon xanthomas, atherosclerosis, and cardiovascular disease in childhood and adolescence. Neurological manifestations of the disease, including dementia and cognitive and cerebellar deficiencies, emerge during late adolescence and adulthood. The types, combinations and severity of symptoms can be different from person to person, and making diagnosis challenging and often delayed. Oral administration of CDCA has been shown to normalize primary bile acid synthesis in patients with CTX.
Financial Overview
Acquired IPR&D
We assess whether IPR&D assets acquired from others in an asset acquisition have alternative future use (in research and development projects or otherwise) at the acquisition date. If such assets have alternative future use, they are capitalized and recognized as an intangible asset. If such assets do not have alternative use, nor is there an alternative indication that the Company plans to pursue, the upfront consideration transferred, including any contingent consideration that is probable and reasonably estimable, is charged to expense at the acquisition date. We expensed the
acquired IPR&D associated with the acquisition of Orphan Technologies, which included the developmental product candidate for the treatment of classical homocystinuria (HCU), pegtibatinase (TVT-058).
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs include expenses related to sparsentan, discontinued programs fosmetpantotenate and CNSA-001, and our other pipeline programs, including the recently acquired pegitbatinase (TVT-058) program. We expense all research and development costs as they are incurred. Our research and development costs are comprised of salaries and bonuses, benefits, non-cash share-based compensation, license fees, milestones under license agreements, costs paid to third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials, and develop drug materials and delivery methods, and associated overhead expenses and facilities costs. We charge direct internal and external program costs to the respective development programs. We also incur indirect costs that are not allocated to specific programs because such costs benefit multiple development programs and allow us to increase our pharmaceutical development capabilities. These consist of internal shared resources related to the development and maintenance of systems and processes applicable to all of our programs.
We record expenses in connection with our clinical trials under contracts with contract research organizations ("CROs") that support conducting and managing clinical trials. The financial terms and activities of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven expense levels. Generally, these agreements set forth activities that drive the recording of expenses such as start-up, initiation activities, enrollment, treatment of patients, or the completion of other clinical trial activities.
Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on our estimates and/or representations from service providers regarding work performed, including actual level of patient enrollment, completion of patient studies and progress of the clinical trials. Other incidental costs related to patient enrollment or treatment are accrued when reasonably certain. If the amounts we are obligated to pay under our clinical trial agreements are modified (for instance, as a result of changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed), we adjust our accruals accordingly on a prospective basis. Revisions to our contractual payment obligations are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become reasonably certain.
We currently have three Phase 3 clinical trials in process that are in varying stages of activity, with ongoing non-clinical support studies. As such, clinical trial expenses will vary depending on the all the factors set forth above and may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter.
At any point in time, we typically have various early stage research and drug discovery projects. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one research or drug discovery project and are typically deployed across multiple projects. As such, we do not maintain information regarding costs incurred for these early stage research and drug discovery programs on a project-specific basis.
We routinely engage vendors and service providers for scientific research, clinical trial, regulatory compliance, manufacturing and other consulting services. We also make grants to research and non-profit organizations to conduct research which may lead to new intellectual properties that we may subsequently license under separately negotiated license agreements. Such grants may be funded in lump sums or installments.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The internal costs include personnel, facility costs, and discovery and research related activities associated with our pipeline. The external program costs reflect external costs attributable to our clinical development candidates and preclinical candidates selected for further development. Such expenses primarily include third-party contract costs relating to clinical trial activities, nonclinical studies and manufacturing.
1Credit received in 2021 and 2020.
Most of our product development programs are in clinical trials which are highly uncertain and may not result in approved products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to project. Given the uncertainty associated with clinical trial enrollments and the risks inherent in the development process, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of current or future clinical trials of our product candidates, or if and to what extent we will generate revenues, if any, from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of salaries and bonuses, benefits, non-cash share-based compensation, legal and other professional fees, rent, depreciation and amortization, travel, insurance, business development, sales and marketing programs, and other operating expenses.
Other Income/Expenses
Other income/expenses consists of interest income and expense, finance expense and miscellaneous other income/expenses.
License Agreements
Ligand License Agreement
In 2012, we entered into a license agreement with Ligand, granting us a worldwide license for the development, manufacture and commercialization of sparsentan, which we are developing in connection with the treatment of FSGS. Under the license agreement, Ligand granted us a sublicense under certain of its patents and other intellectual property in connection with the development and commercialization of sparsentan. Under the license agreement, Ligand is obligated to transfer to us certain information, records, regulatory filings, materials and inventory controlled by Ligand and relating to or useful for developing sparsentan. We must use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize sparsentan in specified major market countries and other countries in which we believe it is commercially reasonable to develop and commercialize such products.
As consideration for the license, we are required to make payments upon the achievement of certain milestones, totaling up to $114.1 million. Should we commercialize sparsentan or any products containing any of the licensed compounds, we will be obligated to pay Ligand an escalating annual royalty between 15% and 17% of net sales of all such products. Through 2021, we made milestone payments to Ligand of $7.2 million under the license agreement.
Under the terms of the license agreement, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (“BMS”) has a right of first negotiation and Ligand has a right of second negotiation with respect to any license arrangement for a licensed compound, except to the extent such rights may be waived.
The license agreement will continue until neither party has any further payment obligations under the agreement and is expected to continue for approximately 10 to 20 years from the effective date. Ligand may terminate the license agreement due to (i) our insolvency, (ii) our material uncured breach of the agreement, (iii) our failure to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize sparsentan as described above or (iv) certain other conditions. We may terminate the license agreement due to a material uncured breach of the agreement by Ligand.
Thiola License Agreement
In 2014, we entered into a license agreement with Mission Pharmacal ("Mission"), pursuant to which we obtained an exclusive, royalty-bearing license to market, sell and commercialize Thiola (tiopronin) in the United States and Canada, and a non-exclusive license to use know-how relating to Thiola to the extent necessary to market Thiola. We paid Mission an up-front license fee of $3.0 million and will pay guaranteed minimum royalties during each calendar year the greater of $2.0 million or 20% of our net sales of Thiola in the United States and Canada.
In October 2015, the license agreement was amended to allow for us to secure enough API to ensure an adequate level of safety stock to prevent an interruption in the supply of Thiola and to prepare for a reformulation development project.
In March 2016, the license agreement was amended to, among other things, include a new formulation development project for tiopronin tablets.
In November 2017, we amended the license agreement to extend the term through May of 2029.
In November 2018, the license agreement was amended to remove all territorial restrictions on our license rights. As consideration for the expanded territory we paid an up-front fee of $0.3 million and will pay guaranteed minimum royalties equaling the greater of $0.1 million or 20% of our Thiola net sales generated outside of the United States during each calendar year.
See Note 9 to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
License and Collaboration Agreement with Vifor Pharma
On September 15, 2021, we entered into a License Agreement with Vifor Pharma, pursuant to which we granted an exclusive license to Vifor Pharma for the commercialization of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories. Under the terms of the License Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $55.0 million in September 2021, and will be eligible for up to $135.0 million in aggregate regulatory and market access related milestone payments and up to $655.0 million in aggregate sales-based milestone payments for a total potential value of up to $845.0 million. We are also entitled to receive tiered double-digit royalties of up to 40 percent of annual net sales of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories.
The License Agreement includes a sublicense to Vifor Pharma under our license agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Ligand”). We remain obligated to make payments to Ligand upon achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, as well as an escalating annual royalty between 15 percent and 17 percent of global net sales of licensed products.
See Note 4 to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Results of Operations
Revenue
The following table provides information regarding revenue, including net product sales and license and collaboration revenue (in thousands):
Net product sales for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $210.8 million, $198.3 million and $175.3 million, respectively, and consisted of sales of Thiola ("Tiopronin products"), Chenodal and Cholbam ("Bile acid products").
The increase in net product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, is due to increased patient counts for all products.
We use a direct-to-patient distributor. Under this distribution model, we record revenues when customers take control of the product (at delivery).
License and collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $16.7 million. We had no license or collaboration revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. License and collaboration revenue recognized in 2021 was attributable to the license and collaboration agreement entered into with Vifor Pharma in September 2021. We recognized $12.0 million from the license based upon the allocation of the stand-alone selling price, and $4.7 million from the clinical development activities based upon the ratio of costs incurred to total estimated costs.
Operating Expenses
The following table provides information regarding operating expenses (in thousands):
2021 versus 2020 results
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $389.3 million compared to $374.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $14.8 million.
Cost of goods sold increased by $0.7 million due to increased sales.
Research and development costs increased by $78.6 million due to increases in clinical trial expenses, chemistry manufacturing and control costs, preclinical study expenses, and related expenses associated with the advancement of our programs in development, particularly sparsentan and pegtibatinase, which saw increases in external service provider costs of $32.9 million and $25.9 million, respectively. Internal personnel costs to support these programs also increased by $14.3 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $14.1 million due to increased personnel expenses, including increased headcount as we prepare for commercialization of sparsentan and enhance support for other programs in development.
Fair value of contingent consideration increased by $18.6 million due to changes in discount factors, along with changes in revenue forecasts and timing of payments.
Acquired IPR&D of $97.1 million in 2020 was due to the November 2020 acquisition of Orphan Technologies Limited, which included the developmental rare metabolic disorder drug pegtibatinase.
Other Income/Expenses
The following table provides information regarding other income (expenses) (in thousands):
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $17.9 million compared to other expense of $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents a change of $5.3 million. The change was primarily attributable to a decrease in interest income earned on our available-for-sale marketable debt securities. The decrease in interest income earned was due to a decline in short-term interest rates.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
We follow ASC 740, Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the asset will not be realized.
The standard addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under ASC 740, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. ASC 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. Our policy is to record estimated interest and penalty related to the underpayment of income taxes or unrecognized tax benefits as a component of its income tax provision.
The change in tax provision of $0.4 million for fiscal 2021 as compared to a tax benefit of $19.4 million for fiscal 2020 was due to the income tax benefit related to the CARES Act NOL carryback that was recognized in 2020.
Inflation
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our salaries and fees paid to third-party contract service providers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations through a combination of borrowings, sales of our equity securities, and revenues generated from our commercialized products and license and collaboration agreements. Research and development activities have required significant capital investment and are expected to continue to require significant cash expenditure in the future, particularly as our pipeline of drug candidates and our employee headcount have expanded. In addition, we continue to evaluate potential opportunities to expand our pipeline and approved products through licenses and acquisitions of products in areas that we believe offer attractive growth characteristics, which may require considerable upfront capital to pursue as well as possible contingent payments upon the future achievement of certain milestones.
We believe that our available cash and short-term investments as of the date of this filing will be sufficient to fund our anticipated level of operations beyond the next 12 months. Management believes that our operating results will vary from quarter to quarter and year to year depending upon various factors including revenues, general and administrative expenses, and research and development expenses.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had the following balances and financial performance (in thousands):
Collaboration and License Proceeds
License and Collaboration Agreement with Vifor Pharma
On September 15, 2021, we entered into a License Agreement with Vifor Pharma, pursuant to which we granted an exclusive license to Vifor Pharma for the commercialization of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories. Under the terms of the License Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $55.0 million in September 2021, and will be eligible for up to $135.0 million in aggregate regulatory and market access related milestone payments and up to $655.0 million in aggregate sales-based milestone payments for a total potential value of up to $845.0 million. We are also entitled to receive tiered double-digit royalties of up to 40 percent of annual net sales of sparsentan in the Licensed Territories.
The Agreement includes a sublicense to Vifor Pharma under our license agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Ligand”). We remain obligated to make payments to Ligand upon achievement of certain regulatory and sales milestones, as well as an escalating annual royalty between 15 percent and 17 percent of global net sales of licensed products.
Equity Offerings
2021 Underwritten Public Offering of Common Stock
In February 2021, we sold an aggregate of 7.5 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering, at a price to the public of $26.75 per share. The net proceeds to us from the offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and offering expenses, were $189.3 million.
2020 Underwritten Public Offering of Common Stock
In June 2020, we sold an aggregate of 7.5 million shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering, at a price to the public of $15.50 per share. The net proceeds to us from the offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and offering expenses, were $108.7 million.
At-the-Market Equity Offering
In February 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement ("ATM Agreement") with Jefferies LLC, as agent (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through Jefferies, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million. Of the $100.0 million originally authorized for sale under the ATM Agreement, approximately $28.6 million were sold under our prior registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration Statement No. 333-227182). An additional $31.7 million were sold under our effective registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration Statement No. 333-259311).
In 2020, the Company sold 867,806 shares under the ATM Agreement, resulting in gross proceeds of $23.5 million. In 2021, the Company sold a combined 1,240,640 shares under the ATM Agreement, resulting in gross proceeds of $36.8 million. Through December 31, 2021, we have sold a
total of 2,108,446 shares under the ATM Agreement, resulting in gross proceeds of $60.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, an aggregate amount of $39.7 million remained eligible for sale under the facility.
Authorized Shares of Common Stock
On May 14, 2021, in connection with the Company’s 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, the Company’s stockholders approved, among other matters, a Certificate of Amendment (“Certificate of Amendment”) to the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation to increase the number of shares of common stock authorized for issuance thereunder from 100,000,000 to 200,000,000. Effective May 18, 2021, the Certificate of Amendment was filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware.
Operating Leases
Future Minimum Rental Commitments
We have future minimum rental commitments totaling $43.7 million arising from our operating leases. These commitments represent the aggregate base rent through August 2028.
Contingent Cash Payments
Acquisition Agreement with Orphan Technologies Limited
In November 2020, we completed the acquisition of Orphan Technologies Limited (“Orphan”), including Orphan’s rare metabolic disorder drug pegtibatinase. We acquired Orphan by purchasing all of its outstanding shares. In exchange for the shares, we made an upfront cash payment at closing of $90.0 million plus closing adjustments, net liabilities assumed, and transaction expenses of $1.2 million, $1.8 million, and $4.2 million, respectively. Under the Agreement, we also agreed to make contingent cash payments up to an aggregate of $427.0 million based on the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercialization events as set forth in the Agreement, as well as additional tiered mid-single digit royalty payments based upon future net sales of any pegtibatinase products in the US and Europe, subject to certain reductions as set forth in the Agreement, and a contingent payment in the event a pediatric rare disease voucher for any pegtibatinase product is granted.
License Agreement Obligations
See discussion above under the heading "License Agreements".
Borrowings
Convertible Senior Notes Due 2025
On September 10, 2018, we completed a registered underwritten public offering of $276 million aggregate principal amount of 2.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025 ("2025 Notes"), and entered into a base indenture and supplemental indenture agreement ("2025 Indenture") with respect to the 2025 Notes. The 2025 Notes will mature on September 15, 2025 ("Maturity Date”), unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted. The 2025 Notes are senior unsecured obligations of ours and bear interest at an annual rate of 2.50%, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year.
The net proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes were approximately $267.2 million, after deducting commissions and the offering expenses payable by us. A portion of the net proceeds from the 2025 Notes were used by us to repurchase $23.4 million aggregate principal amount of its then-outstanding 4.5% senior convertible notes due in 2019 in privately-negotiated transactions.
The initial conversion rate for the 2025 Notes is 25.7739 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2025 Notes, which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $38.80 per share. If a “make-whole fundamental change” (as defined in the 2025 Indenture) occurs, then we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a specified period of time.
The 2025 Notes will be redeemable, in whole or in part, at our option at any time, and from time to time, on or after September 15, 2022 and, in the case of any partial redemption, on or before the 40th scheduled trading day before the Maturity Date, at a cash redemption price equal to the principal amount of the 2025 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date, but only if the last reported sale price per share of our common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price on each of at least 20 trading days during the 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the trading day immediately before the date we send the related redemption notice. If a fundamental change (as defined in the 2025 Indenture) occurs, then, subject to certain exceptions, holders may require us to repurchase their 2025 Notes at a cash repurchase price equal to the principal amount of the 2025 Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
The effective interest rate on the liability components of the 2025 Notes for the period from the date of issuance was 7.7%.
Convertible Senior Notes Due 2019
On May 29, 2014, the Company entered into a Note Purchase Agreement relating to a private placement by the Company of $46.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2019 Notes which were convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at an initial conversion price of $17.41 per share. The conversion price was subject to customary anti-dilution protection. The 2019 Notes bore interest at a rate of 4.5% per annum, payable semiannually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year. The maturity date of the 2019 Notes was on May 30, 2019, and there were no contractual payments due prior to that date.
In September 2018, the Company used part of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes to repurchase $23.4 million aggregate principal amount of the 2019 Notes in privately-negotiated transactions for approximately $40.2 million in cash. The partial repurchase of the 2019 Notes resulted in a $17.0 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in September 2018.
In May 2019, the remaining $22.6 million outstanding principal amount of 2019 Notes was converted by the holders thereof into approximately 1.3 million shares of common stock. At December 31, 2019, there was no outstanding balance on the 2019 Notes.
Interest Expense
Total interest expense recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $20.1 million, $19.1 million, and $18.8 million, respectively.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our available cash and short-term investments as of the date of this filing will be sufficient to fund our anticipated level of operations beyond the next 12 months. This belief is based on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. Factors that may affect financing requirements include, but are not limited to:
•the rate of progress and cost of our clinical trials, preclinical studies and other discovery and research and development activities, including any delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the timing of, and costs involved in, seeking and obtaining marketing approvals for our products, and in maintaining quality systems standards for our products;
•increases or decreases in revenue from our marketed products, including decreases in revenue resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, if any;
•debt service obligations on the 2025 Notes;
•our ability to manufacture sufficient quantities of our products to meet expected demand;
•the costs of preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights, litigation costs and the results of litigation;
•our ability to enter into collaboration, licensing or distribution arrangements and the terms and timing of these arrangements;
•the potential need to expand our business, resulting in additional payroll and other overhead expenses;
•the potential in-licensing of other products or technologies; and
•the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market or technological developments.
Future cash requirements will also depend on the extent to which we acquire or invest in additional complementary businesses, products and technologies.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Management considers marketable debt securities to be available to fund current operations, and they are classified as available for sale and included within current assets in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Therefore, cash and short-term investments available to fund operations is $552.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Operating activities used $14.8 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $42.7 million of cash used for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used was primarily attributable to the $55.0 million upfront payment received in connection with the license and collaboration agreement entered into with Vifor Pharma in September 2021, along with increased net product sales, offset by increased research and development expenses.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $137.6 million compared to cash used of $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used was due to the increase in net purchases of marketable debt securities, offset by expenses arising from the acquisition of Orphan Technologies in 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $231.7 million compared to cash provided of $127.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash provided was due to the February 2021 issuance of stock through an underwritten public offering that provided $189.3 million and an At-The-Market public offering that provided $36.8 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management makes certain judgments and uses certain estimates and assumptions when applying accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis and base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our experience and assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may vary from what we anticipate and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change our reported results. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to us, in that they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of our Consolidated financial statements. For further information, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which outlines our application of significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect substantially all the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
We recognize revenues from product sales are recognized when the customer obtains control of the product, which occurs upon delivery to our customer. We receive payments from our product sales based on terms that generally are within 30 days of delivery of product to the patient.
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price, which includes provisions resulting from discounts, rebates and co-pay assistance that are offered to its customers, health care providers, payors and other indirect customers relating to the sale of our products. In order to determine the transaction price, we estimate, utilizing the expected value method, the amount of variable consideration to which we will be entitled. These provisions are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as a reduction of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to the customer) or as a current liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than a customer). Calculating these provisions involves estimates and judgements. Where appropriate, these reserves take into consideration our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements and specific known market events and trends. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which it is entitled based on the terms of the contract. If actual results in the future vary from the provisions, we will adjust the provision, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known. Our historical experience is that such adjustments have been immaterial.
Payments received under collaboration and licensing agreements may include non-refundable fees at the inception of the arrangements, milestone payments for specific achievements and royalties on the sale of products. At the inception of arrangements that include milestone payments, we use judgement to evaluate whether the milestones are probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to include in the transaction price utilizing the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur, the estimated amount is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals are not included in the transaction price until those approvals are received. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of development milestones and any related constraint and adjusts the estimate of the overall transaction price, if necessary. We recognize aggregate sales-based milestones and royalty payments from product sales at the later of when the related sales occur or when the performance obligation to which the sales-based milestone or royalty has been allocated has been satisfied. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur, we estimate the sales-based milestone and royalty payments using the most likely amount method.
We utilize significant judgement to develop estimates of the stand-alone selling price for each distinct performance obligation based upon the relative stand-alone selling price. Variable consideration that relates specifically to our efforts to satisfy specific performance obligations is allocated entirely to those performance obligations. The stand-alone selling price for license-related performance obligations requires judgement in developing assumptions to project probability-weighted cash flows based upon estimates of forecasted revenues, clinical and regulatory timelines and discount rates. The stand-alone selling price for clinical development performance obligations is based on forecasted expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation plus an appropriate margin.
If the licenses to intellectual property are determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to benefit from the license. For licenses that are not distinct from other promises, we apply judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the related revenue recognition accordingly.
The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the products or services to be provided. Revenue is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. We generally utilize the cost-to-cost method of progress because it best measures the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. We use judgment to estimate the total costs expected to complete the clinical development performance obligations, which include subcontractor costs, labor, materials, other direct costs and an allocation of indirect costs. We evaluate these cost estimates and the progress each reporting period and adjusts the measure of progress, if necessary.
Changes in assumptions where management utilizes significant judgement could have a material impact on the revenue we recognize.
Clinical Trial Expenses
We record expenses in connection with our clinical trials under contracts with contract research organizations (CROs) that support conducting and managing clinical trials. The financial terms and activities of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven expense levels. Generally, these agreements set forth activities that drive the recording of expenses such as start-up and initiation activities, enrollment and treatment of patients, or the completion of other clinical trial activities.
Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on our estimates and/or representations from service providers regarding work performed, including actual level of patient enrollment, completion of patient studies and progress of the clinical trials. We currently have three Phase 3 clinical trials in process that are in varying stages of activity, with ongoing non-clinical support trials that are significant and changes in estimates and representations from service providers could have a material impact on expenses we recognize.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation arrangements in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards to be based on estimated fair values. We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to estimate the fair value of its stock options at the date of grant. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions to calculate the value of stock options. For restricted stock units, the value of the award is based on our stock price at the grant date. For performance-based restricted stock unit awards, the value of the award is based on our stock price at the grant date, with consideration given to the probability of the performance condition being achieved. We use historical data and other information to estimate the expected price volatility for stock option awards and the expected exercise activity for all awards. Expense is recognized over the vesting period for all awards and commences at the grant date for time-based awards and upon our determination that the achievement of such performance conditions is probable for performance-based awards. The valuation, including the assumptions, require significant judgment by management.
Contingent Consideration
We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date. On a quarterly basis, we revalue these obligations and record increases or decreases from their fair value as an adjustment to the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. In estimating the fair value of our contingent consideration, we use a Monte Carlo Simulation. Changes to contingent consideration obligations can result from changes to discount rates, accretion of the liability due to the passage of time, changes in revenue forecasts and changes in our estimates of the likelihood or timing of achieving commercial revenue milestones. The determination of the contingent consideration liabilities requires significant judgments including the appropriateness of the valuation model and reasonableness of estimates and assumptions included in the forecasts of future net sales and the discount rates applied to such forecasts. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities.
Impairment of Intangible Assets subject to amortization
Intangible assets subject to amortization include certain license agreements and purchased technologies. Intangible assets subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable and are also reviewed annually to determine whether any impairment is necessary.
Income Taxes
We follow ASC 740, Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the asset will not be realized.
The standard addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under ASC 740, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion.