Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Bilander Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 5, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”), described below and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, the search for a Business Combination target. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of the initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering.
Our sponsor is Bilander Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on July 15, 2021 (the “Registration Statement”). On July 20, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.9 million, of which approximately $5.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions and $218,000 was for offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities. We granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 Units at the Initial Public Offering price to cover over-allotments, if any. On August 9, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 1,851,598 Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option. The over-allotment units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating additional gross proceeds of $18.5 million. We incurred additional offering cost of approximately $1.0 million in connection with the over-allotment, of which approximately $0.6 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 3,500,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $5.3 million (see Note 4). In connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option on August 9, 2021, the Sponsor purchased an additional 246,880 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $370,320.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, over-allotment and the Private Placement, $168.5 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering, over-allotment and of the Private Placement Warrants in the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Recent Developments
On March 28, 2022, we announced that Ms. Mindy Simon and Ms. Nima Kelly were appointed to our Board to serve as directors with a term expiring at our second and third annual meeting of stockholders, respectively. Ms. Simon was determined to be an “independent director” as defined in the applicable Nasdaq listing standards, and she was appointed to the Board’s audit committee and compensation committee.
The appointments of Ms. Kelly and Ms. Simon as members of our Board were not made pursuant to any arrangement or understanding with respect to any other person. In addition, there are no related persons transactions (within the meaning of Item 404(a) of Regulation S-K) involving either Ms. Kelly or Ms. Simon and us.
In addition, on March 28, 2022, Mr. James H. Greene, Jr. and Mr. Brandon Van Buren resigned from our Board effective immediately. Neither of their resignations resulted from any disagreement with us concerning any matter relating to our operations, policies or practices.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021 we had operating cash of approximately $723,000 and working capital of approximately $1.1 million.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through the cash receipt of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase Founder Shares (as defined in Note 4), and loan from the Sponsor of approximately $100,000 under the Note (as defined in Note 4). We repaid the Note in full on July 20, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, over-allotment and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 4). As of December 31, 2021, we have an immaterial amount due to an affiliate of the Sponsor and there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40 “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” as of December 31, 2021, the Company will have sufficient liquidity to meet our obligations in the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these financial statements. However, we have determined that the Company may need to have access to funds from our Sponsor to fund our working capital needs until the earlier of the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or a minimum one year from the date of issuance of these unaudited condensed financial statements following this filing.
Our management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering and since the Initial Public Offering, our search for prospective Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $2.6 million, which consisted of approximately $2.2 million in general and administrative expenses, approximately $96,000 in franchise tax expenses, a non-cash loss of approximately $114,000 for the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $241,000 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, partially offset by approximately $15,000 of income from investments held in the Trust Account and approximately $17,000 of gain from expiration of over-allotment option.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), as well as the Forward Purchasers and their permitted transferees, were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $3.4 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including over-allotment). In addition, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $5.9 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued Public Warrant and Private Placement Warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering were estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The fair value of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is determined using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional Units solely to cover over-allotments, if any. We estimated the fair value of the over-allotment option using a Black-Scholes model. On August 9, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option and subsequently, on August 29, 2021, the over-allotment option expired partially unexercised.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering and Over-Allotment
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering and over-allotment that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering and over-allotment. Offering costs were allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering and over-allotment based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities were expensed as incurred and presented as non-operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A common stock issued were charged against the carrying value of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering and over-allotment. We classify deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities because their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480. Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 16,851,598 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the over-allotment option, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per share of common stock is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the over-allotment) and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,959,780 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. We have considered the effect of Class B common stock that were excluded from the weighted average number of basic shares outstanding as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we have included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on February 5, 2021 (inception) using the modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things:, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act;, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.