Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Special Note Regarding Smaller Reporting Company Status
Under SEC Release 33-10513; 34-83550, Amendments to Smaller Reporting Company Definition, the Company qualifies as a smaller reporting company based on its public float as of the last business day of the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Accordingly, it has scaled some of its disclosures of financial and non-financial information in this annual report. The Company will continue to determine whether to provide additional scaled disclosures of financial or non-financial information in future quarterly reports, annual reports and/or proxy statements if it remains a smaller reporting company under SEC rules.
Note on Forward-Looking Statements
Statements in this report (including but not limited to certain statements in Items 1, 3 and 7) and in other Company communications that are not historical facts are forward-looking statements, which are based on management’s current expectations. These statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from what appears here.
Forward-looking statements include the Company’s description of plans and objectives for future operations and assumptions behind those plans. The words “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “estimates,” and “expects,” or similar anticipatory expressions, usually identify forward-looking statements. In addition, goals established by the Company should not be viewed as guarantees or promises of future performance. There can be no assurance the Company will be successful in achieving its goals.
In addition to the assumptions and information referred to specifically in the forward-looking statements, other factors, including, but not limited to those factors discussed under Item 1A, Risk Factors, could cause actual results to be materially different from what is presented in any forward-looking statements.
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Net Sales
Net sales for fiscal 2022 increased 11.1%, or $24.3 million, to $242.9 million from $218.6 million in fiscal 2021. The Company experienced a broad-based recovery in demand across most of the markets served, as the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the Company’s global markets subsided. While market demand was strong through the year, supply chain disruption limited the Company’s ability to deliver product through the first three quarters of fiscal 2022. The Company was able to overcome many supply chain challenges in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2022, resulting in revenue of $76.0 million, an increase of $9.8 million or 14.8% compared to the prior year fourth fiscal quarter. Currency translation had an unfavorable impact on fiscal 2022 sales compared to the prior year totaling $8.5 million primarily due to the weakening of the euro and Australian dollar against the U.S. dollar.
Sales at our manufacturing segment increased 13.4%, or $25.8 million, versus the same period last year. The largest improvement was seen at the Company’s North American manufacturing operations, which experienced a 30.7% increase in sales compared to fiscal 2021. The primary driver for this increase was a broad recovery in demand following the negative global economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, this operation saw a marked improvement in demand for its oil and gas related products, both new units and aftermarket volume. The Company’s Veth Propulsion operation in the Netherlands experienced a 4.6% decrease in sales in fiscal 2022, primarily the result of an unfavorable currency translation impact. In constant currency, this entity experienced a slight increase in sales (1.3%) as recovering market demand was hampered somewhat by supply chain challenges. The Company’s Italian manufacturing operations reported an 8.2% increase in sales from fiscal 2021, despite an unfavorable currency translation impact, thanks to a recovering European industrial market following the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s Belgian manufacturing operation saw an 11.3% decrease in sales in fiscal 2022 on an unfavorable foreign exchange impact and supply chain challenges limiting production. The Company’s Swiss manufacturing operation, which supplies customized propellers for the global mega yacht and patrol boat markets, experienced a 6.5% increase in sales, primarily due to a recovering European marine market.
Sales at our distribution segment were up 6.7%, or $6.7 million, compared to fiscal 2021, with improving global demand and product delivery from the manufacturing operations. The Company’s Asian distribution operation in Singapore, China and Japan experienced a 7.8% increase in sales due to the recovering global demand following the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by an unfavorable currency translation impact. The Company’s European distribution operation saw essentially flat sales, as improving demand was offset by an unfavorable currency translation impact and supply chain challenges limiting shipment of goods from the production operations. The Company’s North American distribution operation was also relatively unchanged from fiscal 2021, as supply chain challenges offset an improving demand picture. The Company’s distribution operation in Australia, which provides boat accessories, propulsion and marine transmission systems primarily for the pleasure craft market, saw an 18.2% sales increase, driven by strong demand for the Company’s product in the pleasure craft market.
Net sales for the Company’s marine transmission, propulsion and boat management systems were up 6.1% in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. This increase reflects a general strengthening of the global economy following the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2021. Strength was seen across the commercial, pleasure and defense components of the market. In the off-highway transmission market, the year-over-year increase of 11.1% can also be attributed primarily to the global recovery following the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, with particular strength in North American aftermarket product sales for the oil and gas industry. Sale of the Company’s pressure pumping transmission systems into China also improved over the prior year. The increase experienced in the Company’s industrial products of 36.9% was also a function of the recovering global economy, along with the improving performance of the Company’s new Lufkin, Texas operation, which is focused on growing sales of industrial products.
Geographically, sales to the U.S. and Canada improved 26% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, representing 36% of consolidated sales for fiscal 2022 compared to 32% in fiscal 2021. The increase is primarily due to the impact of the economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales into the Asia Pacific market improved 8% compared to fiscal 2021 and represented approximately 23% of sales in fiscal 2022, compared to 24% in fiscal 2021. The increase in fiscal 2022 reflects a continued strong Australian pleasure craft market, continued demand for the Company’s oil and gas transmissions by the Chinese market and a general economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales into the European market declined approximately 6% from fiscal 2021 levels while accounting for 31% of consolidated net sales in fiscal 2021 compared to 37% of net sales in fiscal 2021. Despite strengthening demand, the region experienced significant supply chain challenges and an unfavorable currency exchange impact. See Note J, Business Segments and Foreign Operations, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for more information on the Company’s business segments and foreign operations.
Gross Profit
In fiscal 2022, gross profit improved $18.0 million, or 35.3%, to $68.8 million on a sales increase of $24.3 million. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased 500 basis points in fiscal 2022 to 28.3%, compared to 23.3% in fiscal 2021. The table below summarizes the gross profit trend by quarter for fiscal years 2022 and 2021:
There were a number of factors that impacted the Company’s overall gross profit rate in fiscal 2022. Gross profit for the year was primarily impacted by improved volumes and a significantly more favorable product mix. This was driven by the global economic recovery following the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and a significant increase in the sales of high-margin oil and gas transmissions and parts. The Company also experienced a net favorable improvement in margins from the recording of benefits related to COVID-19 relief programs of the U.S. and the Netherlands, totaling $1.4 million. The Company estimates the net favorable impact of increased volumes on gross margin in fiscal 2022 was approximately $5.7 million. The favorable shift in product mix, primarily related to the increased shipments of the Company’s high margin oil and gas transmission units and aftermarket products, had an estimated favorable impact of $9.6 million.
Marketing, Engineering and Administrative (ME&A) Expenses
Marketing, engineering, and administrative (ME&A) expenses of $60.1 million were up $4.3 million, or 7.8%, in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of sales, ME&A expenses decreased to 24.7% of sales versus 25.5% of sales in fiscal 2021. The increase in ME&A spending in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year was driven by increased domestic salaries and benefits ($2.4 million), increased marketing activities ($0.4 million), additional engineering project spending ($0.5 million), increased travel expense ($0.4 million) and bad debt expense ($0.3 million), higher professional fees ($0.8 million), reduced benefit from the U.S. employee retention credit program ($0.7 million) and an inflationary impact estimated at $2.0 million. These increases were partially offset by an increase in the receipt of Dutch COVID-19 subsidy payments ($1.2 million), the absence of a prior year one-off product issue ($0.8 million) and an exchange driven decrease ($1.2 million).
Restructuring of Operations
During the course of fiscal 2022, the Company incurred $1.0 million in restructuring charges. These charges relate to a continued restructuring program at the Company’s Belgian operation to focus resources on core manufacturing process, while allowing for savings on the outsourcing of non-core processes. In fiscal 2021, the Company incurred $7.4 million in restructuring charges. These charges relate to the Belgian restructuring program just mentioned ($2.3 million), an impairment charge of the Company’s corporate office building ($4.3 million), and other restructuring activities at the company’s domestic and European operations ($0.8 million). Restructuring activities since June 2015 have resulted in the elimination of 254 full-time employees in the manufacturing segment. Accumulated costs to date under these programs within the manufacturing segment through June 30, 2022 were $16,226.
Income from Extinguishment of Loan
During the fourth fiscal quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company received formal forgiveness of its PPP Loan in the amount of $8.2 million. The Company recorded $8.2 million in income from extinguishment of loan in its consolidated statement of operations in fiscal 2021. See Note G, Debt, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the PPP loan.
Interest Expense
Interest expense of $2.1 million for fiscal 2022 was $0.3 million lower than fiscal 2021 on a relatively stable average interest rate and a lower average balance on the domestic revolver.
Other income (expense), net
In fiscal 2022, other income, net, of $1.3 million improved by $4.7 million from a prior fiscal year other expense, net, of ($3.4 million). This change is primarily due to the impact of currency movements related to the euro and Asian currencies.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 is 17.8% compared to -200.0% for fiscal 2021. During the prior fiscal year, the Company received full forgiveness of its PPP loan which resulted in an increase to the effective tax rate of 17.5%.
The Company maintains valuation allowances when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in valuation allowances from period to period are included in the tax provision in the period of change. In determining whether a valuation allowance is required, the Company takes into account such factors as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carry-back and carry-forward periods, and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. In fiscal 2021, the Company evaluated the likelihood of whether the net domestic deferred tax assets would be realized and concluded that it is more likely than not that all of deferred tax assets would not be realized. Management believes that it is more likely than not that the results of future operations will not generate sufficient taxable income and foreign source income to realize all the domestic deferred tax assets, therefore, a valuation allowance in the amount of $24.4 million, was included in income tax expense (benefit) on the consolidated statement of operations, for fiscal year 2021. In fiscal year 2022, the valuation allowance was $23.1 million,
Order Rates
As of June 30, 2022, the Company’s backlog of orders scheduled for shipment during the next six months (six-month backlog) was $101.2 million or approximately 44% higher than the six-month backlog of $70.3 million as of June 30, 2021. The increased backlog is primarily attributable to the improvement in order rates throughout the fiscal year resulting from the global economic recovery following the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Fiscal Years 2022 and 2021
The net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2022 totaled $8.3 million, a change of ($14.8 million) from the prior fiscal year cash provided by operating activities of $6.5 million. The negative operating cash flow was created primarily by an increase to inventory ($12.2 million) and trade accounts receivable ($5.9 million) compared to the prior year end. The increased inventory is the result of the global volume increase, along with rampant supply chain disruptions creating imbalanced inventory at our operations. These disruptions were mitigated somewhat during the fourth quarter, but remain a significant challenge. The increase in trade accounts receivable reflects a very strong shipping month in June, with collection to follow in fiscal 2023. These increases were partially offset by an increase in accrued liabilities compared to the prior year end.
The net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2022 primarily represents the proceeds from the sale of real property in Switzerland and Italy ($9.5 million), partially offset by capital spending activity totaling $4.7 million. The capital spending amount reflects a continued focus on cash conservation as we navigated through the extreme economic uncertainty brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, along with extended lead times on equipment resulting from global supply chain challenges.
The net cash provided by financing activities relates primarily to borrowings of long-term debt ($3.9 million), partially offset by payments for withholding taxes on stock compensation ($0.5 million), payments on finance lease obligations ($0.9 million) and dividends paid to a non-controlling interest ($0.2 million). During fiscal 2022, the Company did not purchase any shares as part of its Board-authorized stock repurchase program. The Company has 315,000 shares remaining under its authorized stock repurchase plan.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 29, 2018, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with BMO Harris Bank N.A. (“BMO”) that provided for the assignment and assumption of the previously existing loans between the Company and Bank of Montreal (the “2016 Credit Agreement”) and subsequent amendments into a term loan (the “Term Loan”) and revolving credit loans (each a “Revolving Loan” and, collectively, the “Revolving Loans,” and, together with the Term Loan, the “Loans”). Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, BMO agreed to make the Term Loan to the Company in a principal amount not to exceed $35.0 million and the Company may, from time to time prior to the maturity date, enter into Revolving Loans in amounts not to exceed, in the aggregate, $50.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Commitment”). The Credit Agreement also allows the Company to obtain Letters of Credit from BMO, which if drawn upon by the beneficiary thereof and paid by BMO, would become Revolving Loans. Under the Credit Agreement, the Company may not pay cash dividends on its common stock in excess of $3.0 million in any fiscal year.
On March 4, 2019, the Company entered into a second amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. The Second Amendment reduced the principal amount of the term loan commitment under the Credit Agreement from $35.0 million to $20.0 million. In connection with the Second Amendment, the Company issued an amended and restated term note in the amount of $20.0 million to the Bank, which amended the original $35.0 million note provided under the Credit Agreement.
Prior to entering into the Second Amendment, the outstanding principal amount of the term loan (the “Term Loan”) under the Credit Agreement was $10.8 million. On the date of the Second Amendment, the Bank made an additional advance on the Term Loan to the Company in the amount of $9.2 million. The Second Amendment also extended the maturity date of the Term Loan from January 2, 2020 to March 4, 2026, and added a requirement that the Company make principal installments of $0.5 million per quarter starting with the quarter ending June 30, 2019.
The Second Amendment also reduced the applicable margin for purposes of determining the interest rate applicable to the Term Loan. Previously, the applicable margin was 3.00%, which was added to the Monthly Reset LIBOR Rate or the Adjusted LIBOR, as applicable. Under the Second Amendment, the applicable margin was between 1.375% and 2.375%, depending on the Company’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio.
The Second Amendment also adjusted certain financial covenants made by the Company under the Credit Agreement. Specifically, the Company covenanted (i) not to allow its total funded debt to EBITDA ratio to be greater than 3.00 to 1.00 (the cap had previously been 3.50 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or before September 30, 2019 and 3.25 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or about December 31, 2019 through September 30, 2020), and (ii) that its tangible net worth will not be less than $100.0 million plus 50% of net income for each fiscal year ending on and after June 30, 2019 for which net income is a positive number (the $100.0 million figure had previously been $70.0 million).
On January 28, 2020, the Company entered into a third amendment (the “Third Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. The Third Amendment restated the financial covenant provisions related to the maximum allowable ratio of total funded debt to EBITDA from 3.00 to 1.00 to 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ended December 27, 2019, 5.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending March 27, 2020, 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending June 30, 2020, 3.50 to 1.00 for the quarter ending September 25, 2020, and 3.00 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or after December 25, 2020. For purposes of determining EBITDA, the Third Amendment added back extraordinary expenses (not to exceed $3.9 million) related to the previously reported isolated product performance issue on one of the Company’s oil and gas transmission models at certain installations. Under the Third Amendment, the applicable margin for revolving loans, letters of credit, and term loans was between 1.25% and 3.375%, depending on the Company’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio.
On July 22, 2020, the Company entered into a fifth amendment (the “Fifth Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement that amends the Credit Agreement dated as of June 29, 2018, as amended, between the Company and BMO. The Fifth Amendment reduced BMO’s Revolving Credit Commitment from $50.0 million to $45.0 million. The Fifth Amendment also gives the Company the option to make interest-only payments on the Term Loan for quarterly payments occurring on September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, and limits the Company’s Capital Expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021 to $10.0 million.
The Fifth Amendment provides the Company with relief from its Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio financial covenant under the Credit Agreement through (and including) the earlier of June 30, 2021 or a date selected by the Company. During the financial covenant relief period:
●
The “Applicable Margin” to be applied to Revolving Loans, the Term Loan, and the Commitment/Facility Fee increased to 3.25%, 3.875%, and 0.20%, respectively.
●
The Company may not make certain restricted payments (specifically, cash dividends, distributions, purchases, redemptions or other acquisitions of or with respect to shares of its common stock or other common equity interests).
●
The Company must maintain liquidity (as defined in the Fifth Amendment) of at least $15.0 million.
●
The Company must maintain minimum EBITDA of at least (1) $1.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2020 and the two fiscal quarters ending on or about September 30, 2020; (2) $2.5 million for the three fiscal quarters ending on or about December 31, 2020; (3) $6.0 million for the four fiscal quarters ending on or about March 31, 2021; and (4) $10.0 million for the four fiscal quarters ending June 30, 2021.
For purposes of the minimum EBITDA covenant and the Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio, the Fifth Amendment clarified that EBITDA shall exclude any gain that is realized on the forgiveness of the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program loan that the Company previously received.
The Fifth Amendment also changed the definition of “LIBOR” (used in calculating interest on Eurodollar Loans), “Monthly Reset LIBOR Rate” (used in calculating interest on LIBOR Loans), and “LIBOR Quoted Rate” (used in the definition of “Base Rate,” which is used in calculating interest on Letters of Credit that are drawn upon and not timely reimbursed).
The Company also entered into a Deposit Account Control Agreement with the Bank, reflecting the Bank’s security interest in deposit accounts the Company maintains with the Bank. Under the Fifth Amendment, the Bank may not provide a notice of exclusive control of a deposit account (thereby obtaining exclusive control of the account) prior to the occurrence or existence of a Default or an Event of Default under the Credit Agreement or otherwise upon the occurrence or existence of an event or condition that would, but for the passage of time or the giving of notice, constitute a Default or an Event of Default under the Credit Agreement.
On January 27, 2021, the Company entered into a Forbearance Agreement and Amendment No. 6 to the Credit Agreement (the “Forbearance Agreement”) that further amended the Credit Agreement.
The Company entered into the Forbearance Agreement because the Company was not in compliance with its financial covenant to maintain a minimum EBITDA of at least $2.5 million for the three fiscal quarters ended as of December 25, 2020. In the Forbearance Agreement, the Bank agreed to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies against the Company under the Credit Agreement with respect to the Company’s noncompliance with the minimum EBITDA covenant during the period (the “Forbearance Period”) commencing January 27, 2021 and ending on the earlier of (i) September 30, 2021, and (ii) the date on which a default under the Forbearance Agreement or Credit Agreement occurs. During the Forbearance Period, the Bank agreed to continue to honor requests of the Company for draws on the revolving note provided by the Bank under the Credit Agreement, except that the revolving credit commitment was reduced from $45.0 million to $42.5 million during the Forbearance Period.
The Forbearance Agreement also added to the Company’s financial reporting requirements under the Credit Agreement by requiring the Company to provide the Bank with monthly forecasts of the Company’s financial statements, and monthly reports on the Company’s six-month backlog.
On September 30, 2021, the Company entered into a First Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement and Amendment No. 7 to Credit Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement”) that amends the Credit Agreement dated as of June 29, 2018, as amended between the Company and the Bank.
The Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement extended the Forbearance Period through February 28, 2022, or if earlier, through the date on which a default under the Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement or Credit Agreement occurs. During the extended Forbearance Period, the Bank agreed to continue to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies against the Company under the Credit Agreement with respect to the Company’s noncompliance with its minimum EBITDA covenants. The Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement also made certain adjustments to the Credit Agreement, including:
●
Permitting the Company to sell its manufacturing facility in Novazzano, Switzerland for a gross sales price of approximately $10 million, resulting in Net Cash Proceeds of approximately $8.7 million (the “Rolla Disposition”).
●
Requiring the Company to promptly repatriate approximately $7 million of the Net Cash Proceeds from the Rolla Disposition (the “Rolla Repatriation”), and to apply $1 million of such Net Cash Proceeds to the Term Loan and the remainder to the revolving Loans under the Credit Agreement.
●
Upon completion of the Rolla Repatriation: (1) reducing the portion of the Borrowing Base that is based on Eligible Inventory from the lesser of $35 million or 50% of the value of Eligible Inventory to the lesser of $30 million or 50% of the value of Eligible Inventory; and (2) reducing the Revolving Credit Commitment from a maximum of $42.5 million to a maximum of $40 million.
On February 28, 2022, the Company entered into a Second Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement and Amendment No. 8 to Credit Agreement (the “Second Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement”) that amended the Credit Agreement dated as of June 29, 2018, as amended between the Company and the Bank.
The Second Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement extended the Forbearance Period through June 30, 2022, or if earlier, through the date on which a default under the Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement or Credit Agreement occurs. During the extended Forbearance Period, the Bank continued to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies against the Company under the Credit Agreement with respect to the Company’s noncompliance with its minimum EBITDA covenants. The Second Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement also made certain adjustments to the Credit Agreement, including:
●
Reduced the portion of the Borrowing Base that is based on Eligible Inventory from the lesser of $35,000,000 or 50% of the value of Eligible Inventory to the lesser of $30,000,000 or 50% of the value of Eligible Inventory. This change was already in effect under the terms of the Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement, due to the Company’s previously reported sale of its manufacturing facility in Novazzano, Switzerland for a gross sales price of approximately $10,000,000, resulting in Net Cash Proceeds (as defined in the Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement) of approximately $8,700,000 (the “Rolla Disposition”) and repatriation of approximately $7,000,000 of those Net Cash Proceeds (the “Rolla Repatriation”).
●
Reduced the Revolving Credit Commitment from a maximum of $42,500,000 to a maximum of $40,000,000. This change was also already in effect under the terms of the Amended and Restated Forbearance Agreement due to the Rolla Disposition and Rolla Repatriation.
The Company also executed a Third Amended and Restated Revolving Note with the Bank, reflecting the maximum Revolving Credit Commitment of $40,000,000.
On June 30, 2022, the Company entered into Amendment No. 9 to Credit Agreement (the “Ninth Amendment”) that amends and extends the Credit Agreement dated as of June 29, 2018, as amended (the “Credit Agreement”) between the Company and the Bank.
Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, as in effect prior to the Ninth Amendment, the Bank made a Term Loan to the Company in the principal amount of $20,000,000, and the Company may, from time to time prior to the maturity date, enter into Revolving Loans in amounts not to exceed, in the aggregate and subject to a Borrowing Base, $40,000,000 (the “Revolving Credit Commitment”). The Credit Agreement also allows the Company to obtain Letters of Credit from the Bank, which if drawn upon by the beneficiary thereof and paid by the Bank, would become Revolving Loans.
The Ninth Amendment extended the Credit Agreement through June 30, 2025. Prior to the Ninth Amendment, the Credit Agreement was scheduled to terminate as of June 30, 2023.
The Ninth Amendment also formally terminated the January 27, 2021 Forbearance Agreement, which had been entered into because the Company had not been in compliance with a requirement to maintain a minimum EBITDA of $2,500,000 for the three fiscal quarters ended as of December 25, 2020. The Bank also waived the Company’s compliance with the minimum EBITDA requirements under the Credit Agreement and any Event of Default associated with the Company’s noncompliance with the minimum EBITDA requirements.
The Ninth Amendment also replaced LIBOR-based interest rates with different benchmark rates based on the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) or the euro interbank offered rate (the “EURIBO Rate”). Loans under the Credit Agreement are designated either as “SOFR Loans,” which accrue interest at an Adjusted Term SOFR plus an Applicable Margin, or “Eurodollar Loans,” which accrue interest at the EURIBO Rate plus an Applicable Margin. Amounts drawn on a Letter of Credit that are not timely reimbursed to the Bank bear interest at a Base Rate plus an Applicable Margin. The Company also pays a commitment fee on the average daily Unused Revolving Credit Commitment equal to an Applicable Margin.
The Ninth Amendment also reduced the Applicable Margins from the rates that had been in effect during the period of the Forbearance Agreement. During the period covered by the Forbearance Agreement, the Applicable Margins for Revolving Loans, Term Loans, and the Unused Revolving Credit Commitment were 3.25%, 3.875%, and .20%, respectively. Under the Ninth Amendment, the Applicable Margins are between 1.25% and 2.75% for Revolving Loans and Letters of Credit; 1.375% and 2.875% for Term Loans; and .10% and .15% for the Unused Revolving Credit Commitment (each depending on the Company’s Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio).
The Ninth Amendment also revised the Company’s financial covenants under the Credit Agreement. The Company’s Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio (for which the Bank provided relief during period covered by the Forbearance Agreement) may not exceed 3.50 to 1.00, and the Company’s Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio may not be less than 1.10 to 1.00. The Company’s Tangible Net Worth may not be less than $100,000,000 plus 50% of positive Net Income for each fiscal year ending on or after June 30, 2023.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the Company’s personal property, including accounts receivable, inventory, machinery and equipment, and intellectual property. The Company has also pledged 100% of its equity interests in certain domestic subsidiaries and 65% of its equity interests in certain foreign subsidiaries. The Company also entered into a Collateral Assignment of Rights under Purchase Agreement for its acquisition of Veth Propulsion. To effect these security interests, the Company entered into various amendment and assignment agreements that consent to the assignment of certain agreements previously entered into between the Company and the Bank of Montreal in connection with the 2016 Credit Agreement. The Company also amended and assigned to BMO a Negative Pledge Agreement that it has previously entered into with Bank of Montreal, pursuant to which it agreed not to sell, lease or otherwise encumber real estate that it owns except as permitted by the Credit Agreement and the Negative Pledge Agreement.
Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, BMO may take the following actions upon written notice to the Company: (1) terminate its remaining obligations under the Credit Agreement; (2) declare all amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable; and (3) demand the Company to immediately Cash Collateralize L/C Obligations in an amount equal to 105% of the aggregate L/C Obligations or a greater amount if BMO determines a greater amount is necessary. If such Event of Default is due to the Company’s bankruptcy, the Bank may take the three actions listed above without notice to the Company.
On March 3, 2021 the Company submitted its application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. The application was supported by documentation of qualified expenses and compliance of eligibility with the program. On June 16, 2021 the Company was notified by the SBA that the PPP loan was fully forgiven. The Company recorded the forgiveness as income from extinguishment of loan. This is described further in Note G, Debt, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company’s balance sheet remains strong, there are no material off-balance-sheet arrangements, and it continues to have sufficient liquidity for its near-term needs. The Company had approximately $17.0 million of available borrowings under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2022. The Company expects to continue to generate enough cash from operations, as well as its credit facilities, to meet its operating and investing needs. As of June 30, 2022, the Company also had cash of $12.5 million, primarily at its overseas operations. These funds, with some restrictions and tax implications, are available for repatriation as deemed necessary by the Company. In fiscal 2023, the Company expects to contribute $0.6 million to its defined benefit pension plans, the minimum contribution required.
Net working capital increased $10.0 million, or 8.8%, during fiscal 2022 and the current ratio (calculated as total current assets divided by total current liabilities) increased from 2.4 at June 30, 2021 to 2.5 at June 30, 2022. The increase in net working capital was primarily the result of an increase to inventory ($9.1 million) resulting from growing demand and supply chain imbalances. Other increases included trade receivables ($6.0 million - due to increased sales volume in the fourth quarter), lower trade payables ($2.5 million) and slightly higher other current assets ($0.8 million). These increases were partially offset by a reduction in the current portion of assets held for sale ($6.6 million - due primarily to the sale of a Swiss property) and increased accrued expenses ($5.0 million).
The Company expects capital expenditures to be approximately $12 million - $15 million in fiscal 2022. These anticipated expenditures reflect the Company’s plans to invest in modern equipment to drive efficiencies, quality improvements and cost reductions.
Management believes that available cash, the credit facility, cash generated from future operations, and potential access to debt markets will be adequate to fund the Company’s capital requirements for the foreseeable future.
Contractual Obligations
The Company's significant contractual obligations as of June 30, 2022 are discussed in Note H “Lease Obligations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K. There are no material undisclosed guarantees. As of June 30, 2022, the Company had no additional material purchase obligations other than those created in the ordinary course of business related to inventory and property, plant and equipment, which generally have terms of less than 90 days. The Company also has long-term obligations related to its postretirement plans which are discussed in detail in Note M “Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Postretirement medical claims are paid by the Company as they are submitted, and they are anticipated to be $0.3 million in 2022 based on actuarial estimates; however, these amounts can vary significantly from year to year because the Company is self-insured. In fiscal 2023, the Company expects to contribute $0.6 million to its defined benefit pension plans, the minimum contribution required.
Other Matters
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of this Annual Report requires management’s judgment to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note A, Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Not all of these significant accounting policies require management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments or estimates. However, the policies management considers most critical to understanding and evaluating its reported financial results are the following:
Accounts Receivable
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and adjusts credit limits based on payment history and the customer’s credit-worthiness as determined by review of current credit information. The Company continuously monitors collections and payments from its customers and maintains a provision for estimated credit losses based upon its historical experience and any specific customer-collection issues. In addition, senior management reviews the accounts receivable aging on a monthly basis to determine if any receivable balances may be uncollectible. Although the Company’s accounts receivable are dispersed among a large customer base, a significant change in the liquidity or financial position of any one of its largest customers could have a material adverse impact on the collectability of its accounts receivable and future operating results.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost has been determined by the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method for the majority of the inventories located in the United States, and by the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method for all other inventories. Management specifically identifies obsolete products and analyzes historical usage, forecasted production based on future orders, demand forecasts, and economic trends when evaluating the adequacy of the reserve for excess and obsolete inventory. The adjustments to the reserve are estimates that could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from the actual requirements if future economic conditions, customer demand or competitive conditions differ from expectations.
Assets Held for Sale
Assets that will be recovered principally through sale rather than in its continuing use in operations are reclassified out of property, plant and equipment and into assets held for sale if all of the following criteria are met: (a) management, having the authority to approve the action, commits to a plan to sell the asset(s); (b) the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition subject only to terms that are usual and customary for sales of such assets; (c) an active program to locate a buyer, and other actions required to complete the plan to sell the asset have been initiated; (d) the sale of the asset is probable and the transfer of the asset is expected to qualify for recognition as a completed sale within a year; (e) the asset is being actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its current fair value; and (f) actions required to complete the plan indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or that plan will be withdrawn.
Assets Held for Sale are carried at fair value less costs to sell, or net book value, whichever is lower. The Company ceases to record depreciation expense at the time of designation as held for sale.
Long-lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. For property, plant and equipment and other long-lived assets, including intangible assets, the Company performs undiscounted operating cash flow analyses to determine if an impairment exists. If an impairment is determined to exist, any related impairment loss is calculated based on fair value. Fair value is primarily determined using discounted cash flow analyses; however, other methods may be used to substantiate the discounted cash flow analyses, including third party valuations when necessary.
Warranty
The Company engages in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of its suppliers. However, its warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates, the extent of the market affected by the failure and the expense involved in satisfactorily addressing the situation. The warranty reserve is established based on the Company’s best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. When evaluating the adequacy of the reserve for warranty costs, management takes into consideration the term of the warranty coverage, historical claim rates and costs of repair, knowledge of the type and volume of new products and economic trends. While the Company believes that the warranty reserve is adequate and that the judgment applied is appropriate, such amounts estimated to be due and payable in the future could differ materially from what actually transpires.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company provides a wide range of benefits to employees and retired employees, including pensions and postretirement health care coverage. Plan assets and obligations are recorded annually based on the Company’s measurement date utilizing various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates, expected return on plan assets, compensation increases, retirement and mortality tables, and health care cost trend rates as of that date. The approach used to determine the annual assumptions are as follows:
●
Discount Rate - based on the Willis Towers Watson BOND:Link model at June 30, 2022 as applied to the expected payouts from the pension plans. This yield curve is made up of Corporate Bonds rated AA or better.
●
Expected Return on Plan Assets - based on the expected long-term average rate of return on assets in the pension funds, which is reflective of the current and projected asset mix of the funds and considers historical returns earned on the funds.
●
Compensation Increase - reflect the long-term actual experience, the near-term outlook and assumed inflation.
●
Retirement and Mortality Rates - based upon the Society of Actuaries PRI-2012 base tables for annuitants and non-annuitants, adjusted for generational mortality improvement based on the Society of Actuaries modified MP-2021 projection scale.
●
Health Care Cost Trend Rates - developed based upon historical cost data, near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends.
Measurements of net periodic benefit cost are based on the assumptions used for the previous year-end measurements of assets and obligations. The Company reviews its actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and makes modifications to the assumptions when appropriate. The effects of the modifications are recorded currently or amortized over future periods. Based on information provided by its independent actuaries and other relevant sources, the Company believes that the assumptions used are reasonable; however, changes in these assumptions could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Income Taxes and Valuation Allowances
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company maintains valuation allowances when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is required, the Company considers such factors as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carry-back and carry-forward periods, and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. Based on the above criteria the Company has determined that a full valuation allowance is appropriate as relates to its domestic operations. A full domestic valuation allowance of $24.4 million has been recognized in fiscal 2022. The recognition of a valuation allowance does not affect the availability of the tax credits as the Company realizes earnings.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note A, Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.