Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary” herein for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
A discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 is included under "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our prospectus for our initial public offering (the "IPO"), dated September 14, 2021, and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on September 16, 2021 (the “IPO Prospectus”).
Overview
We are a global technology consultancy that integrates strategy, design and engineering to drive digital innovation. We are 10,600+ Thoughtworkers strong across 49 offices in 17 countries. Over the last 25+ years, we’ve delivered extraordinary impact together with our clients by helping them solve complex business problems with technology as the differentiator.
Our revenues are generated from providing professional services based on the mix and locations of delivery professionals involved, the pricing structure, which is predominantly time-and-materials, and the type of services, including: enterprise modernization, platforms & cloud; customer experience, product & design; data & artificial intelligence; and digital transformation & operations.
Initial Public Offering
On September 17, 2021, we successfully completed and closed our IPO, in which 42,368,421 shares of our common stock were sold at $21.00 per share, including 5,526,315 shares sold upon the exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares from certain of the selling stockholders. The Company received net proceeds of $314.7 million, net of the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of approximately $30.3 million. Prior to the completion of the IPO, all shares of the Company's common stock then outstanding were converted into 5,259,163 shares before the Stock Split (as defined below) of common stock on a 1-for-1 basis, and upon the completion of the IPO, all 1,365,058 shares before the Stock Split of the Company’s outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock converted into an equivalent number of shares of common stock on a 1-for-1 basis.
Additionally, prior to the completion of the IPO, the Company effected an approximately 43.6-for-1 split of each outstanding share of common stock (the “Stock Split”). All share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to effect the Stock Split for all periods presented, except as otherwise noted.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key operational and business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Certain of our subsidiaries use functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar and the translation of these foreign currency amounts into the U.S. dollar can impact the comparability of our revenues between periods. Accordingly, we use Revenue Growth Rate at constant currency as an important indicator of our underlying performance. Revenue Growth Rate at constant currency is calculated by applying the average exchange rates in effect during the earlier comparative fiscal period to the later fiscal period.
(2)We use Adjusted Net Income as an important indicator of our performance. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a definition of and reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, how we use this measure and an explanation of why we consider this non-GAAP measure to be helpful for investors.
(3)We also use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as important indicators of our performance. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for a definition of and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, how we use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin and an explanation of why we consider these non-GAAP measures to be helpful for investors.
Revenue Growth Rate and Revenue Growth Rate at constant currency
The initial impact of COVID-19 in early 2020 negatively impacted our revenues, however, we returned to pre-COVID revenue growth by the fourth quarter of 2020 and continued to have positive revenue growth trends in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported revenue growth of 33.2% over the prior year. Had our consolidated revenues been expressed in constant currency terms using the exchange rates in effect for the year ended December 31, 2020, we would have reported revenue growth of 29.3%. The positive impact to revenues, from foreign currencies, was as a result of the depreciation of the U.S. dollar relative to certain principal functional currencies of our subsidiaries.
For more detail regarding our exposure to foreign currency rate fluctuations, see Note 2, Revenue Recognition, to our consolidated financial statements and “