ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on May 29, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
On March 1, 2021, we entered into the business combination Agreement with Merger Sub, QOMPLX and the QOMPLX Stockholder Representative. On August 17, 2021, the Company and QOMPLX terminated the business combination Agreement in a mutual decision not to pursue the QOMPLX business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $17,789,488, which consists of the interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $120,063 and a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $23,241,491, offset by operational costs of $5,572,066.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $17,900,526, which consists of interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $105,431 offset by formation and operational costs of $387,335, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $16,902,902 and transaction costs associated with our initial public offering of $715,720.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 9, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 33,421,570 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,421,570 units, generating gross proceeds of $334,215,700. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 9,700,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9,700,000.
Following our initial public offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriter’s and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $334,215,700 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $18,847,894 in transaction costs, including $6,684,314 of underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $11,697,550 of deferred underwriting fees and $466,030 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,749,104. Net income of $17,789,488 was affected by a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $23,241,491 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $120,063. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $3,822,962 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $454,858. Net loss of $17,900,526 was affected by the transaction costs associated with our initial public offering of $715,720, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $16,902,902 and interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $105,431. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $67,523 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities and cash held in the trust account of $334,441,194. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust accountt will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $479,694 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, of the post business combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Going Concern and Liquidity
We have until September 9, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until the liquidation date. Additionally, it is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. The Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until one year from the issuance of the financial statements included in this Report. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after September 9, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not
entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial, and administrative support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on September 9, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriter in the initial public offering is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $11,697,550 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income ( Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces
additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.