Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading sweet snacks company focused on developing, manufacturing, marketing, selling and distributing snack products in North America, providing a wide range of snack cakes, donuts, sweet rolls, breakfast pastries, cookies, snack pies and related products. As of December 31, 2021, we operate five baking facilities and utilize distribution centers and third-party warehouses to distribute our products. Our Direct-to-Warehouse product distribution system allows us to deliver to our customers’ warehouses. Our customers in turn distribute to their retail stores and/or distributors.
The Company has one reportable segment: Snacking. The Snacking segment consists of sweet baked goods, cookies, bread and buns that are sold under the Hostess®, Voortman®, Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill® and Big Texas® brands.
Hostess® is the second leading brand by market share within the Sweet Baked Goods (“SBG”) category, according to Nielsen U.S. total universe. For the 52-week period ended January 1, 2022 our branded SBG products’ (which include Hostess®, Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill®, and Big Texas®) market share was 21.3% per Nielsen’s U.S. SBG category data. Our Voortman® branded products include the #1 creme wafer and sugar-free cookie products within the larger Cookie category.
Principal Components of Operating Results
Net Revenue
We generate revenue through selling packaged snacks which include iconic products such as Donettes®, Twinkies®, CupCakes, Ding Dongs®, Zingers®, Danishes, Honey Buns and Coffee Cakes under the Hostess® group of brands, as well as cookies, wafers and sugar-free products under the Voortman® brand. We also sell products under the Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill® and Big Texas® brands along with private label products. Our product assortment is sold to customers’ warehouses and distribution centers by the case or in display-ready corrugate units. Retailers display and sell our products to the end consumer in single-serve, multi-pack or club-pack formats. We sell our products primarily to supermarket chains, national mass retailers and convenience and drug stores, along with a smaller portion of our product sales going to club stores, dollar stores, vending, and other retail outlets.
Our revenues are driven by average net price and total volume of products sold. Factors that impact unit pricing and sales volume include product mix, the cost of ingredients, promotional activities, industry capacity, new product initiatives and quality and consumer preferences. We do not keep a significant backlog of finished goods inventory, as our baked products are promptly shipped to our distribution centers after being produced and then distributed to customers.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists of ingredients, packaging, labor, energy, other production costs and warehousing and transportation costs including in-bound freight, inter-plant transportation and distribution of our products to customers. The cost of ingredients and packaging represent the majority of our total costs of goods sold. All costs that are incurred at the bakeries, including the depreciation of bakery facilities and equipment, are included in cost of goods sold. We do not allocate any corporate functions into cost of goods sold.
Our cost of ingredients consists principally of cooking oil, sugar, coatings and flour, which are subject to substantial price fluctuations, as is the cost of paper, corrugate, films and plastics used to package our products. The prices for raw materials are influenced by a number of factors, including the weather, crop production, transportation and processing costs, government regulation and policies and worldwide market supply and demand. We also rely on fuel products, such as natural gas, diesel, propane and electricity, to operate our bakeries and produce our products. Fluctuations in the prices of the raw materials or fuel products used in the production, packaging or transportation of our products affect the cost of products sold and our product pricing strategy. We utilize forward buying strategies through short-term and long-term advance purchase contracts to lock in prices for certain high-volume raw materials, packaged components and certain fuel inputs. Through these initiatives, we believe we are able to obtain competitive pricing.
Advertising and Marketing
Our advertising and marketing expenses include wire racks and corrugate displays delivered to customers to display our products off shelf, field marketing and merchandising services to reset and check our store inventory on a regular basis. We also invest in advertising campaigns, which include social media, print, online advertising, local promotional events, monthly agency fees and payroll costs.
Selling
Selling expenses primarily include sales management, sales employee related expenses, travel, and related expenses, as well as broker fees. We utilize brokers for sales support, including managing promotional activities and order processing.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily include employee and related expenses for the accounting, finance, customer service, legal, human resources, corporate operations, research and development, purchasing, logistics and executive functions. Also included are professional service fees related to audit and tax, legal, outsourced information technology functions, transportation planning, headquarters and other office sites and insurance costs, as well as the depreciation and amortization of corporate assets.
Other Expenses
Other expenses primarily include interest paid on our term loan as well as the change in fair value of our liability-classified public and private placement warrants.
Non-Controlling Interest
During the year ended December 31, 2020, Mr. Metropoulos and the Metropoulos Entities held equity investment in us primarily through Class B limited partnership units in the Company’s subsidiary, Hostess Holdings (“Class B Units”), and an equal number of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (“Class B Stock”). Our Class B Stock had voting, but no economic rights, while Hostess Holdings’ Class B Units had economic, but no voting rights. Each Class B Unit, together with a share of Class B Stock held by the Metropoulos Entities, was exchangeable for a share of the Company’s Class A common stock (or at the option of the Company, the cash equivalent thereof). The Company held 100% of the general partnership interest in Hostess Holdings. Subsequent to final exchange described below, the partnership was dissolved. The interest of the Metropoulos Entities in Hostess Holdings’ Class B Units prior to the final exchange is reflected in our consolidated financial statements as a non-controlling interest. The Metropoulos Entities have eliminated their ownership through a series of exchanges of shares of Class B Stock and Class B Units for an equal number of Class A shares. As part of the final exchange, we repurchased 0.4 million shares of Class A common stock from the Metropoulos Entities. The remaining shares were purchased by third parties. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding shares of Class B common stock.
Factors Impacting Recent Results
COVID-19
The acute and far-reaching impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by governments to contain the spread of the virus have impacted our operations. During the first two quarters of 2020, as consumers prepared for extended stays at home, we experienced an increase in consumption, particularly in our multi-pack products sold through grocery and mass retailer channels. Conversely, during that same time frame, we experienced lower consumption of single-serve products, which are often consumed away from home. During the second half of 2020 and all of 2021, we have continued to experience strong demand in our multi-pack products, as well as an increase in our immediate consumption single-serve business as mobility increased. However, we cannot predict if these trends will sustain or reverse in future periods.
Since the start of the pandemic, our internal COVID-19 task force has monitored the rapidly evolving situation and implemented risk mitigation actions as deemed necessary. To date, we have not experienced significant disruptions to our supply chain and distribution network. However, it is possible that significant disruptions could still occur. Supply chain constraints seen elsewhere in the global economy due to availability of labor, transportation and raw materials could impact our ability to source ingredients and packaging for our bakeries or our ability to ship products to our customers. We continue to work closely with all of our vendors, distributors, contract manufacturers, and other external business partners to ensure availability of our products for our customers and consumers.
To protect our employees and ensure continuity of operations, we have implemented additional safety and sanitation measures in all of our facilities. We continue to follow protocols that are consistent with, or ahead of applicable local, state and federal guidelines. As many of our non-production team members, including sales, marketing and corporate employees, return to the office after working remotely for many months, we continue to monitor employee health and safety and adhere to evolving CDC guidelines while supporting our ability to bring products to consumers.
Despite the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, uncertainty continues to exist regarding the pandemic and its impact on our business, including uncertainty related to, among other things, the duration of the pandemic, vaccine deployment and acceptance, new variants of COVID-19 and vaccine effectiveness for new variants, and the effect of actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its effect.
Under the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, we were able to defer the payment of $5.6 million of 2020 employer payroll taxes. Payments of $2.8 million continue to be deferred as of December 31, 2021. Apart from this deferral and their impact on the general economy, including the labor market and consumer demand, neither the CARES Act, the American Rescue Plan enacted in the first quarter of 2021, nor any other government program intended to address COVID-19 had any material impact on our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. We continue to monitor any effects that may result from the CARES Act and other stimulus programs.
Acquisition
On January 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of all of the shares of the parent company of Voortman Cookies Limited (“Voortman”), a manufacturer of premium, branded wafers and cookies, including sugar-free products. By adding the Voortman® brand, we believe we have greater growth opportunities provided by a more diverse portfolio of brands and products. Our consolidated statements of operations include the operation of these assets from January 3, 2020 through December 31, 2021. In December 2020, we asserted claims for indemnification against the sellers under the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we acquired Voortman for an aggregate of approximately $90 million Canadian Dollar (“CAD”) in damages arising out of alleged breaches by the sellers of certain representations, warranties and covenants contained in such agreement relating to periods prior to the closing of the acquisition. We have also submitted claims relating to these alleged breaches under the representation and warranty insurance policy we purchased in connection with the acquisition. Such insurance policy has a coverage limit of $42.5 million CAD. We have entered into an agreement with the sellers to toll the running of any applicable limitation period that may apply to our claim against them while we work through our claim with our insurers. Although we strongly believe that our claims are meritorious, no assurance can be given as to whether we will recover all, or any part, of the amounts for which we have made such claims. No gains or receivables have been recognized related to these claims as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were fluctuations in the market price of our publicly traded warrants. These fluctuations created significant gains and losses on the remeasurement of certain warrants which are recognized as liabilities measured at fair value on our consolidated balance sheets. These remeasurements are recognized as “change in fair value of warrant liabilities” within other expenses on our consolidated statements of operations.
Results of Operations
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $125.4 million, or 12.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 with higher volumes accounting for approximately seven percentage points of the annual growth. Sweet baked goods revenue increased $105.1 million or 11.4% due to higher volume in Convenience, Grocery and Dollar channels, the benefit of pricing actions implemented in the second half of the year and continued momentum of single-serve products driving favorable product mix. Cookies net revenue increased $20.3 million or 21.1% due to distribution growth and lapping the initial Voortman slotting fees paid in 2020 to obtain space in customer warehouses.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was 35.9% of net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 92 basis points from a gross margin of 35.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit was driven primarily by higher volume, productivity initiatives, pricing actions, and favorable product mix, as well as lapping Voortman acquisition and facility transition costs and COVID-19 costs in the prior year. These benefits were partially offset by transportation and input cost inflation.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Operating costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 5.0% from the year ended December 31, 2020. These costs decreased primarily due to lapping Voortman acquisition and integration costs and conversion of Voortman’s operations. Operating costs in 2020 also reflect an impairment expense related to the planned disposition of production equipment, resulting in a decrease in 2021. These decreases were partially offset by increased headcount, higher incentive compensation, additional investment in marketing spend and increased project consulting costs.
Operating Income
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $200.7 million compared to $135.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit gains and lapping the Voortman acquisition and integration costs incurred in the prior year contributed to the higher operating income in the current year.
Other Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, interest expense related to our term loan was $38.6 million and $41.8 million, respectively. Also during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we recognized a $0.6 million gain and a $39.9 million gain, respectively, on the fair value remeasurement of our liability-classified public and private placement warrants. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we also recognized an unrealized gain of $0.5 million compared to a loss of $1.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the remeasurement of certain CAD denominated liabilities.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 25.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 15.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rates in both periods were impacted by non-taxable mark-to-market adjustments on our liability-classified warrants. Additionally, the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects a tax benefit related to revaluing our deferred tax liabilities due to a change in the estimated state tax rate, while the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects a portion of income which was allocated to the non-controlling interest, a pass-through entity for tax purposes.
Net Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income was $119.3 million compared to $108.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the $0.6 million gain and $39.9 million gain on remeasurement of warrant liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, net income increased as a result of higher gross profits, lower operating costs and lower interest expense.
Earnings Per Share
Our earnings per Class A share was $0.91 (basic) and $0.86 (dilutive) for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.84 (basic) and $0.51 (dilutive) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in basic and diluted earnings per share was due to the net income impacts noted above.
RECONCILIATION OF NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted net revenue, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross margin, adjusted operating income, adjusted net income, adjusted net income margin, adjusted Class A net income, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, and adjusted EPS collectively referred to as “Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” are commonly used in our industry and should not be construed as an alternative to net revenue, gross profit, gross margin operating income, net income, net income margin, net income attributed to Class A stockholders or earnings per share as indicators of operating performance (as determined in accordance with GAAP). These Non-GAAP Financial Measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We included these Non-GAAP Financial Measures because we believe the measures provide management and investors with additional information to measure the Company’s performance, estimate the Company’s value and evaluate the Company’s ability to service debt.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures are adjusted to exclude certain items that affect comparability. The adjustments are itemized in the tables below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reason we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating adjustments, you should be aware that in the future the Company may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments set forth below. The presentation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures should not be construed as an inference that future results will be unaffected by unusual or recurring items.
For example, we define adjusted EBITDA as net income adjusted to exclude (i) interest expense, net, (ii) depreciation and amortization (iii) income taxes and (iv) share-based compensation, as further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that the Company does not consider indicative of its ongoing operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of the Company's results as reported under GAAP. For example, adjusted EBITDA:
•does not reflect the Company’s capital expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, the Company’s working capital needs;
•does not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on the Company’s debt; and
•does not reflect payments related to income taxes, the tax receivable agreement or distributions to the non-controlling interest to reimburse its tax liability.
(1) Project consulting costs are included within general and administrative on the consolidated statement of operations.
(2) Costs related to certain corporate initiatives, including $2.8 million of Voortman acquisition related costs. Of the total $4.3 million, $0.7 million is included in cost of goods sold, $1.4 million is included in general and administrative and $2.2 million is included in other non-operating expenses.
(1) Adjustments to net revenue represent initial slotting fees paid to customers to obtain space in customer warehouses for the Voortman transition. Adjustments to operating costs included $8.0 million of selling expense, $8.9 million of general and administrative expenses and $4.3 million of business combination transaction costs on the consolidated statement of operations.
(2) Facility transition costs are included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
(3) COVID-19 costs are included in cost of goods sold and general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations. Total COVID-19 non-GAAP adjustments primarily consist of costs of incremental cleaning and sanitation, personal protective equipment and employee bonuses in the first half of 2020.
Adjusted Net Revenue
There were no adjustments to net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net revenue increased $118.6 million, or 11.6%, compared to adjusted net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, with higher volumes accounting for approximately seven percentage points of the annual growth. Sweet baked goods net revenue increased $105.1 million or 11.4% due to higher volume in Convenience, Grocery and Dollar channels, the benefit of pricing actions implemented in the second half of the year and continued momentum of single-serve products driving favorable product mix. Cookies adjusted net revenue increased $13.5 million or 13.1% due to strong distribution growth in 2021, including introduction to the Convenience channel and pricing actions.
Adjusted Gross Margin
Adjusted gross margin was 36.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of 13 basis points from an adjusted gross margin of 36.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted gross margin was relatively flat in comparison to the prior year as transportation and input cost inflation was offset by productivity initiatives, pricing actions and favorable product mix.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $268.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $240.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in adjusted EBITDA was driven by higher sales volume, productivity initiatives, pricing actions and the realization of Voortman cost synergies, partially offset by transportation and input cost inflation as well as increased headcount, higher incentive compensation and additional investment in marketing spend.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS was $0.88 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.75 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in adjusted EPS was driven by strong adjusted EBITDA performance along with decreases in interest expense and depreciation and amortization, partially offset by the dilutive impact of settling the public and private warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are from the cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet, future cash flow generated from operations, and availability under our revolving credit agreement (“Revolver”). We believe that cash flows from operations and the current cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet will be sufficient to satisfy the anticipated cash requirements associated with our existing operations for at least the next 12 months. Our future cash requirements include the purchase commitments for certain raw materials and packaging used in our production process, scheduled rent on leased facilities, scheduled debt service payments on our term loan and settlements on related interest rate swap contracts, payments on our tax receivable agreement, settlements on our outstanding foreign currency contracts and outstanding purchase orders on capital projects.
Our ability to generate sufficient cash from our operating activities depends on our future performance, which is subject to general economic, political, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. In addition, our future capital expenditures and other cash requirements could be higher than we currently expect as a result of various factors, including any expansion of our business that we undertake, including acquisitions. We consider all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
We had working capital, excluding cash and warrant liabilities, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $17.9 million and $7.0 million, respectively. We have the ability to borrow under our Revolver to meet obligations as they come due. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $94.0 million available for borrowing, net of letters of credit, under our Revolver.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $203.0 million and $159.2 million, respectively. The increase in operating cash flows was driven by an increase in net income after adjusting for non-cash items such as change in fair value of warrant liabilities, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation and impairment and loss on sale of assets.
Cash Flows provided by and used in Investing Activities
Investing activities used $65.4 million and $374.3 million of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2020, we funded $316.0 million of the net cash required to purchase Voortman from cash on hand and the proceeds from an incremental term loan on our existing credit facility. Cash used for the purchase of property and equipment reflects planned investments in our bakeries, including new production lines.
Cash Flows provided by and used in Financing Activities
Financing activities used $61.3 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2021 and provided $103.2 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net outflow for 2021 consisted of cash used to repurchase 3.3 million shares of our common stock under our existing securities repurchase authorization offset by cash inflows from the proceeds on exercise of employee stock options and proceeds from the exercise of public warrants prior to the amendment of the warrant agreement in July 2021. The net inflow in 2020 reflects proceeds from debt originated to fund the purchase of Voortman, offset by cash outflows related to the repurchase of 2.0 million warrants and 0.4 million shares from the Metropoulos Entities as part of the exchange of their last remaining Class B units in Hostess Holdings, LP and distributions to non-controlling interest, which was dissolved in Q4 2020. Both periods reflected similar activity on cash outflows related to scheduled payments under the tax receivable agreement and term loan.
Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2021, $1,091.6 million aggregate principal amount of our term loan and $6.0 million aggregate principal amount of letters of credit, reducing the amount available under the Revolver, were outstanding. See Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding the letters of credit. We had no outstanding borrowings under our Revolver as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under our term loan and the Revolver. The Revolver contains certain restrictive financial covenants. Based on our current and projected financial performance, we believe that we will comply with these covenants for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires the use of judgment, estimates and assumptions. We make such subjective determinations after careful consideration of our historical performance, management’s experience, current economic trends and events and information from outside sources. Inherent in this process is the possibility that actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions for any particular period.
Our significant accounting policies are detailed in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to our consolidated financial statements within Item 8. Critical accounting policies are defined as those policies that are reflective of significant judgments, estimates and uncertainties, which could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The following is a summary of certain accounting estimates considered critical by management.
Trade and Consumer Promotion Programs
We offer various sales incentive programs to customers, such as feature price discounts, in-store display incentives, cooperative advertising programs and new product introduction fees. The mix between promotional programs, which are classified as reductions in revenue in the statements of operations, and advertising or other marketing activities, which are classified as marketing and selling expenses in the consolidated statements of operations, fluctuates between periods based on our overall marketing plans, and such fluctuations have an impact on revenues. These trade programs also require management to make estimates about the expected total cost of the programs and related allocations amongst participants (who might have different levels of incentives based on various program requirements). These estimates are inherently uncertain and are generally based on historical experience, adjusted for any new facts or circumstances that might impact the ultimate cost estimate for a particular program or programs.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Trade Names
When evaluating goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment under U.S. GAAP, we may first perform an assessment of qualitative factors to determine if the fair value of the reporting unit or the intangible asset is more likely than not greater than the carrying amount. Such qualitative factors include, but are not limited to, macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, cost considerations, competitive environment, share price fluctuations, overall financial performance and results of past impairment tests. Based on a review of the qualitative factors, if we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, we may bypass the quantitative impairment test. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment for the reporting unit and perform a quantitative impairment test. For our 2021 and 2020 annual impairment testing, we elected to perform qualitative assessments for our reporting unit. No indicators of impairment were noted.
If a quantitative test were to be utilized for our reporting unit, it would estimate the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to its carrying value. To the extent the fair value was in excess of the carrying value, no impairment would be recognized. Otherwise, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount that the carrying value of our reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeded its fair value. In performing the quantitative test of goodwill, fair value would be determined based on a calculation which would give consideration to an income approach utilizing the discounted cash flow method and the market approach using the market comparable and market transaction methods.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trademarks and trade names. The $1,538.6 million balances at both December 31, 2021 and 2020, were recognized as part of the Hostess Business Combination and the Voortman and Cloverhill acquisitions. The trademarks and trade names are integral to the Company’s identity and are expected to contribute indefinitely to our corporate cash flows. Fair value for trademarks and trade names was determined using the income approach. The application of the income approach was premised on a royalty savings method, whereby the trademark and trade names are valued by reference to the amount of royalty income they could generate if they were licensed, in an arm’s-length transaction, to a third party. These assets have been assigned an indefinite life and therefore are not amortized but rather evaluated for impairment annually using the qualitative or quantitative methods similar to goodwill. For 2021 and 2020, we performed a qualitative test. No indicators of impairment were noted.
Changes in certain significant assumptions could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value, and therefore, a future impairment could result for a portion of goodwill or long-lived intangible assets.
Long-lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, including property and equipment and amortizable identifiable intangible assets (e.g. customer relationships), to assess recoverability from projected undiscounted cash flows whenever events or changes in facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. When such events occur, we compare the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset or asset group to the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group. The cash flows are based on our best estimate of future cash flows derived from the most recent business projections. If this comparison indicates there is an impairment, the carrying value of the asset is reduced to its estimated fair value. We also evaluate the amortization periods assigned to our intangible assets to determine whether events or changes in circumstances require a revised estimate of useful lives. We recorded impairment charges of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no impairment losses for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Business Combinations
We account for business acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting. Assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests are recorded at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of purchase price over fair value of the net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, is recorded as goodwill. Given the time it takes to obtain pertinent information to finalize the acquired company’s balance sheet, it may be multiple quarters before we are able to finalize those initial fair value estimates. Accordingly, it is not uncommon for the initial estimates to be subsequently revised.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding recently issued accounting standards.