Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
General
We are a Maryland corporation focused on investing in and managing Agency residential mortgage-backed securities, or Agency RMBS, mortgage servicing rights, or MSR, and other financial assets, which we collectively refer to as our target assets. We operate as a real estate investment trust, or REIT, as defined under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code.
Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted total return to our stockholders over the long term, primarily through dividends and secondarily through capital appreciation. We acquire and manage an investment portfolio of our target assets, which include the following:
•Agency RMBS (which includes inverse interest-only Agency securities classified as “Agency Derivatives” for purposes of U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP), meaning RMBS whose principal and interest payments are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency, such as the Government National Mortgage Association (or Ginnie Mae), or a U.S. government sponsored enterprise, or GSE, such as the Federal National Mortgage Association (or Fannie Mae) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (or Freddie Mac); and
•MSR; and
•Other financial assets comprising approximately 5% to 10% of the portfolio.
Historically, we viewed our target assets in two strategies that were based on our core competencies of understanding and managing prepayment and credit risk. Our rates strategy included assets that were primarily sensitive to changes in interest rates and prepayment speeds, specifically Agency RMBS and MSR. Our credit strategy included assets that were primarily sensitive to changes in inherent credit risk, including non-Agency securities, meaning securities that are not issued or guaranteed by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. In the first quarter of 2020, we experienced unprecedented market conditions as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, including unusually significant spread widening in both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities. In response, we focused our efforts on raising excess liquidity and de-risking our portfolio. On March 25, 2020, we sold substantially all of our non-Agency securities in order to eliminate the risks posed by continued margin calls and ongoing funding concerns associated with the significant spread widening on these assets. We also sold approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS in order to reduce risk and raise cash to establish a strong defensive liquidity position to weather potential ongoing economic and market instability. Late in the first quarter of 2020, the U.S. Federal Reserve, or the Fed, committed to unlimited purchases of Agency RMBS. The Fed’s actions were successful in helping to stabilize that market; however, the resulting historic spread tightening in the first half of 2021 made investments in Agency RMBS less attractive. As a result, and in anticipation of an accelerated tapering of Fed purchases, we reduced our aggregate Agency RMBS/TBA position during the year ended December 31, 2021. In the ordinary course of business, we make investment decisions and allocate capital in accordance with our views on the changing risk/reward dynamics in the market and in our portfolio. Going forward, we expect our capital to be fully allocated to our strategy of pairing Agency RMBS and MSR.
Our Agency RMBS portfolio is comprised primarily of fixed rate mortgage-backed securities backed by single-family and multi-family mortgage loans. All of our principal and interest Agency RMBS are Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac mortgage pass-through certificates or collateralized mortgage obligations that carry an implied rating of “AAA,” or Ginnie Mae mortgage pass-through certificates, which are backed by the guarantee of the U.S. government. The majority of these securities consist of whole pools in which we own all of the investment interests in the securities.
Within our MSR business, we acquire MSR assets, which represent the right to control the servicing of residential mortgage loans and the obligation to service the loans in accordance with relevant standards, from high-quality originators. We do not directly service the mortgage loans underlying the MSR we acquire; rather, we contract with appropriately licensed third-party subservicers to handle substantially all servicing functions in the name of the subservicer. As the servicer of record, however, we remain accountable to the GSEs for all servicing matters and, accordingly, provide substantial oversight of each of our subservicers. We believe MSR are a natural fit for our portfolio over the long term. Our MSR business leverages our core competencies in prepayment and credit risk analytics and the MSR assets provide offsetting risks to our Agency RMBS, hedging both interest rate and mortgage spread risk.
In making our capital allocation decisions, we take into consideration a number of factors, including the opportunities available in the marketplace, the cost and availability of financing, and the cost of hedging interest rate, prepayment, credit and other portfolio risks. We have expertise in mortgage credit and may choose to invest again in those assets should the opportunity arise.
For the three months ended December 31, 2021, our net spread realized on the portfolio was higher than recent quarters due primarily to higher MSR servicing income, net of estimated amortization, offset by higher servicing expenses. Additionally, our higher yielding MSR now make up a larger proportion of our total portfolio due to prepayments and sales of Agency RMBS. Cost of financing for the three months ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the prior two quarters due to an increase in interest rate swap spread income. The following table provides the average annualized yield on our assets for the three months ended December 31, 2021, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
____________________
(1)Average annualized yield includes interest income on Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities and MSR servicing income, net of estimated amortization, and servicing expenses.
(2)Cost of financing includes swap interest rate spread and amortization of upfront payments made or received upon entering.
We seek to deploy moderate leverage as part of our investment strategy. We generally finance our Agency RMBS securities through short- and long-term borrowings structured as repurchase agreements. We also finance our MSR through revolving credit facilities, repurchase agreements, term notes payable and convertible senior notes.
Our Agency RMBS, given their liquidity and high credit quality, are eligible for higher levels of leverage, while MSR, with less liquidity and/or more exposure to prepayment, utilize lower levels of leverage. As a result, our debt-to-equity ratio is determined by our portfolio mix as well as many additional factors, including the liquidity of our portfolio, the availability and price of our financing, the diversification of our counterparties and their available capacity to finance our assets, and anticipated regulatory developments. Our debt-to-equity ratio is also directly correlated to the composition of our portfolio; specifically, the higher percentage of Agency RMBS we hold, the higher our debt-to-equity ratio is. We may alter the percentage allocation of our portfolio among our target assets depending on the relative value of the assets that are available to purchase from time to time, including at times when we are deploying proceeds from offerings we conduct. See Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Financial Condition - Financing” for further discussion.
We recognize that investing in our target assets is competitive and we compete with other entities for attractive investment opportunities. We believe that our significant focus in the residential market, the extensive mortgage market expertise of our investment team, our operational capabilities to invest in MSR, our strong analytics and our disciplined relative value investment approach give us a competitive advantage versus our peers.
We have elected to be treated as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes. To qualify as a REIT we are required to meet certain investment and operating tests and annual distribution requirements. We generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income taxes on our taxable income to the extent that we annually distribute all of our net taxable income to stockholders, do not participate in prohibited transactions and maintain our intended qualification as a REIT. However, certain activities that we may perform may cause us to earn income which will not be qualifying income for REIT purposes. We have designated certain of our subsidiaries as taxable REIT subsidiaries, or TRSs, as defined in the Code, to engage in such activities. We also operate our business in a manner that will permit us to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the 1940 Act. While we do not currently originate or directly service residential mortgage loans, certain of our subsidiaries have obtained the requisite licenses and approvals to own and manage MSR.
Through August 14, 2020, we were externally managed and advised by PRCM Advisers LLC, a subsidiary of Pine River Capital Management L.P., under the terms of a Management Agreement between us and PRCM Advisers. We terminated the Management Agreement effective August 14, 2020 for “cause” in accordance with Section 15(a) thereof. On August 15, 2020, we completed our transition to self-management and directly hired the senior management team and other personnel who had historically provided services to us.
Factors Affecting our Operating Results
Our net interest income includes income from our securities portfolio, including the amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of purchase discounts. Net interest income, as well as our servicing income, net of subservicing expenses, will fluctuate primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates, our financing costs and prepayment speeds on our assets. Interest rates, financing costs and prepayment rates vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty.
On January 1, 2020 we adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which changed the impairment model for most financial assets and certain other instruments. Valuation allowances for credit losses on available-for-sale, or AFS, debt securities are recognized, rather than direct reductions in the amortized cost of the investments, regardless of whether the impairment is considered to be other-than-temporary. We use a discounted cash flow method to estimate and recognize an allowance for credit losses on AFS securities, as detailed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Fair Value Measurement
A significant portion of our assets and liabilities are reported at fair value and, therefore, our consolidated balance sheets and statements of comprehensive (loss) income are significantly affected by fluctuations in market prices. At December 31, 2021, approximately 77.9% of our total assets, or $9.4 billion, consisted of financial instruments recorded at fair value. See Note 10 - Fair Value to the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for descriptions of valuation methodologies used to measure material assets and liabilities at fair value and details of the valuation models, key inputs to those models and significant assumptions utilized. Although we execute various hedging strategies to mitigate our exposure to changes in fair value, we cannot fully eliminate our exposure to volatility caused by fluctuations in market prices.
Any temporary change in the fair value of our AFS securities, excluding certain interest-only mortgage-backed securities, is recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income and does not impact our reported income (loss) for U.S. GAAP purposes, or GAAP net income (loss). However, beginning on January 1, 2020 (as discussed above), changes in the provision for credit losses on AFS securities are recognized immediately in GAAP net income (loss). Our GAAP net income (loss) is also affected by fluctuations in market prices on the remainder of our financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value, including interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements and certain other derivative instruments (i.e., TBAs, put and call options for TBAs, U.S. Treasury and Eurodollar futures, Markit IOS total return swaps and inverse interest-only securities), which are accounted for as derivative trading instruments under U.S. GAAP, certain interest-only mortgage-backed securities and MSR.
We have numerous internal controls in place to help ensure the appropriateness of fair value measurements. Significant fair value measures are subject to detailed analytics and management review and approval. Our entire investment portfolio reported at fair value is priced by third-party brokers and/or by independent pricing vendors. We generally receive three or more broker and vendor quotes on pass-through principal and interest (P&I) Agency RMBS, and generally receive multiple broker or vendor quotes on all other securities, including interest-only Agency RMBS and inverse interest-only Agency RMBS. We also receive three vendor quotes for the MSR in our investment portfolio. For Agency RMBS, the third-party pricing vendors and brokers use pricing models that commonly incorporate such factors as coupons, primary and secondary mortgage rates, rate reset periods, issuer, prepayment speeds, credit enhancements and expected life of the security. For MSR, vendors use pricing models that generally incorporate observable inputs such as principal balance, note rate, geographical location, loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, FICO, appraised value and other loan characteristics, along with observed market yields and trading levels. Pricing vendors will customarily incorporate loan servicing cost, servicing fee, ancillary income, and earnings rate on escrow as observable inputs. Unobservable or model-driven inputs include forecast cumulative defaults, default curve, forecast loss severity and forecast voluntary prepayment.
We evaluate the prices we receive from both third-party brokers and pricing vendors by comparing those prices to actual purchase and sale transactions, our internally modeled prices calculated based on market observable rates and credit spreads, and to each other both in current and prior periods. We review and may challenge valuations from third-party brokers and pricing vendors to ensure that such quotes and valuations are indicative of fair value as a result of this analysis. We then estimate the fair value of each security based upon the median of the final broker quotes received, and we estimate the fair value of MSR based upon the average of prices received from third-party vendors, subject to internally-established hierarchy and override procedures.
We utilize “bid side” pricing for our Agency RMBS and, as a result, certain assets, especially the most recent purchases, may realize a markdown due to the “bid-offer” spread. To the extent that this occurs, any economic effect of this would be reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Considerable judgment is used in forming conclusions and estimating inputs to our Level 3 fair value measurements. Level 3 inputs such as interest rate movements, prepayments speeds, credit losses and discount rates are inherently difficult to estimate. Changes to these inputs can have a significant effect on fair value measurements. Accordingly, there is no assurance that our estimates of fair value are indicative of the amounts that would be realized on the ultimate sale or exchange of these assets. At December 31, 2021, 18.2% of our total assets were classified as Level 3 fair value assets.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain judgments and assumptions, based on information available at the time of our preparation of the financial statements, in determining accounting estimates used in preparation of the statements. Accounting estimates are considered critical if the estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made and if different estimates reasonably could have been used in the reporting period or changes in the accounting estimate are reasonably likely to occur from period to period that would have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our most critical accounting policies involve our fair valuation of AFS securities, MSR and derivative instruments.
The methods used by us to estimate fair value for AFS securities, MSR and derivative instruments may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. Furthermore, while we believe that our valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies, or assumptions, to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate of fair value at the reporting date. We use prices obtained from third-party pricing vendors or broker quotes deemed indicative of market activity and current as of the measurement date, which in periods of market dislocation, may have reduced transparency. For more information on our fair value measurements, see Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, the key economic assumptions and sensitivity of the fair value of MSR to immediate adverse changes in these assumptions are presented in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Market Conditions and Outlook
The pace of U.S. economic growth picked up in the fourth quarter of 2021, accelerating to a 6.9% annualized rate while full year GDP growth of 5.5% was the highest in nearly four decades. The labor market remains very tight with the unemployment rate hovering at approximately 4.0% and other metrics such as job openings and quits remaining near record highs. There are signs of overheating as inflation has also reached multi-decade highs. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Fed moved away from its stance that current inflation will be transitory and began taking steps to remove monetary accommodations to combat persistently high inflation. Expectations regarding the timeline for interest rate hikes by the Fed have accelerated, with the market now pricing in five hikes in 2022 compared to only one at the beginning of the fourth quarter.
RMBS funding has been stable although term funding rates moved quickly towards the end of 2021 as the market priced in faster Fed hikes. RMBS repo measured as a spread to the Fed Funds rate remained very tight at around 10 basis points, showing that markets remain deep and relatively inexpensive. The Fed’s overnight reverse repo facility remained elevated throughout the fourth quarter of 2021 and hit another all-time high at year end at $1.9 trillion.
Demand for mortgages remained strong through the end of 2021 but materially worsened in January 2022 as the market priced in a more accelerated reduction of the Fed’s balance sheet. Many analysts are projecting a record amount of supply for private markets which may be a headwind for mortgages in the coming year. However, with both higher rates and wider mortgage spreads, prepayments are expected to slow considerably, which will benefit both MSR and higher coupon RMBS.
This environment, with prepayment speeds beginning to slow and current coupon mortgage spreads widening, is one for which our portfolio strategy was designed. As a result, we are very constructive and optimistic about the forward outlook for Two Harbors and our paired Agency RMBS and MSR portfolio construction.
The following table provides the carrying value of our investment portfolio by product type:
Prepayment speeds and volatility due to interest rates
Our portfolio is subject to market risks, primarily interest rate risk and prepayment risk. We seek to offset a portion of our Agency pool market value exposure through our MSR and interest-only Agency RMBS portfolios. During periods of decreasing interest rates with rising prepayment speeds, the market value of our Agency pools generally increases and the market value of our interest-only securities and MSR generally decreases. The inverse relationship occurs when interest rates rise and prepayments fall. Interest rates moved lower throughout the first nine months of 2021, but retraced higher in the fourth quarter of 2021. Looking forward, prepayment speeds are expected to slow with both rising rates and the recent refinance activity that has lowered mortgage rates overall. In addition to changes in interest rates, changes in home price performance, key employment metrics and government programs, among other macroeconomic factors, can affect prepayment speeds. We believe our portfolio management approach, including our asset selection process, positions us to respond to a variety of market scenarios. Although we are unable to predict future interest rate movements, our strategy of pairing Agency RMBS with MSR, with a focus on managing various associated risks, including interest rate, prepayment, credit, mortgage spread and financing risk, is intended to generate attractive yields with a low level of sensitivity to changes in the yield curve, prepayments and interest rate cycles.
The following table provides the three-month average constant prepayment rate, or CPR, experienced by our Agency RMBS and MSR during the three months ended December 31, 2021, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
Our Agency RMBS are primarily collateralized by pools of fixed-rate mortgage loans. Our Agency portfolio also includes securities with implicit prepayment protection, including lower loan balances (securities collateralized by loans of less than $200,000 in initial principal balance), higher LTVs (securities collateralized by loans with LTVs greater than or equal to 80%), certain geographic concentrations, loans secured by investor-owned properties and lower FICO scores. Our overall allocation of Agency RMBS and holdings of pools with specific characteristics are viewed in the context of our aggregate rates strategy, including MSR and related derivative hedging instruments. Additionally, the selection of securities with certain attributes is driven by the perceived relative value of the securities, which factors in the opportunities in the marketplace, the cost of financing and the cost of hedging interest rate, prepayment, credit and other portfolio risks. As a result, Agency RMBS capital allocation reflects management’s flexible approach to investing in the marketplace.
The following tables provide the carrying value of our Agency RMBS portfolio by underlying mortgage loan rate type:
____________________
(1)Weighted average actual 1-month annualized CPR released at the beginning of the following month based on RMBS held as of the preceding month-end.
We believe MSR are a natural fit for our portfolio over the long term. Our MSR business leverages our core competencies in prepayment and credit risk analytics and the MSR assets provide offsetting risk to our Agency RMBS, hedging both interest rate and mortgage spread risk. The following table summarizes activity related to the unpaid principal balance, or UPB, of loans underlying our MSR portfolio for the three months ended December 31, 2021, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
Counterparty exposure and leverage ratio
We monitor counterparty exposure in our broker, banking and lending counterparties on a daily basis. We believe our broker and banking counterparties are well-capitalized organizations, and we attempt to manage our cash balances across these organizations to reduce our exposure to any single counterparty.
As of December 31, 2021, we had entered into repurchase agreements with 39 counterparties, 20 of which had outstanding balances at December 31, 2021. In addition, we held short- and long-term borrowings under revolving credit facilities, long-term term notes payable and short- and long-term unsecured convertible senior notes. As of December 31, 2021, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, was 3.2:1.0.
As of December 31, 2021, we held $1.2 billion in cash and cash equivalents, approximately $141.7 million of unpledged Agency securities and derivatives and $11.9 million of unpledged non-Agency securities. As a result, we had an overall estimated unused borrowing capacity on our unpledged securities of approximately $133.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $60.8 million of unpledged MSR and $96.8 million of unpledged servicing advances. Overall, we had unused committed borrowing capacity on MSR asset and servicing advance financing facilities of $313.4 million and $180.8 million, respectively. Generally, unused borrowing capacity may be the result of our election not to utilize certain financing, as well as delays in the timing in which funding is provided, insufficient collateral or the inability to meet lenders’ eligibility requirements for specific types of asset classes.
We also monitor exposure to our MSR counterparties. We may be required to make representations and warranties to investors in the loans underlying the MSR we own; however, some of our MSR were purchased on a bifurcated basis, meaning the representation and warranty obligations remain with the seller. If the representations and warranties we make prove to be inaccurate, we may be obligated to repurchase certain mortgage loans, which may impact the profitability of our portfolio. Although we obtain similar representations and warranties from the counterparty from which we acquired the relevant asset, if those representations and warranties do not directly mirror those we make to the investor, or if we are unable to enforce the representations and warranties against the counterparty for a variety of reasons, including the financial condition or insolvency of the counterparty, we may not be able to seek indemnification from our counterparties for any losses attributable to the breach.
LIBOR transition
LIBOR has been used extensively in the U.S. and globally as a “benchmark” or “reference rate” for various commercial and financial contracts, including corporate and municipal bonds and loans, floating rate mortgages, asset-backed securities, consumer loans, and interest rate swaps and other derivatives. On March 5, 2021, Intercontinental Exchange Inc. announced that ICE Benchmark Administration Limited, the administrator of LIBOR, intends to stop publication of the majority of USD-LIBOR tenors on June 30, 2023. In the U.S., the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, or ARRC, has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative rate for U.S. dollar-based LIBOR. SOFR is a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions. The ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR, and various organizations are currently working on industry wide and company-specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to LIBOR. We have material contracts that are indexed to USD-LIBOR and are monitoring this activity, evaluating the related risks and our exposure, and have already amended terms to transition to an alternative benchmark, where necessary. All of our financing arrangements and derivative instruments that incorporate LIBOR as the referenced rate either mature prior to the phase out of LIBOR or have provisions in place that provide for an alternative to LIBOR upon its phase-out. Additionally, each series of our fixed-to-floating preferred stock that becomes callable at the time the stock begins to pay a LIBOR-based rate has existing LIBOR cessation fallback language.
Summary of Results of Operations and Financial Condition
During the first quarter of 2020, we experienced unprecedented market conditions as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, including unusually significant spread widening in both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities. In response, we focused our efforts on raising excess liquidity and de-risking our portfolio. On March 25, 2020, we sold substantially all of our non-Agency securities in order to eliminate the risks posed by continued margin calls and ongoing funding concerns associated with the significant spread widening on these assets. We also sold approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS portfolio in order to reduce risk and raise cash to establish a strong defensive liquidity position to weather potential ongoing economic and market instability. These actions, occurring at a time of wide spreads and low prices, resulted in large realized losses in the first quarter of 2020 and a corresponding decline in book value.
Late in the first quarter of 2020, the Fed committed to unlimited purchases of Agency RMBS. The Fed’s actions were successful in helping to stabilize that market; however, the resulting historic spread tightening in the first half of 2021 made investments in Agency RMBS less attractive. As a result, and in anticipation of an accelerated tapering of Fed purchases, we reduced our aggregate Agency RMBS/TBA position during the year ended December 31, 2021. In the ordinary course of business, we make investment decisions and allocate capital in accordance with our views on the changing risk/reward dynamics in the market and in our portfolio.
Certain mortgage loan forbearance programs were established in connection with the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act. As the servicer of record for the MSR assets in our portfolio, we may be responsible for continuing to advance principal, interest, taxes and insurance on mortgage loans that are in forbearance, delinquency or default. At December 31, 2021, our forbearance rate had declined to less than one percent of our MSR portfolio by loan count. We are confident in our ability to meet our servicing advance obligations and have entered into a revolving credit facility to finance these advances. Further, a significant number of borrowers, who were previously eligible for forbearance plan extensions, have reached or are reaching their terminal forbearance plan expiration. This has led to improvement in actual and projected forbearance rates in our portfolio; however, over time, delinquencies and defaults in our MSR portfolio could increase if borrowers who were in forbearance are unable to resume making their monthly mortgage payments.
Our GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders was $15.0 million and GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders was $128.8 million ($(0.05) and $0.43 per diluted weighted average share) for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, respectively, as compared to GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $192.2 million and GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.7 billion ($0.68 and $(6.24) per diluted weighted average share) for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
With our accounting treatment for AFS securities, unrealized fluctuations in the market values of AFS securities, excluding certain interest-only securities and securities with an allowance for credit losses, do not impact our GAAP net income (loss) or taxable income but are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets as a change in stockholders’ equity under “accumulated other comprehensive income.” For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, net unrealized losses on AFS securities recognized as other comprehensive loss, net of tax, were $113.6 million and $455.3 million, respectively. This, combined with GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders of $15.0 million and GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $128.8 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, respectively, resulted in comprehensive loss attributable to common stockholders of $128.6 million and $326.5 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, respectively. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net unrealized losses on AFS securities recognized as other comprehensive loss, net of tax, were $78.7 million and $47.8 million, respectively. This, combined with GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $192.2 million and GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.7 billion, resulted in comprehensive income attributable to common stockholders of $113.5 million and comprehensive loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.8 billion for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
Our book value per common share for U.S. GAAP purposes was $5.87 at December 31, 2021, a decrease from $7.63 per common share at December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized comprehensive loss attributable to common stockholders of $326.5 million and declared common dividends of $205.6 million, which drove the overall decrease in book value.
Although some uncertainty remains regarding the future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions that may be taken by federal, state and local governmental authorities and the GSEs in response, the Agency RMBS market has stabilized and there is more clarity regarding forbearance levels and deferral programs on Agency MSR. Our liquidity position is strong, with $1.2 billion in unrestricted cash as of December 31, 2021. We continue to believe the pace of economic recovery and the tapering of Agency RMBS purchases by the Fed will lead to spread normalization, at which time we expect to increase leverage and deploy excess cash into investments at more attractive levels.
The following tables present the components of our comprehensive (loss) income for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Results of Operations
The following analysis focuses on financial results during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The analysis of our financial results during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is omitted from this Form 10-K and included in Part II Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which analysis is incorporated by reference.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased from $72.5 million and $525.1 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 to $33.0 million and $168.6 million for the same periods in 2021 due to sales of both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities that occurred during the first quarter of 2020, further sales of Agency RMBS during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and higher amortization recognized on Agency RMBS due to prepayments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased from $22.6 million and $281.2 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively, to $20.2 million and $89.2 million for the same periods in 2021 due to lower borrowing balances related to the sale of both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities and a lower interest rate environment.
Net Interest Income
The following tables present the components of interest income and average annualized net asset yield earned by asset type, the components of interest expense and average annualized cost of funds on borrowings incurred by collateral type, and net interest income and average annualized net interest spread for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
____________________
(1)Average asset balance represents average amortized cost on AFS securities and average unpaid principal balance on other assets.
(2)Cost of funds does not include the accrual and settlement of interest associated with interest rate swaps. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, those costs are included in gain (loss) on interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our total average cost of funds on the assets assigned as collateral for borrowings shown in the table above, including interest spread expense associated with interest rate swaps, was 0.7% and 0.7%, respectively, compared to 0.5% and 1.2% for the same periods in 2020.
(3)Yields on Agency Derivatives not shown as interest income is included in (loss) gain on other derivative instruments in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income.
(4)Yields on mortgage servicing rights and advances not shown as these assets do not earn interest.
(5)Net interest spread does not include the accrual and settlement of interest associated with interest rate swaps. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, those costs are included in gain (loss) on interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our total average net interest rate spread on the assets and liabilities shown in the table above, including interest spread expense associated with interest rate swaps, was 1.5% and 1.3%, respectively, compared to 1.5% and 1.5% for the same periods in 2020.
The slight increase in yields on AFS securities for the three months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 was driven by purchases of pools with higher yields. The decrease in yields on AFS securities for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was predominantly driven by the sale of substantially all legacy non-Agencies during the first quarter of 2020 as well as sales of Agency pools with higher yields. The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of AFS securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, was also a result of the sale of non-Agencies as well as decreases in the borrowing rates offered by financing counterparties.
The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of Agency Derivatives for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, was the result of decreases in the borrowing rates offered by counterparties.
The increase in cost of funds associated with the financing of MSR assets and related servicing advance obligations for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, was due to an increase in the use of revolving credit facility and repurchase agreement financing versus term notes financing, which carry lower rates, as well as an increase in amortization of deferred debt issuance costs on this financing. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into a new revolving credit facility to finance our servicing advance obligations, which are included in other assets on our consolidated balance sheets.
Our convertible senior notes due 2022 were issued in January 2017. Our convertible senior notes due 2026 were issued in February 2021, and a portion of the proceeds from the offering were used to partially repurchase our senior notes due 2022. Both convertible senior notes due 2022 and 2026 are unsecured and pay interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum. The cost of funds associated with our convertible senior notes for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, increased due to an increase in amortization of deferred debt issuance costs.
The following tables present the components of the yield earned on our AFS securities portfolio as a percentage of our average amortized cost of securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
____________________
(1)Excludes Agency Derivatives. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the average annualized net yield on total RMBS, including Agency Derivatives, was 2.2% and 2.0%, respectively, compared to 2.0% and 2.7% for the same periods in 2020. Yields have not been adjusted for cost of delay and cost to carry purchase premiums.
Gain (Loss) On Investment Securities
The following tables present the components of gain (loss) on investment securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Due to the unprecedented market conditions experienced as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, we sold substantially all of our portfolio of non-Agency securities and approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS during the first quarter of 2020. Late in the first quarter of 2020, the Fed committed to unlimited purchases of Agency RMBS. The Fed’s actions were successful in helping to stabilize that market; however, the resulting historic spread tightening in the first half of 2021 made investments in Agency RMBS less attractive. As a result, and in anticipation of an accelerated tapering of Fed purchases, we reduced our aggregate Agency RMBS/TBA position during the year ended December 31, 2021. In the ordinary course of business, we make investment decisions and allocate capital in accordance with our views on the changing risk/reward dynamics in the market and in our portfolio. We do not expect to sell assets on a frequent basis, but may sell assets to reallocate capital into new assets that we believe have higher risk-adjusted returns.
Subsequent to the adoption of Topic 326 on January 1, 2020, the Company uses a discounted cash flow method to estimate and recognize an allowance for credit losses on AFS securities, as detailed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Subsequent adverse or favorable changes in expected cash flows are recognized immediately in earnings as a provision for or reversal of provision for credit losses (within gain (loss) on investment securities).
The majority of the “other” component of gain (loss) on investment securities is related to changes in unrealized gains (losses) on certain interest-only mortgage-backed securities. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the unrealized losses recognized were primarily due to faster prepayment assumptions.
Servicing Income
The following table presents the components of servicing income for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in servicing income for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, was due to a higher portfolio balance and lower compensating interest, offset by lower float income.
(Loss) Gain On Servicing Asset
The following table presents the components of loss on servicing asset for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in loss (decrease in gain) on servicing asset for the three months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was driven by expected prepayment speed assumptions used in the fair valuation of MSR decreasing at a lower rate and realized losses on sales of MSR, offset by a decrease in portfolio runoff. The decrease in loss on servicing asset for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was driven by favorable change in valuation assumptions used in the fair market valuation of MSR, including the impact of acquiring MSR at a cost below fair value, offset by increased portfolio runoff and realized losses on sales of MSR during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain (Loss) On Interest Rate Swap And Swaption Agreements
The following table summarizes the net interest spread and gains and losses associated with our interest rate swap and swaption positions recognized during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net interest spread recognized for the accrual and/or settlement of the net interest expense associated with our interest rate swaps results from receiving either a floating interest rate (LIBOR, OIS or SOFR) or a fixed interest rate and paying either a fixed interest rate or a floating interest rate (LIBOR, OIS or SOFR) on positions held to economically hedge/mitigate portfolio interest rate exposure (or duration) risk. We may elect to terminate certain swaps and swaptions to align with our investment portfolio, agreements may mature or options may expire resulting in full settlement of our net interest spread asset/liability and the recognition of realized gains and losses, including early termination penalties. During the second quarter of 2020, we elected to terminate certain swaps and swaptions in order to adjust the total notional and fixed interest rates on these instruments, as a result of adjustments made to our investment portfolio and changes in interest rates. The change in fair value of interest rate swaps and swaptions during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was a result of changes to floating interest rates (LIBOR, OIS or SOFR), the swap curve and corresponding counterparty borrowing rates. Since swaps and swaptions are used for purposes of hedging our interest rate exposure, their unrealized valuation gains and losses (excluding the reversal of unrealized gains and losses to realized gains and losses upon termination, maturation or option expiration) are generally offset by unrealized losses and gains in our Agency RMBS AFS portfolio, which are recorded either directly to stockholders’ equity through other comprehensive (loss) income, net of tax, or to gain (loss) on investment securities, in the case of certain interest-only mortgage-backed securities.
(Loss) Gain On Other Derivative Instruments
The following table provides a summary of the total net gains (losses) recognized on other derivative instruments we hold for purposes of both hedging and non-hedging activities, principally TBAs, put and call options for TBAs, U.S. Treasury and Eurodollar futures and inverse interest-only securities during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
____________________
(1)As these derivative instruments are considered trading instruments, our financial results include both realized and unrealized gains (losses) associated with these instruments.
For further details regarding our use of derivative instruments and related activity, refer to Note 7 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities to the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Expenses
The following table presents the components of expenses, other than restructuring charges, for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement on August 14, 2020, a management fee was payable to PRCM Advisers under the agreement. The management fee was calculated based on our stockholders’ equity with certain adjustments outlined in the management agreement.
We incur servicing expenses generally related to the subservicing of MSR. The decrease in servicing expenses during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same periods in 2020, was a result of a decrease in loan forbearance and adjustments for preliquidation claims.
Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement, included in compensation and benefits and other operating expenses were direct and allocated costs incurred by PRCM Advisers on our behalf and reimbursed by us. For the year ended December 31, 2020 these direct and allocated costs totaled approximately $19.3 million. Included in these reimbursed costs was compensation paid to employees of an affiliate of PRCM Advisers serving as our principal financial officer and general counsel of $1.4 million respectively for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not reimburse PRCM Advisers for compensation paid to our principal financial officer and general counsel for the three months ended December 31, 2020. Prior to termination of the Management Agreement, the allocation of compensation paid to employees of an affiliate of PRCM Advisers serving as our principal financial officer and general counsel was based on time spent overseeing our activities in accordance with the Management Agreement; we did not reimburse PRCM Advisers for any expenses related to the compensation of our chief executive officer or chief investment officer. Additionally, included in compensation and benefits is non-cash equity compensation expense, which represents amortization of the restricted stock awarded to our independent directors, executive officers and other eligible individuals. Included in non-cash equity compensation expense for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was amortization of restricted stock awarded to our executive officers, including our chief executive officer, chief investment officer, principal financial officer and general counsel of $0.9 million and $3.9 million, respectively.
Following the termination of the Management Agreement, we no longer pay a management fee to, or reimburse the expenses of, PRCM Advisers. Expenses for which we previously reimbursed PRCM Advisers are now paid directly by us. We are also now responsible for the cash compensation and employee benefits of our chief executive officer, chief investment officer and investment professionals, which were previously the responsibility of PRCM Advisers. Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement, we were only responsible for the equity compensation paid to such individuals.
Restructuring Charges
On April 13, 2020, we announced that we had elected to not renew the Management Agreement with PRCM Advisers on the basis of unfair compensation payable to the manager pursuant to Section 13(a)(ii) of the Management Agreement. As a result, we had expected the Management Agreement to terminate on September 19, 2020, at which time we would have been required to pay a termination fee equal to three times the sum of the average annual base management fee earned by PRCM Advisers during the 24-month period immediately preceding the date of termination, calculated as of the end of the most recently completed fiscal quarter prior to the date of termination, pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement. The termination fee was calculated to be $139.8 million based on results as of June 30, 2020 and recorded during the three months ended June 30, 2020.
On July 15, 2020, we provided PRCM Advisers with a notice of termination of the Management Agreement for “cause” on the basis of certain material breaches of the Management Agreement by PRCM Advisers, its agents and/or its assignees that are incapable of being cured within the time period set forth therein and certain events of gross negligence on the part of PRCM Advisers in the performance of its duties under the Management Agreement. The Management Agreement subsequently terminated on August 14, 2020. No termination fee was payable to PRCM Advisers in connection with such termination, pursuant to Section 15(a) of the Management Agreement.
In connection with the termination of the Management Agreement, we reversed the $139.8 million accrued termination fee during the three months ended September 30, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a total of $5.7 million in contract termination costs, which includes all estimated costs incurred for legal and advisory services provided to facilitate the termination of the Management Agreement. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations, all contract termination costs are included within restructuring charges on our consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income.
Income Taxes
During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our TRSs recognized a provision for income taxes of $2.1 million and $4.2 million, respectively, which was primarily due to income from MSR servicing activity and gains recognized on MSR, offset by net losses recognized on derivative instruments and operating expenses. During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our TRSs recognized a provision for income taxes of $3.8 million and a benefit from income taxes of $35.7 million, respectively. The provision recognized for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to gains recognized on MSR, offset by net losses recognized on derivative instruments held in our TRSs. The benefit recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to losses recognized on MSR, offset by net gains recognized on derivative instruments held in our TRSs.
Financial Condition
Available-for-Sale Securities, at Fair Value
The majority of our AFS investment securities portfolio is comprised of fixed rate Agency mortgage-backed securities backed by single-family and multi-family mortgage loans. We also hold $12.3 million in tranches of mortgage-backed and asset-backed P&I and interest-only non-Agency securities. All of our P&I Agency RMBS AFS are Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac mortgage pass-through certificates or collateralized mortgage obligations that carry an implied rating of “AAA,” or Ginnie Mae mortgage pass-through certificates, which are backed by the guarantee of the U.S. government. The majority of these securities consist of whole pools in which we own all of the investment interests in the securities.
The tables below summarizes certain characteristics of our Agency RMBS AFS at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Mortgage Servicing Rights, at Fair Value
One of our wholly owned subsidiaries has approvals from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to own and manage MSR, which represent the right to control the servicing of mortgage loans. We do not directly service mortgage loans, and instead contract with appropriately licensed subservicers to handle substantially all servicing functions in the name of the subservicer for the loans underlying our MSR. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our MSR had a fair market value of $2.2 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our MSR portfolio included MSR on 796,205 and 781,905 loans with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $193.8 billion and $177.9 billion, respectively. The following tables summarize certain characteristics of the loans underlying our MSR by gross weighted average coupon rate types and ranges at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Financing
Our borrowings consist primarily of repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities and term notes payable. These borrowings are collateralized by our pledge of AFS securities, derivative instruments, MSR, servicing advances and certain cash balances. Substantially all of our Agency RMBS are currently pledged as collateral, and a portion of our non-Agency securities have been pledged as collateral for repurchase agreements. Additionally, a substantial portion of our MSR is currently pledged as collateral for repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities and term notes payable, and a portion of our servicing advances have been pledged as collateral for revolving credit facilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we formed a trust entity, or the MSR Issuer Trust, for the purpose of financing MSR through securitization, pursuant to which, through two of our wholly owned subsidiaries, MSR is pledged to the MSR Issuer Trust and in return, the MSR Issuer Trust issues term notes to qualified institutional buyers and a variable funding note, or VFN, to one of the subsidiaries, in each case secured on a pari passu basis. In connection with the transaction, we also entered into a repurchase facility that is secured by the VFN issued in connection with the MSR securitization transaction, which is collateralized by our MSR.
Additionally, our convertible senior notes due 2022 were issued in January 2017. Our convertible senior notes due 2026 were issued in February 2021, and a portion of the proceeds from the offering were used to partially repurchase our senior notes due 2022. All remaining senior notes due 2022 matured pursuant to their terms in January 2022. Both convertible senior notes due 2022 and 2026 are unsecured and pay interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum.
Many of our financing arrangements incorporate LIBOR as the referenced rate; however all arrangements either mature prior to the phase out of LIBOR or have provisions in place that provide for an alternative to LIBOR upon its phase-out. See Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Market Conditions and Outlook - LIBOR transition” for further discussion.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, borrowings under repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes had the following characteristics:
____________________
(1)Includes unsecured convertible senior notes due 2022 and 2026 paying interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum on the aggregate principal amount of $431.3 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR, servicing advances and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, was 3.2:1.0. As previously discussed, our Agency RMBS, given their liquidity and high credit quality, are eligible for higher levels of leverage, while MSR, with less liquidity and/or more exposure to prepayment risk, utilize lower levels of leverage. Generally, our debt-to-equity ratio is directly correlated to the composition of our portfolio; typically, the higher the percentage of Agency RMBS we hold, the higher our debt-to-equity ratio will be. However, in addition to portfolio mix, our debt-to-equity ratio is a function of many other factors, including the liquidity of our portfolio, the availability and price of our financing, the diversification of our counterparties and their available capacity to finance our assets, and anticipated regulatory developments. We may alter the percentage allocation of our portfolio among our target assets depending on the relative value of the assets that are available to purchase from time to time, including at times when we are deploying proceeds from offerings we conduct. We believe the current degree of leverage within our portfolio helps ensure that we have access to unused borrowing capacity, thus supporting our liquidity and the strength of our balance sheet.
The following table provides a summary of our borrowings under repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes, our net TBA notional amounts and our debt-to-equity ratios for the three months ended December 31, 2021, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
____________________
(1)Defined as total borrowings under repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes, plus implied debt on net TBA notional, divided by total equity.
Equity
The tables below provide details of our changes in stockholders’ equity from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 as well as a reconciliation of comprehensive income and GAAP net income to non-GAAP measures. Beginning with the reporting period for the three months ended September 30, 2021, the previously reported non-GAAP measure Core Earnings will be referred to as Earnings Available for Distribution, or EAD.(1) Also beginning with the three months ended September 30, 2021, EAD includes U.S. Treasury futures income. U.S. Treasury futures income is the economic equivalent to holding and financing a relevant cheapest-to-deliver U.S. Treasury note or bond using short-term repurchase agreements.
____________________
(1)EAD is a non-GAAP measure that we define as comprehensive (loss) income attributable to common stockholders, excluding “realized and unrealized gains and losses” (provision for (reversal of) credit losses, realized and unrealized gains and losses on the aggregate portfolio, reserve expense for representation and warranty obligations on MSR, non-cash compensation expense related to restricted common stock, other nonrecurring expenses and restructuring charges). As defined, EAD includes net interest income, accrual and settlement of interest on derivatives, dollar roll income on TBAs, U.S. Treasury futures income, servicing income, net of estimated amortization on MSR and recurring cash related operating expenses. Dollar roll income is the economic equivalent to holding and financing Agency RMBS using short-term repurchase agreements. U.S. Treasury futures income is the economic equivalent to holding and financing a relevant cheapest-to-deliver U.S. Treasury note or bond using short-term repurchase agreements. EAD provides supplemental information to assist investors in analyzing the Company’s results of operations and helps facilitate comparisons to industry peers. EAD is one of several measures our board of directors considers to determine the amount of dividends to declare on our common stock and should not be considered an indication of our taxable income or as a proxy for the amount of dividends we may declare.
U.S. GAAP to Estimated Taxable Income
The following tables provide reconciliations of our GAAP net income (loss) to our estimated taxable income (loss) split between our REIT and TRSs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The permanent tax differences recorded in 2021 include a difference related to officer’s compensation deduction limitations, a recurring difference in compensation expense related to restricted stock dividends and vesting and state deferred tax benefit. The permanent tax differences recorded in 2020 include a difference related to the intercompany sales of RMBS and a recurring difference in compensation expense related to restricted stock dividends and vesting. Temporary differences recorded in 2021 and 2020 are principally timing differences between U.S. GAAP and tax accounting related to unrealized gains and losses from derivative instruments, realized and unrealized gains and losses from MSR and RMBS, accretion and amortization from RMBS and changes in reserves related to servicing advances and allowance for credit losses on certain RMBS.
Change in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
With our accounting treatment for AFS securities, unrealized fluctuations in the market values of AFS securities, excluding Agency interest-only securities, do not impact our GAAP net (loss) income or taxable income but are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets as a change in stockholders’ equity under “accumulated other comprehensive income.” As a result of this fair value accounting through stockholders’ equity, we expect our net income to have less significant fluctuations and result in less U.S. GAAP to taxable income timing differences, than if the portfolio were accounted for as trading instruments.
Dividends
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we declared cash dividends totaling $0.68 per share. As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to stockholders, subject to certain distribution requirements. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our board of directors elected to make cash distributions in excess of REIT taxable income for the year. Temporary differences between GAAP net income (loss) and taxable income can generate deterioration in book value on a permanent and temporary basis as taxable income is distributed that has not been earned for U.S. GAAP purposes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity and capital resources are managed and forecasted on a daily basis. We believe this ensures that we have sufficient liquidity to absorb market events that could negatively impact collateral valuations and result in margin calls. We also believe that it gives us the flexibility to manage our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities.
Our principal sources of cash consist of borrowings under repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable, payments of principal and interest we receive on our target assets, cash generated from our operating results, and proceeds from capital market transactions. We typically use cash to repay principal and interest on our borrowings, to purchase our target assets, to make dividend payments on our capital stock, and to fund our operations. To the extent that we raise additional equity capital through capital market transactions, we anticipate using cash proceeds from such transactions to purchase our target assets and for other general corporate purposes. Such general corporate purposes may include the refinancing or repayment of debt, the repurchase or redemption of common and preferred equity securities, and other capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2021, we held $1.2 billion in cash and cash equivalents available to support our operations; $9.4 billion of AFS securities, MSR, and derivative assets held at fair value; and $8.9 billion of outstanding debt in the form of repurchase agreements, borrowings under revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes. During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, increased from 3.1:10 to 3.2:1.0 and decreased from 5.2:1.0 to 3.2:1.0, respectively. The slight increase for the three months ended December 31, 2021 was due to increased financing on Agency RMBS purchases. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by decreased financing on Agency RMBS due to sales and prepayments on the related assets. During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our economic debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes and implied debt on net TBA notional, decreased from 6.1:1.0 to 4.7:1.0 and 6.8:1.0 to 4.7:1.0, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $141.7 million of unpledged Agency securities and derivatives and $11.9 million of unpledged non-Agency securities. As a result, we had an overall estimated unused borrowing capacity on unpledged securities of approximately $133.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $60.8 million of unpledged MSR and $96.8 million of unpledged servicing advances. Overall, we had unused committed borrowing capacity on MSR asset and servicing advance financing facilities of $313.4 million and $180.8 million, respectively. Generally, unused borrowing capacity may be the result of our election not to utilize certain financing, as well as delays in the timing in which funding is provided, insufficient collateral or the inability to meet lenders’ eligibility requirements for specific types of asset classes. On a daily basis, we monitor and forecast our available, or excess, liquidity. Additionally, we frequently perform shock analyses against various market events to monitor the adequacy of our excess liquidity. If borrowing rates and/or collateral requirements change in the near term, we believe we are subject to less earnings volatility than a more leveraged organization.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not experience any material issues accessing our funding sources. We expect ongoing sources of financing to be primarily repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable, convertible notes and similar financing arrangements. We plan to finance our assets with a moderate amount of leverage, the level of which may vary based upon the particular characteristics of our portfolio and market conditions.
As of December 31, 2021, we had master repurchase agreements in place with 39 counterparties (lenders), the majority of which are U.S. domiciled financial institutions, and we continue to evaluate additional counterparties to manage and optimize counterparty risk. Under our repurchase agreements, we are required to pledge additional assets as collateral to our lenders when the estimated fair value of the existing pledged collateral under such agreements declines and such lenders, through a margin call, demand additional collateral. Lenders generally make margin calls because of a perceived decline in the value of our assets collateralizing the repurchase agreements. This may occur following the monthly principal reduction of assets due to scheduled amortization and prepayments on the underlying mortgages, or may be caused by changes in market interest rates, a perceived decline in the market value of the investments and other market factors. To cover a margin call, we may pledge additional assets or cash. At maturity, any cash on deposit as collateral is generally applied against the repurchase agreement balance, thereby reducing the amount borrowed. Should the value of our assets suddenly decrease, significant margin calls on our repurchase agreements could result, causing an adverse change in our liquidity position.
In addition to our master repurchase agreements to fund our Agency and non-Agency securities, we have one repurchase facility and three revolving credit facilities that provide short- and long-term financing for our MSR portfolio. We also have one revolving credit facility that provides short-term financing for our servicing advances. An overview of the facilities is presented in the table below:
____________________
(1)The facilities are set to mature on the stated expiration date, unless extended pursuant to their terms.
(2)Represents unused capacity amounts to which commitment fees are charged.
(3)This repurchase facility is secured by the VFN issued in connection with the 2019 MSR securitization transaction, which is collateralized by our MSR.
(4)The revolving period of this facility ceases on March 17, 2023, at which time the facility starts a 12-month amortization period.
We are subject to a variety of financial covenants under our lending agreements. The following represent the most restrictive financial covenants across our lending agreements as of December 31, 2021:
•Total indebtedness to tangible net worth must be less than 8.0:1.0. As of December 31, 2021, our total indebtedness to tangible net worth, as defined, was 3.3:1.0.
•Cash liquidity must be greater than $200.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity, as defined, was $1.2 billion.
•Net worth must be greater than the higher of $1.5 billion or 50% of the highest net worth during the 24 calendar months prior, measured beginning March 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, 50% of the highest net worth during the 24 calendar months prior, as defined, was $1.6 billion and our net worth, as defined, was $2.7 billion.
We are also subject to additional financial covenants in connection with various other agreements we enter into in the normal course of our business. We intend to continue to operate in a manner which complies with all of our financial covenants.
The following table summarizes assets at carrying values that were pledged or restricted as collateral for the future payment obligations of repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and derivative instruments at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Although we generally intend to hold our target assets as long-term investments, we may sell certain of our assets in order to manage our interest rate risk and liquidity needs, to meet other operating objectives and to adapt to market conditions. Our Agency RMBS are generally actively traded and thus, in most circumstances, readily liquid. However, certain of our assets, including MSR, are subject to longer trade timelines, and, as a result, market conditions could significantly and adversely affect the liquidity of our assets. Any illiquidity of our assets may make it difficult for us to sell such assets if the need or desire arises. Our ability to quickly sell certain assets, such as MSR may be limited by delays encountered while obtaining certain regulatory approvals required for such dispositions and may be further limited by delays due to the time period needed for negotiating transaction documents, conducting diligence, and complying with regulatory requirements regarding the transfer of such assets before settlement may occur. Consequently, even if we identify a buyer for our MSR, there is no assurance that we would be able to quickly sell such assets if the need or desire arises.
In addition, if we are required to liquidate all or a portion of our portfolio quickly, we may realize significantly less than the value at which we previously recorded our assets. Assets that are illiquid are more difficult to finance, and to the extent that we use leverage to finance assets that become illiquid, we may lose that leverage or have it reduced. Assets tend to become less liquid during times of financial stress, which is often the time that liquidity is most needed. As a result, our ability to sell assets or vary our portfolio in response to changes in economic and other conditions may be limited by liquidity constraints, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.
We cannot predict the timing and impact of future sales of our assets, if any. Because many of our assets are financed with repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities and term notes payable, a significant portion of the proceeds from sales of our assets (if any), prepayments and scheduled amortization are used to repay balances under these financing sources.
The following table provides the maturities of our repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
As of the date of this filing, we have sufficient liquid assets to satisfy all of our short-term recourse liabilities and to satisfy covenants in our financing documents. With respect to the next twelve months, we expect that our cash on hand combined with the cash flow provided by our operations will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated liquidity needs with respect to our current investment portfolio, including related financings, potential margin calls and operating expenses. While it is inherently more difficult to forecast beyond the next twelve months, we currently expect to meet our long-term liquidity requirements through our cash on hand and, if needed, additional borrowings, proceeds received from repurchase agreements and other financing arrangements, proceeds from capital market transactions and the liquidation or refinancing of our assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our restricted and unrestricted cash balance decreased approximately $557.8 million to $2.1 billion at December 31, 2021. The cash movements can be summarized by the following:
•Cash flows from operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities increased our cash balances by approximately $423.5 million, primarily driven by our financial results for the year.
•Cash flows from investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities increased our cash balances by approximately $6.3 billion, primarily driven by proceeds from sales of and principal payments on AFS securities, offset by purchases of AFS securities and MSR.
•Cash flows from financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities decreased our cash balance by approximately $7.3 billion, primarily driven by decreases in repurchase agreements as a result of sales of and principal payments on AFS securities.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Inflation
Substantially all of our assets and liabilities are financial in nature. As a result, changes in interest rates and other factors impact our performance far more than does inflation, although inflation rates can often have a meaningful influence over the direction of interest rates. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and dividends are based upon net ordinary income and capital gains as calculated for tax purposes; in each case, our results of operations and reported assets, liabilities and equity are measured with reference to historical cost or fair value without considering inflation.
Other Matters
We intend to conduct our business so as to maintain our exempt status under, and not to become regulated as, an investment company for purposes of the 1940 Act. If we failed to maintain our exempt status under the 1940 Act and became regulated as an investment company, our ability to, among other things, use leverage would be substantially reduced and, as a result, we would be unable to conduct our business as described in Item 1, “Business - Other Business - Regulation” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, we monitor our compliance with both the 55% Test and the 80% Tests of the 1940 Act in order to maintain our exempt status. As of December 31, 2021, we determined that we maintained compliance with both the 55% Test and the 80% Test requirements.
We calculate that at least 75% of our assets were qualified REIT assets, as defined in the Code for the year ended December 31, 2021. We also calculate that our revenue qualified for the 75% source of income test and for the 95% source of income test rules for the year ended December 31, 2021. Consequently, we met the REIT income and asset tests. We also met all REIT requirements regarding the ownership of our common stock and the distribution of our net income. Therefore, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we believe that we qualified as a REIT under the Code.