Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
This section of this Form 10-K does not address certain items regarding the year ended December 31, 2019. For a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a year-over-year comparison between the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading online education platform company. Our mission is to expand access to high-quality educational opportunities that unlock human potential. In November 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets of edX Inc. (the “edX Acquisition”), including the edX brand, website and marketplace. As a result of the edX Acquisition, we expanded our digital education offerings to include open courses and micro-credential offerings at the undergraduate and graduate levels and added an education consumer marketplace, edx.org, with over 42 million registered learners.
Following the completion of the edX Acquisition, we now serve more than 230 top-ranked global universities and other leading institutions, and offer more than 3,600 high-quality online learning opportunities, including open courses, executive education offerings, boot camps, micro-credentials, professional certificates as well as undergraduate and graduate degree programs.
With the edX Acquisition, we are now positioned as one of the world’s most comprehensive free-to-degree online learning platforms. We believe our platform and robust consumer marketplace provide our clients with the digital infrastructure to launch world-class online education offerings and allow students to easily access high-quality, job-relevant education offerings without the barriers of cost or location.
We have two reportable segments: the Degree Program Segment and the Alternative Credential Segment.
In our Degree Program Segment, we provide the technology and services to nonprofit colleges and universities to enable the online delivery of degree programs. Students enrolled in these programs are generally seeking an undergraduate or graduate degree of the same quality they would receive on campus.
In our Alternative Credential Segment, we provide premium online open courses, executive education programs, technical, skills-based boot camps and micro-credential programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels through relationships with nonprofit colleges and universities and other leading institutions. Students enrolled in these offerings are generally seeking to reskill or upskill for career advancement or personal development through shorter duration, lower-priced offerings.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have widespread impacts on society and the global economy. Our focus remains on ensuring the health and safety of our employees and clients, while ensuring the continuity of our business. We have adapted our business practices to allow our global workforce to continue to work from home on a voluntary basis. In addition, many of our in-person offerings and other campus-based experiences are offered in a virtual format, including the field placement components in certain of our clinical graduate programs. Our course production capabilities allow faculty to record studio-quality asynchronous content remotely.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. The pandemic initially accelerated the need for online learning and training, but has also created new and different demand dynamics in the market. At the beginning of the pandemic, we experienced increased demand from new and existing university clients and students as universities moved classes online. We do not know if the university client and student demand levels we have experienced during the pandemic will continue. More recently, we have seen some of these pandemic-related trends subside in certain areas of our business. We have experienced fluctuations in our student retention rates and in our marketing costs. In particular, our marketing costs were lower earlier in the pandemic and began to increase in the second half of 2021. In addition, during the past year, competition for talent has increased, resulting in higher employee turnover and additional costs to attract and retain
employees.
We cannot estimate the impact of COVID-19 on future demand or cost levels or on our business or economic conditions generally, due to numerous uncertainties, including uncertainties regarding the duration or reemergence of the outbreak in various regions, including the potential impact of variants of the virus, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, future fluctuations in demand and cost levels and labor market conditions. For a discussion of additional risks related to COVID-19, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Certain Trends and Uncertainties
The following represents a summary of certain trends and uncertainties, which could have a significant impact on our financial condition and results of operations. This summary is not intended to be a complete list of potential trends and uncertainties and should be considered along with the factors identified in the section titled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report.
•The risk of a data security breach or service disruption has increased as the frequency, intensity and sophistication of attempted attacks and intrusions from around the world have increased. While we make significant efforts to maintain the security and integrity of our services and computer systems, our cybersecurity measures and the cybersecurity measures taken by our third-party software and service providers may be unable to anticipate, detect or prevent all attempts to compromise our systems. In particular, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of cyber-attacks or other privacy or data security incidents may be heightened as a result of our employees and third-party service providers working remotely from networks that may be less secure.
•We and our university clients are subject to certain education laws and regulations that are frequently revised, repealed or expanded. Any administration may change certain DOE rules or policies in accordance with its policy priorities. The outcome of the process to re-authorize the HEA, any DOE rulemakings, or other law and policy changes may alter the regulatory landscape of the higher education industry, and thereby impact the manner in which we conduct business and serve our university clients.
•Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced increased demand for our technology and services from university clients, increased demand for our offerings from students, and a decrease in our marketing costs. Although we believe that the COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the trend towards adoption of online education that was already in process prior to the pandemic, we have recently seen demand and marketing cost fluctuate. We do not know the impact that COVID-19 will have on future demand or cost levels.
•We believe the edX Acquisition will combine our industry-leading marketing capabilities with the edX marketplace will result in a scalable and sustainable marketing advantage and drive marketing cost efficiencies. We are in the early stages of the edX integration. If we are unable to successfully or timely integrate the operations of edX, or if we are unable to realize the anticipated benefits resulting from the edX Acquisition, our results of operations and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
Our Business Model and Components of Operating Results
The key elements of our business model and components of our operating results are described below.
Revenue Drivers
In our Degree Program Segment, we derive substantially all of our revenue from revenue-share arrangements with our university clients under which we receive a contractually specified percentage of the amounts students pay them to enroll in degree programs. In our Alternative Credential Segment, we derive substantially all of our revenue from tuition and fees from students taking our executive education programs and boot camps. Revenue in each segment is primarily driven by the number of student enrollments in our offerings.
Operating Expense
Marketing and Sales
Our most significant expense relates to marketing and sales activities to attract students to our offerings across both of our segments. This includes the cost of Search Engine Optimization, Search Engine Marketing and Social Media Optimization, as well as personnel and personnel-related expense for our marketing and recruiting teams.
In our Degree Program Segment, our marketing and sales expense in any period generates student enrollments eight months later, on average. We then generate revenue as students progress through their programs, which generally occurs over a two-year period following initial enrollment. Accordingly, our marketing and sales expense in any period is an investment to
generate revenue in future periods. Therefore, we do not believe it is meaningful to directly compare current period revenue to current period marketing and sales expense. Further, in this segment we believe that our marketing and sales expense in future periods will generally decline as a percentage of the revenue reported in those same periods as our revenue base from returning students in existing programs increases.
In our Alternative Credential Segment, our marketing and sales expense in any period generates student enrollments as much as 24 weeks later. We then generate revenue as students progress through their courses, which typically occurs over a two- to six-month period following initial enrollment.
Curriculum and Teaching
Curriculum and teaching expense consists primarily of amounts due to universities for licenses to use their brand names and other trademarks in connection with our executive education and boot camp offerings. The payments are based on contractually specified percentages of the tuition and fees we receive from students in those offerings. Curriculum and teaching expense also includes personnel and personnel-related expense for our executive education and boot camp instructional staff.
Servicing and Support
Servicing and support expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense associated with the management and operations of our educational offerings, as well as supporting students and faculty members. Servicing and support expense also includes expenses to support our platform, facilitate in-program field placements and student immersions, and assist with compliance requirements.
Technology and Content Development
Technology and content development expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense associated with the ongoing improvement and maintenance of our platform, as well as hosting and licensing expenses. Technology and content expense also includes the amortization of capitalized technology and content.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense for our centralized functions, including executive management, legal, finance, human resources, and other departments that do not provide direct operational services. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees and other corporate expenses.
Net Interest Income (Expense)
Net interest income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense from our long-term debt and interest income from our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense also includes the amortization of debt issuance costs.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment consists of amounts recorded related to the retirement of our debt obligations.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency gains and losses, gains and losses related to the sale of investments and other non-operating income and expense.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provisions for all periods consist of U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes. Our effective tax rate for the period is based on a mix of higher-taxed and lower-taxed jurisdictions.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Operating Results
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table presents selected consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss data for each of the periods indicated.
* Not meaningful for comparative purposes.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $171.1 million, or 22.1%, to $945.7 million as compared to $774.5 million in 2020. Revenue from our Degree Program Segment increased $105.6 million, or 21.7%, primarily due to growth in full course equivalent (“FCE”) enrollments of 39,102, or 19.7% and a 1.7% increase in average revenue per FCE enrollment, from $2,456 to $2,497. Revenue from our Alternative Credential Segment increased $65.5 million, or 22.8%, primarily due to a 15.3% increase in average revenue per FCE enrollment, from $3,561 to $4,105, and growth in FCE enrollments of 5,251, or 6.5%.
Curriculum and Teaching. Curriculum and teaching expense increased $22.8 million, or 21.2%, to $130.8 million as compared to $108.0 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $17.4 million for amounts owed to university clients resulting from revenue growth of our offerings in our Alternative Credential Segment. In addition, expense for instructional staff increased $4.0 million to support to higher FCE enrollments.
Servicing and Support. Servicing and support expense increased $12.7 million, or 10.1%, to $138.5 million as compared to $125.9 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an $11.5 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense and a $0.9 million increase in student support costs to serve a greater number of students.
Technology and Content Development. Technology and content development expense increased $23.1 million, or 14.8%, to $179.1 million as compared to $155.9 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $9.7 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, a $7.4 million increase in expenses to support our platform and software applications, and a $4.9 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense.
Marketing and Sales. Marketing and sales expense increased $65.9 million, or 16.9%, to $456.1 million as compared to $390.2 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $59.6 million increase in marketing expense and a $4.8 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense to support our revenue growth.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense increased $35.1 million, or 20.2%, to $208.6 million as compared to $173.5 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $14.6 million increase in transaction and integration expense, a $12.5 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense, a $4.1 million increase in professional fees, a $3.5 million increase in provision for credit losses, a $2.7 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, a $1.7 million increase in restructuring-related expense, and a $1.7 million increase in banking fees. Stockholder activism and litigation-related expense decreased by $5.0 million, primarily due to $5.6 million in legal fees associated with stockholder activism incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 which did not recur in 2021. This decrease was partially offset by a $0.6 million increase in litigation-related expense.
Net Interest Income (Expense). Net interest expense was $49.7 million and $26.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to interest incurred on our Notes and our $575 million aggregate principal amount of term loan facilities that were issued in June 2021 and amended in November 2021. The net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to interest incurred on our Notes that were issued in April 2020 and our $250 million senior secured term loan facility that was extinguished in April 2020.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment was $1.1 million and $11.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the write-off of deferred financing costs and fees paid in connection with the termination of our $50 million credit agreement in June 2021. The loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the write-off of deferred financing costs and fees paid in connection with the extinguishment of our $250 million senior secured term loan facility in April 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net. Other income (expense), net was $22.3 million and $(1.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was primarily due to the gain recognized in connection with the sale of our investment in an education technology company.
Income Tax Benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an income tax benefit of $1.2 million, and our effective tax rate was approximately 0.6%. This income tax benefit was due to net operating losses and the reversal of taxable temporary differences of the acquired intangibles, as well as realization of deferred tax assets in our Alternative Credential Segment. There was also a tax expense recorded to establish a deferred tax liability related to the tax amortization of acquired edX indefinite lived intangibles. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $1.5 million, and our effective tax rate was approximately 0.7%. This tax benefit was due to net operating losses and the reversal of taxable temporary differences of the acquired intangibles in our Alternative Credential Segment. We expect to continue to recognize an income tax benefit for our Alternative Credential Segment to the extent that this segment continues to generate pre-tax losses while carrying a net deferred tax liability. To date, we have not been required to pay U.S. federal income taxes because of our current and accumulated net operating losses.
Business Segment Operating Results
We define segment profitability as net income or net loss, as applicable, before net interest income (expense), other income (expense), net, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, deferred revenue fair value adjustments, transaction costs, integration costs, restructuring-related costs, stockholder activism costs, certain litigation-related costs, consisting of fees for certain non-ordinary course litigation and other proceedings, impairment charges, losses on debt extinguishment, and stock-based compensation expense. Some of these items may not be applicable in any given reporting period and they may vary from period to period. Total segment profitability is a non-GAAP measure when presented outside of the financial statement footnotes. Total segment profitability is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to develop short- and long-term operational plans and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating total segment profitability can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that total segment profitability provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
The following table presents a reconciliation of total segment profitability to net loss for each of the periods indicated.
* Includes (i) transaction and integration expense of $16.9 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, (ii) restructuring-related expense of $8.5 million and $6.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and (iii) stockholder activism and litigation-related expense of $2.4 million and $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table presents revenue by segment and segment profitability for each of the periods indicated.
* Immaterial amounts of intersegment revenue have been excluded from the above results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Degree Program Segment profitability increased $76.5 million, or 154%, to $126.1 million as compared to $49.6 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to revenue growth of $105.6 million and operational efficiency initiatives.
Alternative Credential Segment profitability decreased $26.0 million, or 78%, to $(59.6) million as compared to $(33.5) million in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to an increase in marketing and sales expense and the the contribution of $11.7 million in operating expense from edX.
Key Business and Financial Performance Metrics
We use a number of key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. In addition to adjusted EBITDA (loss), which we discuss
below, and revenue and the components of loss from operations in the section above entitled “Our Business Model and Components of Operating Results,” we utilize FCE enrollments as a key metric to evaluate the success of our business.
Full Course Equivalent Enrollments
We measure FCE enrollments for each of the courses offered during a particular period by taking the number of students enrolled in that course and multiplying it by the percentage of the course completed during that period. We add the FCE enrollments for each course within each segment to calculate the total FCE enrollments per segment. This metric allows us to consistently view period-over-period changes in enrollments by accounting for the fact that many courses we enable straddle multiple fiscal quarters. For example, if a course had 25 enrolled students and 40% of the course was completed during a particular period, we would count the course as having 10 FCE enrollments for that period. Any individual student may be enrolled in more than one course during a period.
Average revenue per FCE enrollment represents our weighted-average revenue per course across the mix of courses being offered during a period in each of our operating segments. This number is derived by dividing the total revenue for a period for each of our operating segments by the number of FCE enrollments within the applicable segment during that same period. This amount may vary from period to period depending on the academic calendars of our university clients, the relative growth rates of our degree programs, executive education programs, and boot camps, as applicable, and varying tuition levels, among other factors.
The following table presents the FCE enrollments and average revenue per FCE enrollment in our Degree Program Segment and Alternative Credential Segment for each of the periods indicated.
Adjusted EBITDA (Loss)
We define adjusted EBITDA (loss) as net income or net loss, as applicable, before net interest income (expense), other income (expense), net, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, deferred revenue fair value adjustments, transaction costs, integration costs, restructuring-related costs, stockholder activism costs, certain litigation-related costs, consisting of fees for certain non-ordinary course litigation and other proceedings, impairment charges, losses on debt extinguishment, and stock-based compensation expense. Some of these items may not be applicable in any given reporting period and they may vary from period to period.
In the second quarter of 2021, we revised our definition of adjusted EBITDA (loss) to exclude other income (expense), net in connection with the recognition of a gain on the sale of our interest in an education technology company. We believe this change is meaningful to investors because we did not have this activity in prior periods, and as a result, excluding the impact of such a gain in 2021 facilitates a period-to-period comparison of our business. Prior to this revision, our definition of adjusted EBITDA excluded foreign currency gains or losses, which comprised the entirety of our other income (expense), net for all prior periods. The revision to the definition of adjusted EBITDA (loss) had no impact on our reported adjusted EBITDA (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA (loss) is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to develop short- and long-term operational plans and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses that are not reflective of our ongoing operating results in calculating adjusted EBITDA (loss) can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA (loss) provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Adjusted EBITDA (loss) is not a measure calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and should not be considered as an alternative to any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our use of
adjusted EBITDA (loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of the limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA (loss) does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•adjusted EBITDA (loss) does not reflect (i) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (ii) the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates; (iii) acquisition related gains or losses such as, but not limited to, post-acquisition changes in the value of contingent consideration reflected in operations; (iv) transaction and integration costs; (v) restructuring-related costs; (vi) impairment charges; (vii) stockholder activism costs; (viii) certain litigation-related costs; (ix) losses on debt extinguishment; (x) the impact of deferred revenue fair value adjustments; (xi) interest or tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash; or (xii) the non-cash expense or the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation, which has been, and we expect will continue to be, an important part of our compensation plan; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA (loss) differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA (loss) alongside other U.S. GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income (loss) and our other U.S. GAAP results. The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA (loss) to net loss for each of the periods indicated.
* Includes (i) transaction and integration expense of $16.9 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, (ii) restructuring-related expense of $8.5 million and $6.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and (iii) stockholder activism and litigation-related expense of $2.4 million and $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $232.9 million, which were held for working capital and general corporate purposes.
In April 2020, we issued the Notes in an aggregate principal amount of $380 million, including the exercise by the initial purchasers of an option to purchase additional Notes, in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers under Rule 144A of the Securities Act. The Notes are governed by an indenture (the “Indenture”) between the Company and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.25% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2020. The Notes mature on May 1, 2025, unless repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Prior to November 1, 2024, the Notes are convertible only upon satisfaction of certain conditions, and thereafter at any time until the close of business on the second scheduled trading date immediately before the maturity date. In connection with the Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with a premium cost of approximately $50.5 million. The capped call transactions are generally expected to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the Notes and/or to offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the converted Notes, with such reduction and/or offset subject to the cap. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes were $319.0 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, offering expenses and the cost of the capped call transactions. As of December 31, 2021, the conditions allowing holders of the Notes to convert had not been met and we have the right under the Indenture to determine the method of settlement at the time of conversion, and the Notes, therefore, are classified as a non-current on the consolidated balance sheets. Refer to Note 9 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our Notes.
On April 23, 2020, we repaid our $250 million senior secured term loan facility in full (including interest and prepayment premium) and terminated our credit agreement with Owl Rock Capital Corporation. In connection with the extinguishment of our $250 million senior secured term loan facility, we recognized a charge of approximately $11.7 million in the second quarter of 2020.
On June 25, 2020, we entered into a $50 million credit agreement with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent and collateral agent, and certain other lenders party thereto that provided for $50 million in revolving loans. In connection with entering into the Term Loan Agreement (as defined below) in June 2021, we terminated our $50 million credit agreement with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc. Refer to Note 9 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
On August 6, 2020, we sold 6,800,000 shares of our common stock to the public. We received net proceeds of $299.8 million, which we use for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
In June 2021, we entered into a Term Loan Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated June 28, 2021 (“the Term Loan Agreement”), with Alter Domus (US) LLC as administrative agent and collateral agent, to make term loans to us in the aggregate principal amount of $475 million (the “Term Loan Facilities”), which have an initial maturity date of December 28, 2024. Loans under this facility bear interest at a per annum rate equal to a base rate or adjusted Eurodollar rate, as applicable, plus the applicable margin of 4.75% in the case of the base rate loans and 5.75% in the case of the Eurodollar loans. We used the proceeds of the Term Loan Facilities to fund a portion of the edX Acquisition and to pay related costs, fees and expenses. On November 4, 2021, we entered into a First Amendment to Term Loan Credit and Guaranty Agreement and a Joinder Agreement, which amended the Term Loan Agreement (collectively, the “Amended Term Loan Facility”) primarily to provide for an incremental facility to us in an original principal amount of $100 million. The proceeds of the Amended Term Loan Facility may be used for general corporate purposes. Refer to Note 9 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our Amended Term Loan Facility.
We have financed our operations primarily through payments from university clients and students for our technology and services, the Amended Term Loan Facility, the Notes, and public and private equity financings. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations and available borrowing capacity under the Amended Term Loan Facility, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months. We regularly evaluate our liquidity position, debt obligations, and anticipated cash needs, and may consider capital raising and other market opportunities that may be available to us.
Our operations require us to make capital expenditures for content development, capitalized technology, and property and equipment and to service our debt. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our capital asset additions were $72.0 million and $72.6 million, respectively.
We or our affiliates may, at any time and from time to time, seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity or debt, in open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands).
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities have typically been generated from our net income (loss) and by changes in our operating assets and liabilities, adjusted for non-cash expense items such as depreciation and amortization expense and stock-based compensation expense.
Net cash used in operating activities increased $47.7 million from net cash provided by operating activities of $29.6 million in 2020 to net cash used in operating activities of $18.1 million in 2021. This increase was the result of a net increase in the use of cash of $80.9 million related to changes in net operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a decrease of $21.7 million in net loss, and a net increase of $11.6 million in non-cash adjustments.
Net cash used from net changes in operating assets and liabilities increased $80.9 million from net cash provided of $18.4 million in 2020 to net cash used of $62.6 million. This net increase in cash used was primarily due to $42.4 million of net changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities, an increase of $19.7 million in accounts receivable and other receivables as a result of revenue growth, a lower increase in deferred revenue of $16.7 million on a comparative basis to prior year, and an increase of $2.2 million in cash used for prepaid expense and other assets.
Non-cash adjustments increased $11.6 million from $227.7 million in 2020 to $239.3 million in 2021. This net increase was due to an increase of $49.9 million in non-cash adjustments, primarily driven by higher stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization expense. This increase was partially offset by a $27.8 million gain recognized during 2021, with no corresponding gain in 2020, in connection with the sale of our investment in an education technology company, and a net decrease of $10.6 million in loss on debt extinguishment driven by the 2020 settlement of our $250 million senior secured term loan facility.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities primarily consist of strategic acquisitions, divestitures and purchases of property and equipment to support the overall growth of our business. We expect our investing cash flows to be affected by the timing of payments we make for capital expenditures and the strategic acquisition or other growth opportunities we decide to pursue.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $724.1 million from $69.3 million in 2020 to $793.4 million in 2021. This net increase in cash used was primarily due to $761.1 million in use of cash for the 2021 business acquisition of edX and an increase of $3.3 million in cash outflows for property and equipment purchases. These cash uses were partially offset by $38.8 million in proceeds from the sale of investments, including $37.8 million from the sale of our investment in an education technology company completed in 2021.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities primarily consist of long-term debt borrowings, the repayment of principal on long-term debt, tax withholding payments associated with the settlement of restricted stock units and the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $177.4 million from $367.5 million in 2020 to $544.9 million in 2021. This net increase in cash provided was primarily due to the increase of $192.2 million in net proceeds received from
long-term debt borrowings, net of payments related to the initial purchaser’s discount, offering expenses, prepayment premium penalty, debt issuance costs, and the cost of the capped call transactions. Refer to Note 9 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our debt. In addition, the net increase in cash provided includes an increase of $2.3 million in cash proceeds received from the exercise of stock options. Cash proceeds were partially offset by an increase of $14.0 million in tax withholding payments associated with the settlement of restricted stock units and an increase of $3.4 million in payments on our long-term debt.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our obligations under the Notes, deferred government grant obligations, non-cancelable operating leases, commitments to certain of our university clients in exchange for contract extensions and various marketing and other rights, and purchase obligations as of December 31, 2021. Future events could cause actual payments to differ from these amounts.
* Amounts represent principal and interest.
** Amounts represent principal and fixed-rate interest cash payments over the life of the convertible senior notes, including anticipated interest payments that are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. Any future settlement of convertible senior notes would impact our cash payments.
*** Other purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the table above. Any amounts for which we are liable under purchase orders are reflected on our consolidated balance sheets as accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Contingent Payments
We have entered into agreements with certain of our university clients in our Degree Program Segment that require us to make future minimum payments in the event that certain program metrics are not achieved on an annual basis. We recognize any estimated contingent payments under these agreements as contra revenue over the period to which they relate, and record a liability in other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
In the first quarter of 2019, we entered into an agreement to make investments in an education technology company of up to $15.0 million, upon demand by the investee. During the second quarter of 2021, we sold our investment in this education technology company and were released from any further obligation to make additional investments.
See Note 7 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 and “Legal Proceedings” contained in Part I, Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding contingencies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates if conditions differ from our assumptions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition, Receivables and Provision for Credit Losses
We generate substantially all of our revenue from contractual arrangements, with either our university clients or students, to provide a comprehensive platform of tightly integrated technology and technology-enabled services that support our offerings.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value method. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Any estimates, including the effect of the constraint on variable consideration, are evaluated at each reporting period, and if necessary, we adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Revenue is then recognized over the remaining estimated period of performance using the cumulative catch-up method.
Our Degree Program Segment derives revenue primarily from contractually specified percentages of the amounts our university clients receive from their students in 2U-enabled degree programs for tuition and fees, less credit card fees and other specified charges we have agreed to exclude in certain university contracts. Our contracts with university clients in this segment typically have terms of 10 to 15 years and have a single performance obligation, as the promises to provide a platform of tightly integrated technology and services that university clients need to attract, enroll, educate and support students are not distinct within the context of the contracts. The single performance obligation is delivered as the university clients receive and consume benefits, which occurs ratably over a series of academic terms. The amounts received from university clients over the term of the arrangement are variable in nature in that they are dependent upon the number of students that are enrolled in the program within each academic term. These amounts are allocated to and are recognized ratably over the related academic term, defined as the period beginning on the first day of classes through the last. Revenue is recognized net of an allowance, which is established for our expected obligation to refund tuition and fees to university clients.
Our Alternative Credential Segment derives revenue primarily from contracts with students for the tuition and fees paid to enroll in, and progress through, our executive education programs and boot camps. Our executive education programs run between two and 16 weeks, while our boot camps run between 12 and 24 weeks. In this segment, our contracts with students include the delivery of the educational and related student support services and are treated as either a single performance obligation or multiple performance obligations, depending upon the offering being delivered. All performance obligations are satisfied ratably over the same presentation period, which is defined as the period beginning on the first day of the course through the last. We recognize the proceeds received, net of any applicable pricing concessions, from the students enrolled and share contractually specified amounts received from students with the associated university client, in exchange for licenses to use the university brand name and other university trademarks. These amounts are recognized as curriculum and teaching expenses on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Our contracts with university clients in this segment are typically shorter and less restrictive than our contracts with university clients in our Degree Program Segment.
We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for our Degree Program Segment because the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation. We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for our Alternative Credential Segment because the performance obligations are part of contracts that have original durations of less than one year.
Payments to University Clients
Pursuant to certain of our contracts in the Degree Program Segment, we have made, or are obligated to make, payments to university clients at either the execution of a contract or at the extension of a contract in exchange for various marketing and other rights. Generally, these amounts are capitalized as other assets on our consolidated balance sheets, and amortized as contra revenue over the life of the contract, commencing on the later of when payment is due or when contract revenue recognition begins.
Receivables, Contract Assets and Liabilities
Balance sheet items related to contracts consist of accounts receivable, net, other receivables, net and deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets. Accounts receivable, net includes trade accounts receivable, which are comprised of billed and unbilled revenue. Our trade accounts receivable balances have terms of less than one year. Accounts receivable, net is stated at amortized cost net of provision for credit losses. Our methodology to measure the provision for credit losses requires an estimation of loss rates based upon historical loss experience adjusted for factors that are relevant to determining the expected collectability of accounts receivable. Some of these factors include current market conditions, delinquency trends, aging behavior of receivables and credit and liquidity quality indicators for industry groups, customer classes or individual customers. Our estimates are reviewed and revised periodically based on the ongoing evaluation of credit quality indicators. Historically, actual write-offs for uncollectible accounts have not significantly differed from prior estimates.
We recognize unbilled revenue when revenue recognition occurs in advance of billings. Unbilled revenue is recognized in our Degree Program Segment because billings to university clients do not occur until after the academic term has commenced and final enrollment information is available. Our unbilled revenue represents contract assets.
Other receivables, net are comprised of amounts due under tuition payment plans with extended payment terms from students enrolled in certain of our alternative credential offerings. These plans, which are managed and serviced by third-party providers, are designed to assist students with covering tuition costs after all other student financial assistance and scholarships have been applied. The associated receivables generally have payment terms that exceed one year and are recorded net of any implied pricing concessions, which are determined based on our collections history, market data and any time value of money component. There are no fees or origination costs included in these receivables.
Deferred revenue represents the excess of amounts billed or received as compared to amounts recognized in revenue on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as of the end of the reporting period, and such amounts are reflected as a current liability on our consolidated balance sheets. Our deferred revenue represents contract liabilities. We generally receive payments from Degree Program Segment university clients early in each academic term and from Alternative Credential Segment students, either in full upon registration for the course or in full before the end of the course based on a payment plan, prior to completion of the service period. These payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the services are delivered or until our obligations are otherwise met, at which time revenue is recognized.
Business Combinations
The purchase price of an acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired, including intangible assets, and liabilities assumed, based on their respective fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the cost of an acquired entity, net of the amounts assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, is recognized as goodwill. The net assets and results of operations of an acquired entity are included on our consolidated financial statements from the acquisition date.
The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience, market conditions, and information obtained from management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital, and the cost savings expected to be derived from acquiring an asset. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
On November 16, 2021, we completed the edX Acquisition for a preliminary purchase price of $773 million. Refer to Note 3 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding this transaction.
Long-Lived Assets
Amortizable Intangible Assets
Acquired Definite-lived Intangible Assets. We capitalize purchased definite-lived intangible assets, such as software, websites and domains, and amortize them on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life. Historically, we have assessed the useful lives of these acquired intangible assets to be between three and 10 years.
Capitalized Technology. Capitalized technology includes certain purchased software and technology licenses, direct third-party costs, and internal payroll and payroll-related costs used in the creation of our internal-use software. Software development projects generally include three stages: the preliminary project stage (all costs are expensed as incurred), the application development stage (certain costs are capitalized and certain costs are expensed as incurred) and the post-
implementation/operation stage (all costs are expensed as incurred). Costs capitalized in the application development stage include costs of designing the application, coding, integrating our and the university’s networks and systems, and the testing of the software. Capitalization of costs requires judgment in determining when a project has reached the application development stage and the period over which we expect to benefit from the use of that software. Once the software is placed in service, these amounts are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, which is generally three to five years.
Capitalized Content Development. We develop content for each offering on a course-by-course basis in collaboration with university client faculty and industry experts. Depending upon the offering, we may use materials provided by university clients and their faculty, including curricula, case studies, presentations and other reading materials. We are responsible for the creation of materials suitable for delivery through our online learning platform, including all expenses associated with this effort. With respect to the Degree Program Segment, the development of content is part of our single performance obligation and is considered a contract fulfillment cost.
The content development costs that qualify for capitalization are third-party direct costs, such as videography, editing and other services associated with creating digital content. Additionally, we capitalize internal payroll and payroll-related expenses incurred to create and produce videos and other digital content utilized in the university clients’ offerings for delivery via our online learning platform. Capitalization ends when content has been fully developed by both us and the university client, at which time amortization of the capitalized content development begins. The capitalized costs for each offering are recorded on a course-by-course basis and included in amortizable intangible assets, net on our consolidated balance sheets. These amounts are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the respective course, which is generally four to five years. The estimated useful life corresponds with the planned curriculum refresh rate. This refresh rate is consistent with expected curriculum refresh rates as cited by faculty members for similar on-campus offerings.
Evaluation of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, which consist of property and equipment, capitalized technology, capitalized content development and acquired finite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. In order to assess the recoverability of the capitalized technology and content development, the amounts are grouped by the lowest level of independent cash flows. Recoverability of a long-lived asset is measured by a comparison of the carrying value of an asset or asset group to the future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group. If such assets are not recoverable, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of an asset exceeds the estimated fair value (discounted cash flow) of the asset or asset group. Our impairment analysis is based upon cumulative results and forecasted performance.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We review goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually, as of October 1, and more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of goodwill or an indefinite-lived asset below its carrying value.
Goodwill
We test our goodwill at the reporting unit level, which is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. We initially assess qualitative factors to determine if it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment review. We review goodwill for impairment using a quantitative approach if we decide to bypass the qualitative assessment or determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value based on a qualitative assessment. Upon completion of a quantitative assessment, we may be required to recognize an impairment based on the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of a reporting unit by utilizing a weighted combination of the income-based and market-based approaches.
The income-based approach requires us to make significant assumptions and estimates. These assumptions and estimates primarily include, but are not limited to, the selection of appropriate peer group companies, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization expense, capital expenditures and future working capital requirements. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, we consider each reporting unit’s historical results and current operating trends, revenue, profitability, cash flow results and forecasts, and industry trends. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors including, but not limited to, general economic and regulatory conditions, market capitalization, the continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and prospective student enrollment patterns.
In addition, the value of a reporting unit using the market-based approach is estimated by comparing the reporting unit to other publicly-traded companies and/or to publicly-disclosed business mergers and acquisitions in similar lines of business. The value of a reporting unit is based on pricing multiples of certain financial parameters observed in the comparable companies. We also make estimates and assumptions for market values to determine a reporting unit’s estimated fair value.
Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value and the goodwill impairment test result. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the goodwill balance was $834.5 million and $415.8 million, respectively. See Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this annual report for more information regarding goodwill.
Based on our quantitative assessment performed during 2019 and the qualitative assessments performed as of October 1 in 2020 and 2021, we believe that the estimated fair values of the reporting units exceeded their carrying values by no less than 10%. It is possible that future changes in our circumstances, including potential impacts from COVID-19, or in the variables associated with the judgments, assumptions and estimates used in assessing the fair value of our reporting units, could require us to record impairment charges in the future. Subsequent to year-end and through the date of this filing, we experienced a significant decline in our market capitalization, from $1.5 billion to $0.8 billion. Management is evaluating whether this decline represents a triggering event for assessing the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset balances for impairment in the first quarter of 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the balances of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset were $834.5 million and $255.0 million, respectively.
Other Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
Our indefinite-lived intangible asset was acquired in November 2021 and represents the established edX trade name. Given the timing of the edX Acquisition, we will review this asset for impairment as of October 1, 2022, or earlier if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of this asset below its carrying value.
Stock-Based Compensation
We provide stock-based compensation awards consisting of restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance restricted stock units (“PRSUs”) and stock options to employees, directors and consultants. We measure all stock-based compensation awards at fair value as of the grant date. The fair values of RSUs and PRSUs containing performance-based vesting conditions are based on the fair value of our stock on the date of grant. We use a Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants and a Monte Carlo valuation model to estimate the fair value of PRSUs containing market-based vesting conditions . We also maintain the 2017 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”) and estimate the fair value of each purchase right thereunder as of the grant date using a Black-Scholes option pricing model.
The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo valuation models require the input of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, expected life, expected stock price volatility and dividend yield. For stock option grants, the risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates for constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities consistent with the expected term of our employee stock options. The expected life represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the “simplified method.” Under the “simplified method,” the expected life of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. We use the “simplified method” due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected life of the stock options. Expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the estimated expected life of the stock options. We assume no dividend yield because dividends are not expected to be paid in the near future, which is consistent with our history of not declaring or paying dividends to date.
For PRSUs subject to market-based vesting conditions, the risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates for constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities consistent with the expected life of the awards. The expected life is consistent with the performance measurement period of the awards. Expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the estimated expected life. We assume no dividend yield because dividends are not expected to be paid in the near future, which is consistent with our history of not declaring or paying dividends to date. The valuations determined by the Monte Carlo simulation utilize 50,000 future stock prices for us and our peer group. We have chosen this amount for the simulation as to minimize the standard modeling error and believe that the resulting distribution gives a reasonable estimate of the grant date fair value.
For awards subject only to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the awards’ requisite service period. For awards subject to both service and performance-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using an accelerated recognition method when it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. For awards subject to both service and market-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense using an accelerated recognition method over the requisite service period beginning with the date of the grant and ending upon completion of the service period, with stock-based compensation expense being recognized irrespective of the achievement of the market condition. For shares subject to the ESPP, we use the straight-line method to record stock-based compensation expense over the respective offering period.
Refer to Note 12 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our stock-based compensation awards.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the FASB’s recent accounting pronouncements and their effect on us.