ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis below for the Company should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to such financial statements (pages to), "Forward-looking Statements" (page 3) and Risk Factors set forth in Item 1A.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations focuses on discussion of 2021 results as compared to 2020 results. For discussion of 2020 results as compared to 2019 results, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” within our Form 10-K for the year ended December 29, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Our Company
Texas Roadhouse, Inc. is a growing restaurant company operating predominately in the casual dining segment. Our late founder, W. Kent Taylor, started the business in 1993 with the opening of the first Texas Roadhouse restaurant in Clarksville, Indiana. Since then, we have grown to 667 restaurants in 49 states and ten foreign countries. Our mission statement is "Legendary Food, Legendary Service®." Our operating strategy is designed to position each of our restaurants as the local hometown destination for a broad segment of consumers seeking high-quality, affordable meals served with friendly, attentive service. As of December 28, 2021, our 667 restaurants included:
● 566 "company restaurants," of which 546 were wholly-owned and 20 were majority-owned. The results of operations of company restaurants are included in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. The portion of income attributable to noncontrolling interests in company restaurants that are not wholly-owned is reflected in the line item entitled "Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests" in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. Of the 566 restaurants we owned and operated at the end of 2021, we operated 526 as Texas Roadhouse restaurants, 36 as Bubba’s 33 restaurants and four as Jaggers restaurants.
● 101 "franchise restaurants," 24 of which we have a 5.0% to 10.0% ownership interest. The income derived from our minority interests in these franchise restaurants is reported in the line item entitled "Equity (loss) income from investments in unconsolidated affiliates" in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. Additionally, we provide various management services to these 24 franchise restaurants, as well as five additional franchise restaurants in which we have no ownership interest. All of the franchise restaurants operated as Texas Roadhouse restaurants. Of the 101 franchise restaurants, 70 were domestic restaurants and 31 were international restaurants.
We have contractual arrangements that grant us the right to acquire at pre-determined formulas the remaining equity interests in 18 of the 20 majority-owned company restaurants and 66 of the 70 domestic franchise restaurants.
Throughout this report, we use the term "restaurants" to include Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33, unless otherwise noted.
Presentation of Financial and Operating Data
We operate on a fiscal year that typically ends on the last Tuesday in December. Fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020 were both 52 weeks in length, while the fourth quarters were both 13 weeks in length.
COVID-19 and Related Impacts
The Company has been subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic (the “pandemic”). These include federal, state and local restrictions on restaurants, some of which have limited capacity or seating in dining rooms while others have allowed to-go or curbside service only. As of December 28, 2021, all of our domestic company and franchise locations were operating without restriction. As of December 29, 2020, all of our domestic company and franchise locations were operating their dining rooms under various limited capacity restrictions or were limited to outdoor and/or to-go or curbside service only.
As a result of these restrictions, we developed a hybrid operating model to accommodate our dining room restrictions together with enhanced to-go. We continue to see sales in our to-go program higher than pre-pandemic levels, even with dining rooms operating without restriction. We cannot predict how long we will continue to be impacted by the pandemic, the extent to which our dining rooms will have to close again or otherwise have limited seating, or if the increased sales in our to-go program will continue. The extent to which the pandemic impacts our business, results of operations, or financial condition will depend on future developments which are outside of our control. This includes, without limitation, the efficacy and public acceptance of vaccination programs and/or testing mandates in curbing the spread of the virus, the introduction and spread of new variants of the virus, which may prove resistant to currently approved vaccines, and new or reinstated restrictions or regulations on our operations.
As a result of a significant increase in sales, the lingering impact of the pandemic, and other supply constraints, we have experienced and expect to continue to experience commodity cost inflation and certain food and supply shortages. The commodity cost inflation, which primarily relates to beef, is due to increased costs incurred by our vendors related to higher labor, transportation, packaging, and raw material costs. To date, we have been able to properly manage any food or supply shortages but have experienced increased costs. If our vendors are unable to fulfill their obligations under their contracts, we may encounter further shortages and/or higher costs to secure adequate supply and a possible loss of sales, any of which would harm our business.
In addition, as our dining rooms have returned to operating without restriction, our ability to attract and retain restaurant-level employees has become more challenging due to an increasingly competitive job market throughout the country. We have also experienced periodic staffing shortages due to employees testing positive for the virus or having to quarantine. To the extent these challenges persist, we could continue to experience increased labor costs and/or decreased sales.
As a result of the pandemic, legislation referred to as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the "CARES Act") was passed in 2020 to benefit companies that were significantly impacted by the pandemic. This legislation allowed for the deferral of the social security portion of the employer portion of FICA payroll taxes from the date of enactment through the end of 2020. In total, we deferred $47.3 million in payroll taxes, of which $24.3 million was repaid in 2021 and $23.0 million is required to be repaid by the end of 2022. The amount due in 2022 is included in accrued wages and payroll taxes in our consolidated balance sheets.
The CARES Act also allowed for an Employee Retention Credit for companies severely impacted by the pandemic to encourage the retention of full-time employees. This refundable payroll tax credit was available for any company that had fully or partially suspended operations due to government order or experienced a significant decline in gross receipts and had employees who were paid but did not actually work. Since the onset of the pandemic, the Company has provided various forms of relief pay for hourly restaurant employees, a significant portion of which qualified for this tax credit. For the years ended December 28, 2021 and December 29, 2020, we recorded $1.2 million and $7.0 million, respectively, related to this credit which is included as a reduction to labor expense in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
Long-term Strategies to Grow Earnings Per Share and Create Shareholder Value
Our long-term strategies with respect to increasing net income and earnings per share, along with creating shareholder value, include the following:
Expanding Our Restaurant Base. We continue to evaluate opportunities to develop restaurants in existing markets and in new domestic and international markets. Domestically, we remain focused primarily on markets where we believe a significant demand for our restaurants exists because of population size, income levels, and the presence of shopping and entertainment centers and a significant employment base. In recent years, we have relocated several existing Texas Roadhouse locations at or near the end of the associated lease or as a result of eminent domain which allowed us to move to a better site, update them to a current prototypical design, construct a larger building with more seats and greater number of available parking spaces, accommodate increased to-go sales and/or obtain more favorable lease terms. We continue to evaluate these opportunities particularly as it relates to older locations with strong sales. At our high volume restaurants, we continue to look for opportunities to increase our dining room capacity by adding on to our existing building and/or to increase our parking capacity by leasing or purchasing property that adjoins our site. In addition, we continue to pursue opportunities to acquire domestic franchise locations to expand our company restaurant base.
In 2021, we opened 29 company restaurants while our franchise partners opened four total restaurants domestic and internationally. This included 23 Texas Roadhouse restaurants, five Bubba’s 33 restaurants, and one Jaggers restaurant. In 2022, we plan to open approximately 25 Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 company restaurants. In addition, we anticipate our existing franchise partners will open as many as five Texas Roadhouse restaurants in 2022.
Our average capital investment for the 23 Texas Roadhouse restaurants opened during 2021, including pre-opening expenses and a capitalized rent factor, was $5.7 million. We expect our average capital investment for Texas Roadhouse restaurants opening in 2022 to be approximately $6.3 million. Our average capital investment for the five Bubba’s 33 restaurants opened during 2021, including pre-opening expenses and a capitalized rent factor, was $7.4 million. We expect our average capital investment for Bubba’s 33 restaurants opening in 2022 to be approximately $7.3 million.
We remain focused on driving sales and managing restaurant investment costs to maintain our restaurant development in the future. Our capital investment (including cash and non-cash costs) for new restaurants varies significantly depending on a number of factors including, but not limited to: the square footage, layout, scope of required site work, geographical location, cost of materials, type of construction labor, local permitting requirements, hook-up fees, our ability to negotiate with landlords, and cost of liquor and other licenses.
We have entered into area development and franchise agreements for the development and operation of Texas Roadhouse restaurants in several foreign countries and one U.S. territory. We currently have signed franchise and/or development agreements in nine countries in the Middle East as well as Taiwan, the Philippines, Mexico, China, South Korea, Brazil and Puerto Rico. As of December 28, 2021, we had 15 restaurants in five countries in the Middle East, five restaurants open in the Philippines, four in Taiwan, four in South Korea, two in Mexico and one in China for a total of 31 restaurants in ten foreign countries. For the existing international agreements, the franchisee is generally required to pay us a franchise fee for each restaurant to be opened, royalties on the gross sales of each restaurant and a development fee for our grant of development rights in the named countries. We anticipate that the specific business terms of any future franchise agreement for international restaurants might vary significantly from the standard terms of our domestic agreements and from the terms of existing international agreements, depending on the territory to be franchised and the extent of franchisor-provided services to each franchisee.
In 2021, we entered into our first area development agreements for Jaggers, our fast-casual concept. These agreements allow for the development and operation of restaurants in specific territories in Texas, Oklahoma, and North Carolina. As part of these agreements, the franchisees are required to pay us a franchise fee for each restaurant to be opened, royalties on the gross sales of each restaurant and a development fee for our grant of development rights in the named territories. No franchise agreements have been entered into and no corresponding restaurants have been opened yet related to these area development agreements.
Maintaining and/or Improving Restaurant Level Profitability. We continue to balance the impacts of inflationary pressures with our value positioning as we remain focused on our long-term success. This may create a challenge in terms of maintaining and/or increasing restaurant-level profitability (restaurant margin), in any given year, depending on the level of inflation we experience. Restaurant margin is not a U.S. generally accepted accounting principle ("GAAP") measure and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative to income from operations. See further discussion of restaurant margin below. In addition to restaurant margin, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, we also focus on the growth of restaurant margin dollars per store week as a measure of restaurant-level profitability. In terms of driving comparable restaurant sales, we remain focused on encouraging repeat visits by our guests and attracting new guests through our continued commitment to operational standards relating to food and service quality. To attract new guests and increase the frequency of visits of our existing guests, we also continue to drive various localized marketing programs, focus on speed of service and increase throughput by adding seats and parking at certain restaurants. In addition, with the increase in to-go sales, we have made changes to our building layout to better accommodate higher to-go volumes at our restaurants. We have also made investments in technology to allow for a better guest experience.
We also continue to look for ways through various strategic initiatives to drive awareness of our brands and increase sales and profitability. At the onset of the pandemic, we began selling ready-to-grill steaks for customers to prepare at home. While we reduced our store-level offerings around ready-to-grill once our dining rooms began to re-open in mid-2020, based on the success of this program we developed Texas Roadhouse Butcher Shop. This online retail store allows for the purchase and delivery of quality steaks that are similar to those available in our restaurants. This non-royalty-based product launched in late 2020.
We also further expanded our retail business in 2021 with the introduction of our non-alcoholic Margarita Mixer, and our canned cocktail Margarita Seltzer, which rolled out in test markets. These Texas Roadhouse-branded products are subject to royalty-based license agreements.
Leveraging Our Scalable Infrastructure. To support our growth, we have made investments in our infrastructure over the past several years, including information and accounting systems, real estate, human resources, legal, marketing, international and restaurant operations, including the development of new strategic initiatives. Whether we are able to leverage our infrastructure in future years by growing our general and administrative costs at a slower rate than our revenue will depend, in part, on our new restaurant openings, our comparable restaurant sales growth rate going forward and the level of investment we continue to make in our infrastructure.
Returning Capital to Shareholders. We continue to evaluate opportunities to return capital to our shareholders, including the payment of dividends and repurchase of common stock. In 2011, our Board of Directors declared our first quarterly dividend of $0.08 per share of common stock which we consistently grew over time. On March 24, 2020, the Board of Directors voted to suspend the payment of quarterly cash dividends on the Company’s common stock, effective with respect to dividends occurring after March 27, 2020. This was done to preserve cash flow due to the pandemic. On April 28, 2021, our Board of Directors reinstated the payment of a quarterly cash dividend of $0.40 per share of common stock. On February 17, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.46 per share of common stock.
The declaration and payment of cash dividends on our common stock is at the discretion of our Board of Directors, and any decision to declare a dividend will be based on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, earnings, financial condition, applicable covenants under our amended credit facility, other contractual restrictions and other factors deemed relevant.
In 2008, our Board of Directors approved our first stock repurchase program. From inception through December 28, 2021, we have paid $420.7 million through our authorized stock repurchase programs to repurchase 18,307,437 shares of our common stock at an average price per share of $22.98. On May 31, 2019, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program under which we may repurchase up to $250.0 million of our common stock. This stock repurchase program has no expiration date and replaced a previous stock repurchase program which was approved on May 22, 2014. All repurchases to date have been made through open market transactions. In 2021, we paid $51.6 million to repurchase 584,932 shares of our common stock. As of December 28, 2021, $96.1 million remains authorized for stock repurchases.
Key Operating Personnel
Key management personnel who have a significant impact on the performance of our restaurants include market partners, managing partners, operations managers, kitchen managers, service managers and assistant managers. Managing partners are single restaurant operators who have primary responsibility for the day-to-day operations of the entire restaurant. Operations managers support the managing partner in overall operations including both departments for kitchen and service. Kitchen managers have primary responsibility for managing the kitchen staff and overall kitchen operations including food production, preparation, execution and quality standards. Service managers have primary responsibility for managing the front of house staff and overall dining room, bar and to-go operations including service quality and the guest experience. Assistant managers support our managing partners, operations managers, kitchen and service managers. All managers are responsible for maintaining our standards of quality and performance. We use market partners to oversee the operation of our restaurants. Each market partner oversees a group of varying sizes of managing partners and their respective management teams. Market partners are also responsible for the hiring and development of each restaurant’s management team and assisting in the site selection process. Through regular visits to the restaurants, the market partners facilitate adherence to all aspects of our concepts, strategies and standards of quality.
Managing partners and market partners are required, as a condition of employment, to sign a multi-year employment agreement. The annual compensation of our managing partners and market partners includes a base salary plus a percentage of the pre-tax income of the restaurant(s) they operate or supervise. Managing partners and market partners are eligible to participate in our equity incentive plan and are required to make refundable deposits of $25,000 and $50,000, respectively. Generally, the deposits are refunded after five years of continuous service.
Key Measures We Use To Evaluate Our Company
Key measures we use to evaluate and assess our business include the following:
Number of Restaurant Openings. Number of restaurant openings reflects the number of restaurants opened during a particular fiscal period. For company restaurant openings, we incur pre-opening costs, which are defined below, before the restaurant opens. Typically, new restaurants open with an initial start-up period of higher than normalized sales volumes, which decrease to a steady level approximately three to six months after opening. However, although sales volumes are generally higher, so are initial costs, resulting in restaurant margins that are generally lower during the start-up period of operation and increase to a steady level approximately three to six months after opening.
Comparable Restaurant Sales. Comparable restaurant sales reflects the change in sales for all company restaurants over the same period of the prior year for the comparable restaurant base. We define the comparable restaurant base to include those restaurants open for a full 18 months before the beginning of the period measured excluding restaurants permanently closed during the period. Comparable restaurant sales can be impacted by changes in guest traffic counts or by changes in the per person average check amount. Menu price changes, the mix of menu items sold and the mix of dine-in versus to-go sales can affect the per person average check amount.
Average Unit Volume. Average unit volume represents the average annual restaurant sales for Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 restaurants open for a full six months before the beginning of the period measured excluding sales of restaurants permanently closed during the period. Historically, average unit volume growth is less than comparable restaurant sales growth which indicates that newer restaurants are operating with sales levels lower than the company average. At times, average unit volume growth may be more than comparable restaurant sales growth which indicates that newer restaurants are operating with sales levels higher than the company average.
Store Weeks. Store weeks represent the number of weeks that all company restaurants, unless otherwise noted, were open during the reporting period. Store weeks include weeks in which a restaurant is temporarily closed.
Restaurant Margin. Restaurant margin (in dollars and as a percentage of restaurant and other sales) represents restaurant and other sales less restaurant-level operating costs, including food and beverage costs, labor, rent and other operating costs. Restaurant margin is not a measurement determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative, to income from operations. This non-GAAP measure is not indicative of overall company performance and profitability in that this measure does not accrue directly to the benefit of shareholders due to the nature of the costs excluded. Restaurant margin is widely regarded as a useful metric by which to evaluate restaurant-level operating efficiency and performance. In calculating restaurant margin, we exclude certain non-restaurant-level costs that support operations, including pre-opening and general and administrative expenses, but do not have a direct impact on restaurant-level operational efficiency and performance. We also exclude depreciation and amortization expense, substantially all of which relates to restaurant-level assets, as it represents a non-cash charge for the investment in our restaurants. We also exclude impairment and closure expense as we believe this provides a clearer perspective of the Company’s ongoing operating performance and a more useful comparison to prior period results. Restaurant margin as presented may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies in our industry. A reconciliation of income from operations to restaurant margin is included in the Results of Operations section below.
Other Key Definitions
Restaurant and Other Sales. Restaurant sales include gross food and beverage sales, net of promotions and discounts, for all company restaurants. Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are accounted for on a net basis and therefore are excluded from restaurant sales in the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. Other sales include the amortization of fees associated with our third party gift card sales net of the amortization of gift card breakage income. These amounts are amortized consistent with the historic redemption pattern of the associated gift card or on actual redemptions in periods where redemptions do not align with historic redemption patterns. Other sales also include sales related to our non-royalty-based retail products.
Franchise Royalties and Fees. Franchise royalties consist of royalties, as defined in our franchise agreement, paid to us by our domestic and international franchisees. Domestic and/or international franchisees also typically pay an initial franchise fee and/or development fee for each new restaurant or territory. The terms of the international agreements may vary significantly from our domestic agreements. These include advertising fees paid by domestic
franchisees to our system-wide marketing and advertising fund and management fees paid by certain domestic franchisees for supervisory and administrative services that we perform.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs consists of the costs of raw materials and ingredients used in the preparation of food and beverage products sold in our company restaurants. Approximately half of our food and beverage costs relates to beef costs.
Restaurant Labor Expenses. Restaurant labor expenses include all direct and indirect labor costs incurred in operations except for profit sharing incentive compensation expenses earned by our restaurant managing partners and market partners. These profit sharing expenses are reflected in restaurant other operating expenses. Restaurant labor expenses also include share-based compensation expense related to restaurant-level employees.
Restaurant Rent Expense. Restaurant rent expense includes all rent, except pre-opening rent, associated with the leasing of real estate and includes base, percentage and straight-line rent expense.
Restaurant Other Operating Expenses. Restaurant other operating expenses consist of all other restaurant-level operating costs, the major components of which are utilities, dining room and to-go supplies, local store advertising, repairs and maintenance, equipment rent, property taxes, credit card fees, and general liability insurance. Profit sharing incentive compensation expenses earned by our restaurant managing partners and market partners are also included in restaurant other operating expenses.
Pre-opening Expenses. Pre-opening expenses, which are charged to operations as incurred, consist of expenses incurred before the opening of a new or relocated restaurant and are comprised principally of opening team and training compensation and benefits, travel expenses, rent, food, beverage and other initial supplies and expenses. On average, over 70% of total pre-opening costs incurred per restaurant opening relate to the hiring and training of employees. Pre-opening costs vary by location depending on a number of factors, including the size and physical layout of each location; the number of management and hourly employees required to operate each restaurant; the availability of qualified restaurant staff members; the cost of travel and lodging for different geographic areas; the timing of the restaurant opening; and the extent of unexpected delays, if any, in obtaining final licenses and permits to open the restaurants.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation and amortization expenses ("D&A") include the depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of intangibles with definite lives, substantially all of which relates to restaurant-level assets.
Impairment and Closure Costs, Net. Impairment and closure costs, net include any impairment of long-lived assets, including property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and goodwill, and expenses associated with the closure of a restaurant. Closure costs also include any gains or losses associated with a relocated restaurant or the sale of a closed restaurant and/or assets held for sale as well as lease costs associated with closed or relocated restaurants.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses ("G&A") are comprised of expenses associated with corporate and administrative functions that support development and restaurant operations and provide an infrastructure to support future growth including advertising costs incurred. G&A also includes legal fees, settlement charges and share-based compensation expense related to executive officers, Support Center employees and market partners and the realized and unrealized holding gains and losses related to the investments in our deferred compensation plan.
Interest Expense (Income), Net. Interest expense (income), net includes interest expense on our debt or financing obligations including the amortization of loan fees reduced by earnings on cash and cash equivalents.
Equity (Loss) Income from Unconsolidated Affiliates. Equity (loss) income includes our percentage share of net income earned by unconsolidated affiliates. This includes our 5.0% to 10.0% equity interest in 24 franchise restaurants. Additionally, we had a 40% equity interest in four non-Texas Roadhouse restaurants as part of a joint venture agreement with a casual dining restaurant operator in China. We fully impaired our equity investment related to this joint venture in 2021 as these restaurants closed during the year.
Net Income Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests represents the portion of income attributable to the other owners of the majority-owned restaurants. Our consolidated subsidiaries include 20 majority-owned restaurants for all periods presented.
2021 Financial Highlights
Total revenue increased $1.1 billion or 44.4% to $3.5 billion in 2021 compared to $2.4 billion in 2020 primarily due to an increase in average unit volumes driven by an increase in comparable restaurant sales, along with an increase in store weeks. Store weeks and comparable restaurant sales increased 5.0% and 37.8%, respectively, at company restaurants in 2021. The increase in comparable restaurant sales was driven by the re-opening of our dining rooms, the continued easing of dining room capacity and seating restrictions throughout 2021 and continued strong to-go sales.
Restaurant margin increased $316.1 million or 119.0% to $581.7 million in 2021 compared to $265.6 million in 2020 and restaurant margin, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, increased to 16.9% in 2021 compared to 11.2% in 2020. The increase in restaurant margin was due to higher sales partially offset by commodity inflation.
Net income increased $214.0 million or 684.8% to $245.3 million in 2021 compared to $31.3 million in 2020 primarily due to higher restaurant margin dollars partially offset by higher general and administrative expenses and higher income tax expense. Diluted earnings per share increased 682.5% to $3.50 from $0.45 in the prior year.
NM - Not meaningful
Restaurant Unit Activity
Restaurant and Other Sales
Restaurant and other sales increased 44.5% in 2021 compared to 2020. The following table summarizes certain key drivers and/or attributes of restaurant sales at company restaurants for the periods presented. Company restaurant count activity is shown in the restaurant unit activity table above.
(1) Includes the impact of the year-over-year change in sales volume of all Jaggers restaurants, along with Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 restaurants open less than six months before the beginning of the period measured, and, if applicable, the impact of restaurants permanently closed or acquired during the period.
(2) Average unit volume restaurants include restaurants open a full six to 18 months before the beginning of the period measured.
The increase in restaurant sales for 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in average unit volumes, driven by an increase in comparable restaurant sales along with an increase in store weeks. The increase in comparable restaurant sales was driven by the re-opening of our dining rooms, the continued easing of dining room capacity and seating restrictions throughout 2021 and continued strong to-go sales. Comparable restaurant sales increased 37.8% in 2021, which included guest traffic count growth of 27.6% and per person average check growth of 10.2%.
Our expanded to-go model helped to offset the loss of dining room sales particularly at the onset of the pandemic when all of our dining rooms were closed. In addition, we continued to see significant to-go sales once our dining rooms reopened. To-go sales as a percentage of total restaurant sales were 17.1% in 2021 compared to 27.0% in 2020.
Comparable restaurant sales include the benefit of menu price increases of approximately 1.75% and 4.2% implemented in April 2021 and October 2021, respectively, as well as an increase of 1.0% in October 2020.
In 2021, we opened 29 company restaurants, including five Bubba’s 33 and one Jaggers restaurant. In 2022, we plan to open approximately 25 Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 company restaurants. On December 29, 2021, the first day of our 2022 fiscal year, we completed the acquisition of seven franchise restaurants for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $27 million. In total, we expect store week growth of approximately 6.5% in 2022, including the impact of the seven franchise restaurants acquired.
Other sales primarily represent the net impact of amortization of third party gift card fees and gift card breakage income. The net impact was ($6.1) million and ($6.8) million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily related to a favorable breakage adjustment of $4.8 million recorded in 2021. This adjustment primarily related to a shift in our historic redemption pattern which indicated that the percentage of gift cards sold that are not expected to be redeemed had shifted from 4.0% to 4.5%. As a result, we adjusted the breakage recognized for all gift cards that had not been fully amortized. The impact of this adjustment was offset by increased amortization of third party fees due to the increase in sales through our third party gift card program.
Franchise Royalties and Fees
Franchise royalties and fees increased by $6.8 million or 38.0% compared to 2020 due to higher average unit volumes, driven by comparable restaurant sales increases at domestic stores. Comparable restaurant sales at domestic franchise stores increased 37.5% in 2021.
We anticipate our existing franchise partners will open as many as five Texas Roadhouse restaurants in 2022.
Food and Beverage Costs
Food and beverage costs, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, increased to 33.6% in 2021 from 32.8% in 2020 primarily due to higher commodity inflation partially offset by the benefit of a higher guest check. Commodity inflation was 10.0% in 2021, primarily driven by higher beef costs.
For 2022, we currently expect commodity cost inflation of approximately 17% for the first half of the year and 12% to 14% for the year with prices locked for approximately 30% of our forecasted costs and the remainder subject to floating market prices.
Restaurant Labor Expenses
Restaurant labor expense, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, decreased to 32.7% in 2021 compared to 36.8% in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to an increase in average unit volumes as well as several items related to 2020 including labor inefficiencies as we converted to our hybrid operating model, relief payments and increased benefits provided to our hourly employees. In 2021, the benefit of a higher guest check amount also contributed to the decrease. These decreases were partially offset by higher wage rates primarily due to labor market pressures along with increases in state-mandated minimum and tipped wage rates, the impact of higher employee retention payroll tax credits in the prior year and an increase in workers’ compensation expense.
In 2021, we incurred costs of $4.0 million for relief pay and enhanced benefits to our restaurant-level managers and hourly employees compared to $20.2 million in 2020.
In 2021, we recognized employee retention payroll tax credits of $1.2 million compared to $7.0 million in 2020. No employee retention credits were recognized in the second half of 2021 as we no longer qualified for these credits.
The increase in workers’ compensation expense was due to changes in our claims development history included in our quarterly actuarial reserve estimate that resulted in an unfavorable adjustment of $1.8 million in 2021. This compared to a favorable adjustment of $1.8 million in 2020.
In 2022, we anticipate our labor costs will continue to be pressured by wage and other labor inflation of approximately 7% driven by labor market pressures, increases in state-mandated minimum and tipped wages and increased investment in our people.
Restaurant Rent Expense
Restaurant rent expense, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, decreased to 1.7% in 2021 compared to 2.3% in 2020 due to the increase in average unit volumes partially offset by higher rent expense, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, at our newer restaurants.
Restaurant Other Operating Expenses
Restaurant other operating expenses, as a percentage of restaurant and other sales, decreased to 15.1% in 2021 compared to 17.0% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the increase in average unit volumes, lower to-go supplies, and lower general liability insurance expense. The lower supplies expense was due to the prior year period having significantly higher to-go sales due to the closure of our dining rooms. The decrease in general liability insurance expense was due to changes in our claims development history included in our quarterly actuarial reserve estimate that resulted in favorable adjustments totaling $3.9 million in 2021 compared to unfavorable adjustments totaling $3.1 million in 2020. In addition, due to the significant increase in our average unit volumes, expenses that are largely fixed, including utilities, property taxes and other outside services decreased as a percentage of restaurant and other sales.
Restaurant Pre-opening Expenses
Pre-opening expenses increased to $24.3 million in 2021 from $20.1 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the timing and number of restaurant openings as well as a slight increase in average pre-opening expenses incurred. Pre-opening costs will typically fluctuate from period to period based on the specific pre-opening costs incurred for each restaurant, the number and timing of restaurant openings and the number and timing of restaurant managers hired.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses ("D&A")
D&A, as a percentage of revenue, decreased to 3.7% in 2021 compared to 4.9% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in average unit volumes partially offset by higher depreciation at newer restaurants.
Impairment and Closure Costs, Net
Impairment and closure costs, net was $0.7 million and $2.3 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, impairment and closure costs, net included the impairment of the fixed assets and operating lease right-of-use assets at two restaurants, both of which have relocated or are scheduled to be relocated. In 2020, impairment and closure costs, net included $1.2 million related to the impairment of the fixed assets and operating lease right-of-use assets at four restaurants, all of which were relocated. In addition, we recorded goodwill impairment of $1.1 million related to two restaurants.
General and Administrative Expenses ("G&A")
G&A, as a percentage of total revenue, decreased to 4.5% in 2021 compared to 5.0% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the increase in average unit volumes partially offset by higher incentive and performance-based compensation costs, the prior year favorable impact of the sale of a legal claim for $3.0 million and higher managing partner conference costs. In 2021, we incurred costs of $3.0 million for our annual managing partner conference which was not held in 2020.
As a result of the pandemic, our executive and leadership teams voluntarily agreed to reductions of salary and bonus for a portion of our 2020 fiscal year. Also, each non-employee member of our Board of Directors volunteered to forgo their director and committee fees and any cash retainers for a portion of our 2020 fiscal year.
We are currently subject to various claims and contingencies that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of business, including those related to litigation, business transactions, employee-related matters and taxes, among others. See note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of these matters.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense was $3.7 million compared to $4.1 million in 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily driven by lower interest rates and the repayment of our incremental revolving credit facility partially offset by reduced earnings on our cash and cash equivalents.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate increased to 13.5% compared to an effective tax rate benefit of 81.4% in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the significant increase in pre-tax income. In 2020, our FICA tip and Work opportunity tax credits exceeded our federal tax liability which resulted in a tax rate benefit. For 2022, we expect our effective tax rate to be approximately 15%, excluding the impact of any legislative changes enacted.
Segment Information
We manage our restaurant and franchising operations by concept and as a result have identified Texas Roadhouse, Bubba's 33, Jaggers, and our retail initiatives as separate operating segments. Our reportable segments are Texas Roadhouse and Bubba's 33. The Texas Roadhouse reportable segment includes the results of our domestic company Texas Roadhouse restaurants and domestic and international franchise Texas Roadhouse restaurants. The Bubba's 33 reportable segment includes the results of our domestic company Bubba's 33 restaurants. Our remaining operating segments, which include the results of our domestic company Jaggers restaurants and the results of our retail initiatives, are included in Other.
Management uses restaurant margin as the measure for assessing performance of our segments. Restaurant margin (in dollars and as a percentage of restaurant and other sales) represents restaurant and other sales less restaurant-level operating costs, including food and beverage costs, labor, rent and other operating costs. Restaurant margin also includes sales and operating costs related to our non-royalty based retail initiatives. Restaurant margin is used by our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) to evaluate restaurant-level operating efficiency and performance. A reconciliation of income from operations to restaurant margin is included in the Results of Operations section above.
The following table presents a summary of restaurant margin by segment (in thousands):
The increase in Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 restaurant margin is driven by the increase in restaurant sales partially offset by commodity inflation. The increase in restaurant sales for 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in average unit volumes, driven by an increase in comparable restaurant sales along with an increase in store weeks. The increase in comparable restaurant sales was driven by the re-opening of our dining rooms, the continued easing of dining room capacity and seating restrictions throughout 2021 and continued strong to-go sales. In addition, restaurant margin at Bubba’s 33 was negatively impacted in 2020 by the impact of increased to-go sales resulting in decreased alcoholic beverage sales.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents a summary of our net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities was $468.8 million in 2021 compared to $230.4 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in net income. The increase was partially offset by our working capital being negatively impacted by the remittance of a portion of our deferred payroll tax liability of $24.3 million related to the CARES Act.
Our operations have not required significant working capital and, like many restaurant companies, we have been able to operate with negative working capital. Sales are primarily for cash, and restaurant operations do not require significant inventories or receivables. In addition, we receive trade credit for the purchase of food, beverages and supplies, thereby reducing the need for incremental working capital to support growth.
Net cash used in investing activities was $195.1 million in 2021 compared to $161.1 million in 2020. The increase was due to an increase in capital expenditures, primarily driven by an increase in new company restaurants and an increase in refurbishments of existing restaurants. This was due to the delay in our development schedule in 2020 due to the pandemic. This increase was partially offset by fewer expenditures related to relocation sites.
We require capital principally for the development of new company restaurants, the refurbishment or relocation of existing restaurants and the acquisition of franchise restaurants, if any. We either lease our restaurant site locations under operating leases for periods generally of five to 30 years (including renewal periods) or purchase the land when appropriate. As of December 28, 2021, 148 of the 566 company restaurants have been developed on land which we own.
The following table presents a summary of capital expenditures (in thousands):
Our future capital requirements will primarily depend on the number and mix of new restaurants we open, the timing of those openings and the restaurant prototype developed in a given fiscal year. These requirements will include costs directly related to opening new restaurants or relocating existing restaurants and may also include costs necessary to ensure that our infrastructure is able to support a larger restaurant base. In 2022, we expect our capital expenditures to be approximately $230 million as we currently plan to open approximately 25 Texas Roadhouse and Bubba’s 33 company restaurants. We also expect to have as many as six relocations in 2022. In addition, on the first day of our 2022 fiscal year, we completed the acquisition of seven franchise restaurants for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $27 million. We intend to satisfy our capital requirements over the next 12 months with cash on hand, net cash provided by operating activities, and if needed, funds available under our amended credit facility.
Net cash used in financing activities was $301.2 million in 2021 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $185.9 million in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to repayments on our amended revolving credit facility, an increase in dividends paid due to the reinstatement of our quarterly dividend payment and an increase in share repurchases.
In 2021, we repaid $140.0 million that was previously outstanding on our amended revolving credit facility. In
2020, we increased our borrowings by $240.0 million as a precautionary measure in order to bolster our cash position and enhance financial flexibility in response to the pandemic.
On April 28, 2021, our Board of Directors reinstated the payment of a quarterly cash dividend of $0.40 per share of common stock which was distributed on June 4, 2021. This was the first dividend since the Board of Directors voted to suspend the payment of quarterly cash dividends at the onset of the pandemic. In 2021 and 2020, the Company paid $83.7 million and $25.0 million, respectively, in dividends to shareholders. On February 17, 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.46 per share of common stock.
On May 31, 2019, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program under which we may repurchase up to $250.0 million of our common stock. This stock repurchase program has no expiration date and replaced a previous stock repurchase program which was approved on May 22, 2014. All repurchases to date under our stock repurchase programs have been made through open market transactions. The timing and the amount of any repurchases will be determined by management under parameters established by the Board of Directors, based on an evaluation of our stock price, market conditions and other corporate considerations. On August 2, 2021, the Company resumed the share repurchase program that was suspended in 2020 at the onset of the pandemic. During 2021 and 2020, we paid $51.6 million and $12.6 million to repurchase 584,932 shares and 252,409 shares of our common stock, respectively. As of December 28, 2021, $96.1 million remains authorized for stock repurchases.
We paid distributions of $8.2 million and $3.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, to noncontrolling interest holders of our 20 majority-owned company restaurants.
On May 4, 2021, we entered into an agreement to amend our revolving credit facility with a syndicate of commercial lenders led by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and PNC Bank, N.A. The amended revolving credit facility remains an unsecured, revolving credit agreement and has a borrowing capacity of up to $300.0 million with the option to increase by an additional $200.0 million subject to certain limitations, including approval by the syndicate of lenders. The amendment also extended the maturity date to May 1, 2026.
Prior to the amendment, our original revolving credit facility had a borrowing capacity of up to $200.0 million with the option to increase by an additional $200.0 million subject to certain limitations, including approval by the syndicate of lenders. On May 11, 2020, we amended the original revolving credit facility to provide for an incremental revolving credit facility of up to $82.5 million. This amount reduced the additional $200.0 million that was available under the original revolving credit facility.
The terms of the amended revolving credit facility require us to pay interest on outstanding borrowings at LIBOR plus a margin of 0.875% to 1.875% and pay a commitment fee of 0.125% to 0.30% per year on any unused portion of the amended revolving credit facility, in each case depending on our leverage ratio. The agreement also provides an Alternate Base Rate that may be substituted for LIBOR.
As of December 28, 2021, we had $100.0 million outstanding on the amended revolving credit facility and $189.1 million of availability, net of $10.9 million of outstanding letters of credit. This outstanding amount is included as long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet.
As of December 29, 2020, we had $190.0 million outstanding on the amended revolving credit facility which is included as long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet. In addition, we had $50.0 million outstanding on the incremental revolving credit facility which is included as current maturities of long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet.
The weighted-average interest rate for the amended revolving credit facility as of December 28, 2021 and December 29, 2020 was 0.98% and 1.98%, respectively.
The lenders’ obligation to extend credit pursuant to the amended revolving credit facility depends on us maintaining certain financial covenants. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 28, 2021 and December 29, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the amount of payments due under specified contractual obligations as of December 28, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Includes interest on our revolving credit facility and interest on our financing leases. We used the interest rate on our amended revolving credit facility as of December 28, 2021 for our variable rate debt and assumed $100.0 million remains outstanding on our amended revolving credit facility through the respective maturity for all borrowings. We assumed a constant interest rate until maturity on our financing leases.
(2) Unrecognized tax benefits under ASC 740, Income Taxes, are not significant and excluded from this amount.
We have no material minimum purchase commitments with our vendors that extend beyond a year. See notes 5 and 8 to the consolidated financial statements for details of contractual obligations.
Guarantees
As of December 28, 2021 and December 29, 2020, we were contingently liable for $12.2 million and $13.0 million, respectively, for seven leases, listed in the table below. These amounts represent the maximum potential liability of future payments under the guarantees. In the event of default, the indemnity and default clauses in our assignment agreements govern our ability to pursue and recover damages incurred. No liabilities have been recorded as of December 28, 2021 as the likelihood of default was deemed to be less than probable and the fair value of the guarantees is not considered significant.
(1) Real estate lease agreements for restaurant locations which we entered into before granting franchise rights to those restaurants. We have subsequently assigned the leases to the franchisees, but remain contingently liable, under the terms of the lease, if the franchisee defaults.
(2) Leases associated with non-Texas Roadhouse restaurants which were sold. The leases were assigned to the acquirer, but we remain contingently liable under the terms of the lease if the acquirer defaults.
(3) We may be released from liability after the initial lease term expiration contingent upon certain conditions being met by the acquirer.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The above discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Our significant accounting policies are described in note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those that we
believe are most important to portraying our financial condition and results of operations and also require the greatest amount of subjective or complex judgments by management. Judgments or uncertainties regarding the application of these policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets. We evaluate long-lived assets related to each restaurant to be held and used in the business, such as property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and intangible assets subject to amortization, for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a restaurant may not be recoverable. For the purposes of this evaluation, we define the asset group at the individual restaurant level. When we evaluate the restaurants, cash flows are the primary indicator of impairment. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the restaurant to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the restaurant. Under our policies, trailing 12-month cash flow results under a predetermined amount at the individual restaurant level signals a potential impairment. In our evaluation of restaurants that do not meet the cash flow threshold, we estimate future undiscounted cash flows from operating the restaurant over its estimated useful life, which can be a period of over 20 years. In the estimation of future cash flows, we consider the period of time the restaurant has been open, the trend of operations over such period and future periods and expectations for future sales growth. We limit assumptions about important factors such as trend of future operations and sales growth to those that are supportable based upon our plans for the restaurant and actual results at comparable restaurants. Both qualitative and quantitative information are considered when evaluating for potential impairments. As we assess the ongoing expected cash flows and carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, these factors could cause us to realize a material impairment charge.
If assets are determined to be impaired, we measure the impairment charge by calculating the amount by which the asset carrying amount exceeds its estimated fair value. The determination of asset fair value is also subject to significant judgment. We generally measure estimated fair value by discounting estimated future cash flows. When fair value is measured by discounting estimated future cash flows, the assumptions used are consistent with what we believe hypothetical market participants would use. We also use a discount rate that is commensurate with the risk inherent in the projected cash flows. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets.
In 2021, as a result of our quarterly impairment analysis, we recorded a total charge of $0.7 million related to the impairment of the fixed assets and operating lease right-of-use assets at two restaurants, both of which have relocated or are scheduled to be relocated. See note 16 in the consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding closures and impairments recorded in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Goodwill. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and is tested more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit. Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, or the level of internal reporting that reflects the way in which an entity manages its businesses. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment. An entity may first assess qualitative factors in order to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The entity may also elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and determine the fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit may be based on several valuation approaches including capitalization of earnings, discounted cash flows, comparable public company market multiples and comparable acquisition market multiples. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill over the fair value of the reporting unit.
At December 28, 2021, our Texas Roadhouse reporting unit had allocated goodwill of $127.0 million. No other reporting units had goodwill balances. Historically, we designated our operating segment and reporting unit to be at the same level which we defined to be the individual restaurant. In 2021, due to a change in our management reporting structure, we changed the designation of our operating segment and reporting unit to be at the concept level. As a result of this change, we performed the goodwill impairment analysis at both the individual restaurant and concept level to substantiate that our goodwill was not impaired under either reporting unit definition.
In performing the qualitative assessment, we reviewed factors such as results of prior impairment tests, impacts of the pandemic, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors of materials, labor, and other
items, financial performance, operational stability, competitive environment, and share price performance. Based on the financial performance of the Texas Roadhouse concept, as well as the improved operating environment in 2021, no indicators of impairment were identified. Changes in circumstances existing at the measurement date or at other times in the future could result in an impairment loss. See note 16 in the consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding closures and impairments recorded in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Effects of Inflation
We are currently operating in a period of high inflation, led by commodity cost inflation which primarily relates to beef. This is due to increased costs incurred by our vendors related to high labor, transportation, packaging, and raw materials costs. Some of the impacts of the inflation have been offset by menu price increases and other adjustments made during the year. Whether we are able and/or choose to continue to offset the effects of inflation will determine to what extent, if any, inflation affects our restaurant profitability in future periods.