ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion highlights the principal factors that have affected our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see the explanatory note concerning “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements. The operating results for the periods presented were not materially affected by inflation.
Overview
AgEagle™ Aerial Systems Inc. (“AgEagle” or the “Company”), through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, is actively engaged in designing and delivering best-in-class drones, sensors and software that solve important problems for our customers. Founded in 2010, AgEagle was originally formed to pioneer proprietary, professional-grade, fixed-winged drones and aerial imagery-based data collection and analytics solutions for the agriculture industry. Today, the Company is earning distinction as a globally respected industry leader offering best-in-class, autonomous unmanned aerial systems (UAS) to a wide range of industry verticals, including energy/utilities, infrastructure, agriculture and government, among others.
The Company’s shift and expansion from solely manufacturing fixed-wing farm drones in 2018, to offering what the Company believes is one of the industry’s best fixed-wing, full-stack drone solutions, culminated in 2021 when AgEagle acquired three market-leading companies engaged in producing UAS airframes, sensors and software for commercial and government use. In addition to a robust portfolio of proprietary, connected hardware and software products, an established global network of nearly 200 UAS resellers, and enterprise customers worldwide, these acquisitions also brought AgEagle a highly valuable workforce comprised largely of experienced engineers and technologists with deep expertise in the fields of robotics, automation, manufacturing and data science.
AgEagle is led by a proven management team with years of drone industry experience. In view of AgEagle’s CEO’s appointment to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) Advanced Aviation Advisory Committee and Unmanned Aircraft Systems Beyond Visual Line of Sight Aviation Rulemaking Committee, in addition to, and the Company’s participation in the FAA’s BEYOND program, AgEagle has played a hands-on role in helping to establish necessary rulemaking guidelines and regulations for the future of autonomous flight and the full integration of drones into the U.S. airspace.
The Company is headquartered in Wichita, Kansas, where it also houses its U.S. manufacturing operations. In addition, AgEagle has business operations in Austin, Texas; Lausanne, Switzerland; Raleigh, North Carolina; Seattle, Washington; and Washington, D.C.
Key Growth Strategies
We intend to materially grow our business by leveraging our proprietary, best-in-class, full-stack drone solutions, industry influence and deep pool of talent with specialized expertise in robotics, automation, custom manufacturing and data science to achieve greater penetration of the global UAS industry - with near-term emphasis on capturing larger market share of the agriculture, energy/utilities, infrastructure and government/military verticals. We expect to accomplish this goal by first bringing three core values to life in our day-to-day operations and aligning them with our efforts to earn the trust and continued business of our customers and industry partners:
1. Curiosity - this pushes us to find value where others aren’t looking. It inspires us to see around corners for our customers, understanding the problems they currently face or will be facing in the future, and delivering them solutions best suited for their unique needs.
2. Passion - this fuels our obsession with excellence, our desire to try the difficult things and tackle big problems, and our commitment to meet our customers’ needs - and then surpass them.
3. Integrity - this is not optional or situational at AgEagle - it is the foundation for everything we do, even when no one is watching.
Key components of our growth strategy include the following:
● Establish three centers of excellence with respective expertise in UAS software, sensors and airframes. These centers of excellence will cross pollinate ideas, industry insights and skillsets to yield intelligent autonomous solutions that fully leverage AgEagle’s experienced team’s specialized knowledge and know-how in robotics, automation, custom manufacturing and data science.
● Deliver new and innovative solutions. AgEagle’s research and development efforts are critical building blocks of the Company, and we intend to continue investing in our own innovations, pioneering new and enhanced products and solutions that enable us to satisfy our customers - both in response to and in anticipation of their needs. AgEagle believes that by investing in research and development, the Company can be a leader in delivering innovative autonomous systems and solutions that address market needs beyond our current target markets, enabling us to create new opportunities for growth.
● Growth through acquisition. Through successful execution of our growth-through-acquisition strategies, we intend to acquire technologically advanced UAS companies and intellectual property that complement and strengthen our value proposition to the market. We believe that by investing in complementary acquisitions, we can accelerate our revenue growth and deliver a broader array of innovative autonomous flight systems and solutions that address specialized market needs within our current target markets and in emerging markets that can benefit from innovations in artificial intelligence-enabled robotics and data capture and analytics.
Competitive Strengths
AgEagle believes the following attributes and capabilities provide us with long-term competitive advantages:
● Proprietary technologies, in-house capabilities and industry experience - We believe our decade of experience in commercial UAS design and engineering; in-house manufacturing, assembly and testing capabilities; and advanced technology development skillset serve to differentiate AgEagle in the marketplace. In fact, approximately 70% of our Company’s global workforce is comprised of engineers and data scientists with deep experience and expertise in robotics, automation, custom manufacturing and data analytics. In addition, AgEagle is committed to meeting and exceeding quality and safety standards for manufacturing, assembly, design and engineering and testing of drones, drone subcomponents and related drone equipment in our Wichita-based and Swiss manufacturing operations.
● AgEagle is more than just customer- and product-centric, we are obsessed with innovation and knowing the needs of our customers before they do - We are focused on capitalizing on our specialized expertise in innovating and commercializing advanced drone, sensor and software technologies to provide our existing and future customers with autonomous robotic solutions that meet the highest possible safety and operational standards and fit their specific business needs. We have established three Centers of Excellence that our leadership has challenged to cross-pollinate ideas, industry insights and interdisciplinary skillsets to generate intelligent autonomous solutions that efficiently leverage our expertise in robotics, automation and manufacturing to solve problems for our customers, irrespective of the industry sector in which they may operate.
● We offer market-tested drones, sensors and software solutions that have earned the longstanding trust and fidelity of customers worldwide - through successful execution of our acquisition strategy in 2021, AgEagle is now delivering a unified line of industry trusted drones, sensors and software that have been vigorously tested and consistently proven across multiple industry verticals and use cases. For instance, our line of eBee fixed wing drones, pioneered by senseFly, have flown more than one million flights over the past decade serving customers spanning surveying and mapping; engineering and construction; military/defense; mining, quarries and aggregates; agriculture humanitarian aid and environmental monitoring, among just a few. Featured in over 100 research publications globally, advanced sensor innovations developed and commercialized by MicaSense, have served to forge new industry standards for high performance, high resolution, thermal and multispectral imaging for commercial drone applications in agriculture, plant research, land management and forestry. In addition, we have championed the development of end-to-end software solutions which power autonomous flight and deliver actionable, contextual data and analytics for a who’s who of Fortune 500 companies, government agencies and a wide range of businesses in agriculture, energy and utilities, construction and other industry sectors.
Impact of COVID-19 On Our Business Operations
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has evolved into a global pandemic. The coronavirus has spread to many regions of the world, including the United States. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business and operating results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
The spread of the coronavirus, which has caused a broad impact globally, including restrictions on travel and quarantine policies put into place by businesses and governments, may have a material economic effect on our business. While the potential economic impact brought on by and the duration of the pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, it has already caused, and is likely to result in further, significant disruptions of global financial markets, which may reduce our ability to access capital either at all or on favorable terms. In addition, a recession, depression or other sustained adverse market event resulting from the spread of the coronavirus could materially and adversely affect our business and the value of our Common Stock.
In addition, as a result of the pandemic, our ability to access components and parts needed in order to manufacture our proprietary drones and sensors, and to perform quality testing have been impacted. If either we or any third-parties in the supply chain for materials used in our manufacturing and assembly processes continue to be adversely impacted by restrictions resulting from the coronavirus pandemic, our supply chain may be further disrupted, limiting our ability to manufacture and assemble products.
The ultimate impact of the current pandemic, or any other health epidemic, is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects can have a material impact on our operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our supply chain was adversely impacted by the pandemic, causing material delays in the delivery of critical supply orders associated with timely fulfilling our obligations to our large ecommerce client. As a consequence, significant inventory purchases were made in 2021 in order to secure the manufacturing of our products in an effort to prevent delays in 2022. This is an on-going situation that we continue to monitor closely.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our most critical estimates include those related to revenue recognition, inventories and reserves for excess and obsolescence, accounting for stock-based awards, and income taxes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements. Please see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report, for our Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. There have been no material changes made to the critical accounting estimates during the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenue is generated pursuant to written contractual arrangements to develop, manufacture and/or modify complex drone related products, and to provide associated engineering, technical and other services according to customer specifications. These contracts are fixed price, and we account for all revenue contracts in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under fixed-price contracts, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent our actual costs vary from the estimates upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate more or less profit or could incur a loss. We account for a contract after it has been approved by all parties to the arrangement, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Topic 606 requires revenue to be recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and recognize revenue under the new standard as costs are incurred. Under previous US GAAP revenue was generally recognized when deliveries were made, performance milestones were attained, or as costs were incurred. The new standard accelerates the timing of when the revenue is recognized, however, it does not change the total amount of revenue recognized on our UAVS contracts. The new standard does not affect revenue recognition for purposes of our UAVS, sensor or software subscription sales as each of the Company’s revenue transactions represent a single performance obligation that is satisfied at a point in time or monthly subscription fees which are recognized ratably over the subscription period, as defined in the new ASU. Accordingly, the Company recognizes revenue for small UAS product contracts with customers at the point in time when the transfer of control passes to the customer, which is generally upon shipping.
Inventories and Provision for Obsolescence
Our policy for valuation of inventory, including the determination of obsolete inventory, requires us to perform a detailed assessment of inventory at each balance sheet date, which includes a review of, among other factors, an estimate of future demand for products within specific time horizons, valuation of existing inventory, as well as product lifecycle and product development plans. Inventory reserves are also provided to cover risks arising from slow-moving items. We write down our inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated net realizable value based on assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We may be required to record additional inventory write-downs if actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by our management.
Business Combinations
The Company records acquisitions pursuant to ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, (“ASC 805”). The Company recognizes, with certain exceptions, 100% of the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests when the acquisition constitutes a change in control of the acquired entity. Shares issued in consideration for a business combination, contingent consideration arrangements and pre-acquisition loss and gain contingencies are all measured and recorded at their acquisition-date fair value. Subsequent changes to fair value of contingent consideration arrangements are generally reflected in earnings. Any in-process research and development assets acquired are capitalized as of the acquisition date. Acquisition-related transaction costs are expensed as incurred. The operating results of entities acquired are included in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss from the respective dates of acquisition.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Intangible assets from acquired businesses are recognized at fair value on the acquisition date and consist of customer programs, trademarks, customer relationships, technology, and other intangible assets. Customer programs include values assigned to major programs of acquired businesses and represent the aggregate value associated with the customer relationships, contracts, technology, and trademarks underlying the associated program and are amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of expected cash flows used to measure fair value, which ranges from three to five years.
In accordance with ASC Topic 350-40, Software - Internal-Use Software (“ASC 350-40”), the Company capitalizes certain direct costs of developing internal-use software that are incurred in the application development stage, when developing or obtaining software for internal use. Once the internal use software is ready for its intended use, it is amortized on a straight-line basis over its useful life.
Finite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment periodically, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their related carrying amounts may not be recoverable in accordance with ASC Topic 360-10-15, Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, (“ASC 360-10-15”). In evaluating intangible assets for recoverability, the Company uses its best estimate of future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and eventual disposition in accordance with ASC 360-10-15. To the extent that estimated future undiscounted net cash flows are less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the difference between the carrying value of such asset and its fair value.
Asset recoverability is an area involving management judgment, requiring assessment as to whether the carrying values of assets are supported by their undiscounted future cash flows. In estimating future cash flows, certain assumptions are required to be made in respect of highly uncertain matters such as revenue growth rates, operating expenses and terminal growth rates.
Goodwill represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested annually for impairment, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the goodwill may not be recoverable.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our goodwill balance was $64.9 million and $3.1 million, respectively. We perform an annual impairment test of our goodwill at least annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may be impaired. Such events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration in overall economic conditions, changes in the business climate of our industry, a decline in our market capitalization, operating performance indicators, competition, reorganizations of our business. Our goodwill has been allocated to and is tested for impairment at a level referred to as the business segment. The level at which we test goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether the operations below the business segment constitute a self-sustaining business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results.
We use both qualitative and quantitative approaches when testing goodwill for impairment. To perform a qualitative assessment, we review events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine if the fair value is less than the carrying value of goodwill. If the qualitative assessment indicates that a goodwill impairment may exist, or we decide not to perform a qualitative assessment, we proceed to perform a quantitative assessment. To perform the quantitative impairment test, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We generally estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis and market-based valuation methodologies such as comparable public company trading values and values observed in recent business acquisitions. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, discount rates and relevant comparable public company earnings multiples and relevant transaction multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis are based on our best estimate of future sales, earnings and cash flows after considering factors such as general market conditions, existing firm orders, expected future orders, changes in working capital, long term business plans and recent operating performance.
Finite-lived intangibles are amortized to expense over the applicable useful lives, ranging from four to five years, based on the nature of the asset and the underlying pattern of economic benefit as reflected by future net cash inflows. We perform an impairment test of finite-lived intangibles whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying value may be impaired. If events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of a finite-lived intangible may be impaired, the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group would be compared to the asset group’s carrying value. If the asset group’s carrying amount exceed the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, we would determine the fair value of the asset group and record an impairment loss in net earnings.
During the fourth quarter 2021, we performed our annual goodwill and finite-lived intangible assets impairment tests for our three reporting units. The results of these tests indicated that the Company’s Drones and Custom Manufacturing and Sensors reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts, while the fair value of the SaaS reporting unit was less than its carrying amount reflected in the consolidated balance sheets. Accordingly, the Company recorded a $12,357,921 goodwill impairment charge on its SaaS reporting unit during the fourth quarter of 2021. The results of these tests indicated that for our reporting units no impairment charges were necessary related to our finite-intangibles assets of $13,565,494.
As of December 31, 2020, we performed our annual goodwill and finite-lived intangible assets impairment tests for our Drones and Custom Manufacturing and SaaS reporting units. The results of these tests indicated that for these reporting units no impairment charges existed for the recorded goodwill of $3,108,000 or the related finite-intangibles assets of $440,000.
Share-Based Compensation Awards
The value we assign to the options that we issue is based on the fair market value as calculated by the Black-Scholes pricing model. To perform a calculation of the value of our options, we determine an estimate of the volatility of our stock. We need to estimate volatility because there has not been enough trading of our stock to determine an appropriate measure of volatility. We believe our estimate of volatility is reasonable, and we review the assumptions used to determine this whenever we issue new equity instruments. If we have a material error in our estimate of the volatility of our stock, our expenses could be understated or overstated. All share-based awards are expensed on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the options.
Income Taxes
We are required to estimate our income taxes, which includes estimating our current income taxes as well as measuring the temporary differences resulting from different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. We currently have significant deferred assets, which are subject to periodic recoverability assessments. Realizing our deferred tax assets principally depends on our achieving projected future taxable income. We may change our judgments regarding future profitability due to future market conditions and other factors, which may result in recording a valuation allowance against those deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 as Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenues were $9,760,952 as compared to $1,285,383 during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $8,475,569, or 659%. The increase was primarily attributable to the new revenues derived from the acquisition of MicaSense, Measure and senseFly businesses. The largest increase can be attributed to our strong sensor sales related specifically to the Altum™, RedEdge-MX™, and RedEdge-MX™ Blue, followed by new sales associated with ebee products. In addition, revenue growth was also positively impacted by increased sales of our SaaS subscription services related to the HempOverview, Ground Control and Atlas Flight platforms which accounted for subscription and licensing sales to various enterprise customers and the states of Iowa and Florida.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales was $5,504,708 as compared to $711,650 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4,793,058, or 674%. We had a gross profit of $4,256,244, or 44% and $573,733 or 45%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, a decrease in our profit margins of 2%. The primary factors contributing to the increase in our cost of sales and decrease in gross profit margin were (i) due to the increase in our cost of components and parts, and (ii) discontinuation of certain of our older sensors and airframes that the Company will no longer be able to sell due to lack of sourcing of certain critical components needed to produce these products.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses were $34,549,016, as compared to $5,505,040 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $29,043,976, or 528%. Operating expenses comprise general and administrative, professional fees, sales and marketing, and research and development, and goodwill impairment. For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses were $12,260,610 as compared to $2,732,274 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9,528,336, or 350%. The increase was primarily due to costs for additional payroll and bonus payments associated with new hires and existing employees for the MicaSense, Measure and senseFly acquisitions (“Business Acquisitions”), and stock compensation expenses related to employees and directors, ERP and related implementation costs, rent cost associated with our new leases for Wichita, Seattle, Washington D.C., Austin, Switzerland and Raleigh offices, and additional amortization expense associated with the intangibles acquired as part of the recent Business Acquisitions and platform development costs. For the year ended December 31, 2021, professional fees were $2,696,800 as compared to $2,703,371, a decrease of $6,571 for the year ended December 31, 2020, or less than 1%. This was mainly due to similar consulting, legal and stock-compensation costs as in the prior year. Also included in our operating expenses were sales and marketing costs that increased to $3,150,886 from $40,003 in the prior year's comparable period due to addition of the MicaSense, Measure and senseFly sales and marketing teams, hiring of additional employees and related business development consultants. Lastly, we recorded research and development expenses totaled $4,082,799 as compared to $29,392 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4,053,407, or 1,379%. The increase was mainly due to the MicaSense, Measure and senseFly acquisitions costs incurred for the development of new airframe, sensor and software technologies. We recorded a $12,357,921 goodwill impairment charge related to our SaaS reporting unit in the fourth quarter of 2021. The impairment charge considered lower than forecasted sales and profitability along with declining markets conditions and changes in our technologies.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income, net was $184,092 as compared to other expense, net of $1,143 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily attributable to the loan owed under the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP Loan") for AgEagle, offset by grant income for Measure contracts.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $30,108,680 as compared to a net loss of $4,932,540 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25,176,230, or 510%. The overall increase in net loss was primarily attributable to greater operating and transactional costs as a result of the acquisitions. In addition, in order to achieve our long-term growth strategies additional resources and investments will be required as we continue to address these shifts by developing new platforms, products and services that support prevailing growth opportunities.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2021 as Compared to the Year ended December 31, 2020
As of December 31, 2021, cash on hand was $14,590,566, a decrease of $9,349,767, or 39%, as compared to $23,940,333 as of December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operations $12,463,128, an increase of $10,206,556, as compared to $2,256,571 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was mainly driven by an increase in operating loss due to greater overhead expenses along with an increase in accrued expenses related to issuance of Common stock and accrued liabilities for the MicaSense, Measure and senseFly acquisitions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $42,497,624, an increase of $41,718,601, as compared to $779,023 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in our investing activities resulted from the acquisitions of MicaSense, Measure and senseFly acquisitions, purchase of property and equipment and building improvements related to the new leased warehouse and corporate offices in Wichita, along with recording capitalized costs associated with the development of the HempOverview and Measure Ground Control platforms.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $45,610,984, an increase of $19,353,054, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash provided by our financing activities was due to sales of our Common stock and the exercise of warrants issued in connection with a securities purchase agreement dated August 4, 2020 and the ATM, in connection with the Company’s ATM Offering.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $5,846,546. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss from operations of $30,292,772, inclusive of $12,357,921 for goodwill impairment, an increase of $25,361,465, as compared to $4,931,307 for the year ended December 31, 2020. While there can be no guarantees, we believe the cash on hand, in connection with cash generated from revenue, will be sufficient to fund the next twelve months of operations. In addition, we intend to pursue other opportunities of raising capital with outside investors.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised capital of $6,613,943 as a result of the sale of 1,057,214 shares of Common Stock in connection with a securities purchase agreement (the "December Purchase Agreement") entered on December 31, 2020. Also on February 8, 2021, we received $8,305,368 in additional gross proceeds associated with the exercise of 2,516,778 of warrants issued at a price of $3.30 per share in connection with a securities purchase agreement dated August 4, 2020. During the period from May 26, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we raised $30,868,703 of net proceeds from our ATM Offering with co-agents Stifel, Nicolaus &Company, Incorporated and Raymond James & Associates.
The Company has continued to realize losses from operations. However, because of our capital raise efforts, we believe that we will have sufficient cash to meet our anticipated operating costs and capital expenditure requirements through December 2022. Our primary need for liquidity is to fund working capital requirements of our business, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service, and for general corporate purposes. Our primary source of liquidity is funds generated by financing activities and from private placements. Our ability to fund our operations, to make planned capital expenditures, to make planned acquisitions, to make scheduled debt payments, and to repay or refinance indebtedness depends on our future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control.
If the Company is unable to generate significant sales growth in the near term and raise additional capital, there is a risk that the Company could default on additional obligations; and could be required to discontinue or significantly reduce the scope of its operations if no other means of financing operations are available. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities or any other adjustment that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. Since our inception, except for standard operating leases, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities. We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
Material contractual obligations arising in the normal course of business primarily consist of business acquisition related liabilities, principal and interest payments for loans made under the Paycheck Protection Program, defined benefit plan obligations, principal and interest payments for operating leases and other purchase obligations. See Notes 5, 8, 10, 11 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements for amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021 for these contractual obligations.
Inflation
Our opinion is that inflation did not have a material effect on our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Climate Change
Our opinion is that neither climate change, nor governmental regulations related to climate change, have had, or are expected to have, any material effect on our operations.
New Accounting Pronouncements
There were certain updates recently issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to a have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.