Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company's financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report.
Overview
The Company
United Security Bancshares, a California corporation, is a bank holding company registered under the BHCA with corporate headquarters located in Fresno, California. The principal business of United Security Bancshares is to serve as the holding company for its wholly-owned subsidiary, United Security Bank. References to the “Bank” refer to United Security Bank together with its wholly-owned subsidiary, York Monterey Properties, Inc. References to the “Company” refer to United Security Bancshares together with its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis. References to the “Holding Company” refer to United Security Bancshares, the parent company, on a stand-alone basis. The Bank currently has twelve banking branches, which provide banking services in Fresno, Madera, Kern, and Santa Clara counties in the state of California. In addition to full-service branches, the Bank has several stand-alone ATM and ITM machines within its geographic footprint.
Executive Summary
During 2021, the Company executed a multi-phase strategy to deploy excess liquidity in a challenging interest rate environment with weak loan demand.
2021 Financial Summary and 2020 Comparison
▪Total assets increased 21.8% to $1.3 billion, compared to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020.
▪Total loans, net of unearned fees, increased 33.2% to $871.5 million, compared to $654.3 million at December 31, 2020.
▪Total investments increased 111.9%, or $96.5 million, to $182.6 million, compared to $86.2 million at December 31, 2020.
▪Total deposits increased 24.7% to $1.2 billion, compared to $952.7 million at December 31, 2020.
▪Net interest income before the provision for credit losses increased 10.45% to $35.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $32.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
▪Book value per share increased to $7.06, compared to $6.93 at December 31, 2020.
▪Net charge-offs totaled $1.3 million, compared to net charge-offs of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
▪Capital position remains well-capitalized with a 9.79% Tier 1 Leverage Ratio compared to 11.37% as of December 31, 2020.
▪Return on average assets ("ROAA") was 0.82%, compared to 0.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
▪Return on average equity ("ROAE") was 8.47%, compared to 7.55% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Current Trends Affecting Results of Operations and Financial Position
The Company’s overall operations are impacted by a number of factors, including not only interest rates and margin spreads, which impact the results of operations, but also the composition of the Company’s balance sheet. One of the primary strategic goals of the Company is to maintain a mix of assets that will generate a reasonable rate of return without undue risk, and to finance those assets with a low-cost and stable source of funds. Liquidity and capital resources must also be considered in the planning process to mitigate risk and allow for growth.
Since the Bank primarily conducts banking operations in California’s Central Valley, its operations and cash flows are subject to changes in the economic condition of the Central Valley. Our business results are dependent in large part upon the business activity, population, income levels, deposits and real estate activity in the Central Valley, and declines in economic conditions can have adverse material effects upon the Bank. In addition, the Central Valley remains largely dependent on agriculture. A downturn in agriculture and agricultural related business could indirectly and adversely affect the Company as many borrowers and customers are involved in, or are impacted to some extent, by the agricultural industry. While a great number of our borrowers are not directly involved in agriculture, they would likely be impacted by difficulties in the agricultural industry since many jobs in our market areas are ancillary to the regular production, processing, marketing and sale of agricultural commodities. The state of California is experiencing a severe drought and water allocations have been significantly reduced for farmers in the Central Valley. Due to these water issues the impact on businesses and consumers located in the Company's market areas is not possible to quantify. In response the California state legislature passed the Sustainable Groundwater
Management Act with the purpose to ensure better local and regional management of groundwater use and sustainable groundwater management in California by 2042. The local districts began to develop, prepare, and begin implementation of the Groundwater Sustainability Plans in 2020. The effect of such plans to Central Valley agriculture, if any, is still unknown.
The Company's earnings are impacted by monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government and its agencies. The FRB has, and is likely to continue to have, an important impact on the operating results of depository institutions through its power to implement national monetary policy, among other things, in order to curb inflation or combat a recession. The FRB affects the levels of bank loans, investments and deposits through its control over the issuance of United States government securities, its regulation of the discount rate applicable to member banks and its influence over reserve requirements to which member banks are subject. The FOMC has indicated that due to rising inflation it expects to raise interest rates in the near term. While the expectation is that the FRB will raise short-term interest rates in 2022, it is unknown what effects the current international instability will have on inflation and the FRB's monetary policies.
The Company continually evaluates its strategic business plan as economic and market factors change in its market area. Balance sheet management, enhancing revenue sources, and maintaining market share will continue to be of primary importance.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the local economy in the Central Valley. Federal, State and local shelter-in-place recommendations were enacted in our markets in March 2020 causing many businesses to close and workers to be furloughed or lose jobs. Essential purpose entities such as medical professionals, food and agricultural businesses, and transportation and logistical businesses were exempted from the closures; however, unemployment rates have increased in our local market area. As of December 2021, the unemployment rate in Fresno County was 7.0%, a decrease from 10.4% as of December 31, 2020. Congress, the President, and the Federal Reserve have taken several actions designed to cushion the economic fallout. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law at the end of March 2020 as a $2 trillion legislative package, and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was signed into law at the end of December 2020 as a $900 billion legislative package. The goal of the CARES Act and Consolidated Appropriations Act, were to prevent a severe economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors. In addition to the general impact of COVID-19, certain provisions of the CARES Act as well as other recent legislative and regulatory relief efforts may have a material impact on our operations. While it is not possible to know the full universe or extent of these impacts as of the date this filing, we are disclosing potentially material items of which we are aware.
Financial position and results of operations
Pertaining to the Company's December 31, 2021 financial condition and results of operations, COVID-19 has had an impact on the allowance for credit losses. While the Company has not yet experienced any charge-offs related to COVID-19, its allowance for credit loss calculation and resulting provision for credit losses are significantly impacted by changes in economic conditions resulting from a significant increase in unemployment. Although economic scenarios improved since the pandemic was declared in March 2020, the credit risk in the loan portfolio remains heightened resulting in the need for an additional reserve for credit loss. Should economic conditions worsen, the Company could experience further increases in its required allowance for credit loss and record additional provision expense.
Capital and liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, the Company and Bank's capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements. The Company's management team believes that while the Company and Bank have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19, its reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further credit losses. The Company relies on cash on hand as well as dividends from the Bank to service its debt. If the Bank is unable to pay dividends for an extended period of time, the Company may not be able to service its debt.
The Company maintains access to multiple sources of liquidity. If extended economic weakness caused large numbers of its deposit customers to withdraw their funds, it might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding. Wholesale funding markets are available to the Company.
Asset valuation
Currently, the Company does not expect COVID-19 to affect its ability to account timely for the assets on the balance sheet; however, this could change in future periods. While certain valuation assumptions and judgments will change to account for pandemic-related circumstances such as widening credit spreads, the Company does not anticipate significant changes in methodology used to determine the fair value of assets measured in accordance with GAAP.
Processes, controls and business continuity plan
The Company maintains a Business Continuity Plan to prepare, and respond to unforeseen circumstances, such as, natural disasters and pandemics. Upon the COVID-19 pandemic declaration, the Company invoked its Business Continuity Plan. Shortly after invoking the plan, the Company implemented protocols for team member safety, provided timely communication to team members and customers, established remote work capabilities to isolate certain personnel essential to critical business continuity operations, and initiated strategies for monitoring and responding to local COVID-19 impacts. Due to the nature of their functions, many team members continue to operate from physical Company locations, while effectively employing social distancing standards. The Company's Management Team continues to meet regularly to anticipate and respond to any future COVID-19 interruptions or developments. As of December 31, 2021, the Company does not anticipate significant challenges to its ability to maintain its systems and controls in light of the measures it has taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Company does not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of its business continuity plans.
Lending operations and accommodations to borrowers
In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation, the Company executed a payment deferral program for our commercial lending clients that are adversely affected by the pandemic. During 2020, the Company had executed 23 payment deferrals or modifications on outstanding loan balances of $69,814,000 in connection with the COVID-19 relief provided by the CARES Act and interagency guidance issued in March 2020. The Company has not recognized any losses on the loan modifications and as of December 31, 2021, there were no modifications outstanding.
The Company participated in the first and second draw of the Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), administered by the SBA. The first PPP draw ended on August 8, 2020, the second draw and PPP program ended May 31, 2021. PPP loans earn interest at 1% and have either a two or five year term. In addition to interest, the Company receives a processing fee ranging from 3%-5% of the loan balance for each PPP loan. The Company believes that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program. As of December 31, 2021, there were 15 SBA PPP loans outstanding, representing $1,731,000 in funding and $57,000 in unearned fees.
The Company is working with customers directly affected by COVID-19. The Company has provided and continues to offer short-term assistance in accordance with regulatory guidelines. As a result of the current economic environment, the Company is engaging in more frequent communication with borrowers to better understand their situation and the challenges faced, allowing it to respond proactively as needs and issues arise. The Company is engaging in more frequent communication with the servicer and individual schools participating in the student loan portfolio to better understand the effects of COVID-19 on school closures and students in school or in clinical programs. It is possible that the Company’s asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 are prolonged.
The Company continually evaluates its strategic business plan as economic and market factors change in its market area. The Company may see a short-term slowdown in new loan originations. There remain shortages in raw materials, manufactured products and labor across many industries resulting in rising prices, which may disrupt business operations and negatively impact financial performance and operating results for the Company's borrowers. Balance sheet management, enhancing revenue sources, and maintaining market share will continue to be of primary importance heading into 2022 and beyond.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected historical consolidated financial information for each of the years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2021. The selected financial data should be read in conjunction with our "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in “