ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand US Nuclear Corp, our operations and our present business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to-and should be read in conjunction with-our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
We were incorporated in Delaware on February 14, 2012, and on March 2, 2012, we filed a registration statement on Form 10 to register with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission as a public company. We were originally organized as a vehicle to investigate and, if such investigation warrants, acquire a target company or business seeking the perceived advantages of being a publicly held corporation.
On April 18, 2012, Richard Chiang, then our sole director and shareholder, entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement whereby Mr. Goldstein of US Nuclear Corp purchased 10,000,000 shares of our common stock from Mr. Chiang, which constituted 100% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock. Mr. Chiang then resigned from all positions. Subsequently, on May 18, 2012, the Registrant appointed Mr. Chiang to serve as a member of the Board of Directors. He resigned from this position on March 31, 2013.
Since our acquisition of Overhoff Technology in 2006, we have had discussions with other companies in our industry for an acquisition. While we targeted Overhoff due to its unique position in the tritium market, we had not commenced an acquisition since our Overhoff Technology acquisition; we believe in part the reason was due to lack of additional capital, our status as a privately-held entity at the time, and focus on developing our own products. We will seek out companies whom our management believes will provide value to our customers and will complement our business. We will focus on diversifying our product line into a larger range so that our customers and vendors may have a more expansive experience in type, choice, options, price and selection. We also believe that with a more diverse product line we will become more competitive as our industry is intensely competitive.
Generally, our product concentration places a heavy reliance on our Overhoff Technology division. In 2022 we derived 30.7% of our total revenues from sales made by Overhoff to one customer. We expect to encounter a continuation of this trend unless we are successful in diversifying our client base, executing our acquisition strategy and experience increases in business from our Technical Associates division.
Our international revenues were 28.5% of our total revenue in 2021. We expect this to increase over time as we continue to field new orders inquires and engage new customers overseas and recover post-pandemic. We believe that Korea and China will likely be a larger contributor to revenue within the next few years. While we maintain steady growth domestically, the international side of our business may be a larger component as nuclear technology and rapid development for clean energy grows abroad. Additionally, the Company relies on continued growth and orders from CANDU reactors (Canada Deuterium Uranium), and rapid development of the next generation of nuclear reactors called Molten Salt Reactors, (MSR) and Liquid-Fluoride Thorium Reactors (LFTR), all of which purchase tritium detection and monitor products. There can be no assurances as to our growth projections and our risk profile as we depend upon increased foreign customers for business.
Robert I. Goldstein, our President, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of Directors also maintains a position as President of Gold Team Inc., a Delaware company that invests in industrial real estate properties for investment purposes. He holds an 8% interest in Gold Team Inc. and spends approximately 5 hours per week with affairs related to Gold Team Inc. The Company leases its current facilities from Gold Team Inc. which owns both the Canoga Park, CA and Milford, Ohio properties at an expense of $7,000 for each facility per month.
On May 31, 2016, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Electronic Control Concepts (“ECC”) whereby the Company purchased certain tangible and intangible assets of ECC. ECC a small manufacturer of test and maintenance meters for x-ray machines both medical and industrial. We acquired ECC to give a boost to our current x-ray related product and hospital/medical product sales.
Cali From Above (“CFA”) is a US Nuclear Corp subsidiary which was formed and began operations on January 28, 2021. CFA is a commercially recognized aerial mapping, aerial surveying, and airborne inspections company. CFA was formed to expand the Company’s presence in the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle market. The Company believes this market is rapidly growing and changing and feel it is an important growth opportunity. Incorporating as its own subsidiary provides the opportunity to specialize specifically in UAVs and UAV services.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $2,137,607 compared to $1,752,976 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $384,631 or 21.9% is a result of an overall increase in revenue across all subsidiaries post-Coronavirus pandemic. The revenue breakdown for the year ended December 31, 2021, is as follows:
North America 71%
Asia (including Japan) 22%
Other 6%
Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 64.4% as compared to 27.1%for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross margin is due to an increase in sales while cost of goods sold decreased.
General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $186,450 or 7.2% to $2,745,003 up from $2,558,553 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is attributed to the Company’s overall increase in revenue and an effort to obtain new customers and working to generate orders from our existing customers by our sales department.
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $514,495, a decrease of $939,562 from $1,454,057 for 2020. Other expense consists of write down of investments, interest expense, loss on issuance of convertible debenture, amortization of debt discount, equity loss in investment.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1,876,684 compared to net loss of $3,538,103 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations have historically been financed by our majority stockholder. As funds were needed for working capital purposes, our majority stockholder would loan us the needed funds. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s majority shareholder paid expenses on behalf of the Company of $46,410, loaned an additional $140,000 to the Company and was repaid $54,000. We anticipate the growth of our business through the sales of shares of our common stock and loans from our majority stockholder if necessary.
At December 31, 2021, total assets increased by $396,278 or 16.1% from $2,454,908 at December 31, 2020 due to an increase in cash and inventory.
At December 31, 2021, total liabilities increased by 53.4% to $2,409,917 from $1,607,748 at December 31, 2020 due to an increase in accrued liabilities, accounts payable, accrued compensation paid to officers, note payable to shareholder and an increase in our line of credit balances.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“US GAAP”). US GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently and conservatively applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes.” ASC 740 requires a company to use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes, whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences, and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all of, the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Under ASC 740, a tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. The adoption had no effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
We believe the following is among the most critical accounting policies that impact our consolidated financial statements. We suggest that our significant accounting policies, as described in our financial statements in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, be read in conjunction with this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company” as defined by Item 10 of Regulation S-K, the Company is not required to provide this information.