Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related notes to consolidated financial statements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis include forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below as well as in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Business,” “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” We make no guarantees regarding outcomes and assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements herein, except as may be required by law.
For discussion of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, see Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on April 15, 2021.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s operations are classified in one reportable business segment. Although we have expanded the products that we manufacture and sell to include components used in the appliance, medical and consumer/off-road markets, products for these industries are manufactured at facilities that also manufacture or are capable of manufacturing products for the automotive industries. Our manufacturing locations have capabilities to produce diverse products utilizing multiple processes to serve
various markets. The manufacturing operations for our transportation, appliance, medical and consumer/off-road products share management and labor forces and use common personnel and strategies for new product development, marketing and the sourcing of raw materials.
We are a “smaller reporting company,” which allows us to take advantage of the SEC’s scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies. As a smaller reporting company, we have not disclosed selected financial data, unaudited quarterly financial information, contractual obligations, or qualitative and quantitative information about market risk. We also have included only two years of consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is permitted under the scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies. As a smaller reporting company, we also are exempt from certain other disclosure requirements, which we have taken advantage of, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Overview
Unique Fabricating, Inc. (“Unique,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) engineers and manufactures components for customers in the transportation, appliance, medical, and consumer markets. The Company’s solutions are comprised of multi-material foam, rubber, and plastic components and utilized in NVH management, acoustical management, water and air sealing, decorative and other functional applications. The Company leverages proprietary manufacturing processes, including die cutting, thermoforming, compression molding, fusion molding, and reaction injection molding to manufacture a wide range of products including air management products, HVAC, seals, fender stuffers, air ducts, acoustical insulation, door water shields, gas tank pads, light gaskets, topper pads, mirror gaskets, glove box liners, personal protection equipment, and packaging. The Company is headquartered in Auburn Hills, Michigan.
The Company serves the North American transportation market, which includes automotive and heavy-duty trucks, as well as the appliance, medical, and consumer markets. Sales are conducted directly to major automotive and heavy-duty truck, appliance, water heater and HVAC manufacturers, referred throughout this report as OEMs, or indirectly through the Tier 1 suppliers of these OEMs. The Company has its principal executive offices in Auburn Hills, Michigan and has sales, engineering and production facilities in Auburn Hills, Michigan; Concord, Michigan; LaFayette, Georgia; Louisville, Kentucky; Monterrey, Mexico; Querétaro, Mexico; and London, Ontario.
The Company derives most of its net sales from the sales of foam, rubber plastic, and tape adhesive related automotive products. These products are produced by a variety of manufacturing processes including die cutting, compression molding, thermoforming, reaction injection molding and fusion molding. We believe we have a broader array of processes and materials utilized than any of our direct competitors, based on our product offerings. By sealing out air, noise and water intrusion, and by providing sound absorption and blocking, our products improve the interior comfort of a vehicle, increasing perceived vehicle quality and the overall experience of its passengers. Our products perform similar functions for appliances, medical, and consumer/off-road systems, improving thermal characteristics, reducing noise, and prolonging equipment life. We primarily operate within the highly competitive and cyclical automotive parts industry.
Recent Developments
Coronavirus
Our supply chain has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 outbreak. Throughout 2020 and 2021, we worked with our supply chain to minimize the impact to our customers by improving our suppliers’ visibility of our future demand requirements, utilizing substitutions when possible, and incurring additional freight costs to expedite the delivery of materials from suppliers and product to our customers. These additional costs cannot always be passed to our customers and when we are able to pass them to our customers the cost is sometimes delayed due to competitive pressures. Supply chain disruptions have continued through 2022 and they have impacted the entire North American transportation market as well as other markets.
The Company continues to follow guidelines with respect to operating during the COVID-19 pandemic provided by the various governmental entities in the jurisdictions where we operate and is taking additional measures to protect our employees.
Due to the inherent uncertainty of the unprecedented situation, including the duration of the actions taken by our various customers and governments, we are unable to determine the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future operations.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company performed an interim impairment analysis as of September 30, 2021, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches. The results of the quantitative analysis performed indicated the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded the fair value. As such, a $5.1 million goodwill impairment charge was recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 14.8%, forecasted revenue for 2022 through 2025, EBITDA margin of 10.8% by 2025, and a terminal growth rate for cash flows of 3%. The guideline public company method was used to determine the fair value of the reporting unit under the market approach. Key assumptions used in this
method included revenue and EBITDA multiples for each guideline company. Future events and changing market conditions may lead the Company to reevaluate the assumptions that have been used to test for goodwill impairment, including key assumptions used in the assumed EBITDA margins, cash flows and discount rates, as well as other assumptions with respect to other matters all of which are out of the Company’s control, such as discount rates and market multiples of comparable companies.
Private Placement of Securities
On September 21, 2021, the Company issued 1,954,000 shares of common stock at a price of $2.25 per share for gross proceeds of $4.4 million in an offering exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Company registered for resale by the purchasers of the shares, on Form S-3, the shares issued in the private placement. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $4.0 million after payment of selling commissions equal to 8% of the gross proceeds to Taglich Brothers, Inc., the placement agent for the Offering. Further, the Company paid the placement agent’s Offering expenses of $44,000. Taglich Brothers, Inc. also received warrants to purchase 156,320 shares of common stock, exercisable for five years, at a price per share of $3.12 (the “Warrants”).
The Company used the net proceeds for general corporate purposes and reduced borrowings under its revolving credit facility, which subject to availability and compliance with the terms of the revolving line of credit, as amended, including by the Forbearance Agreement, may be re-borrowed by the Company.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Net Sales
Net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $125.7 million compared to $120.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 4.5%. North American automotive light vehicle production volume decreased approximately 1% from 2020 to 2021. Net sales increased for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year, despite the decline in North American light vehicle production. This increase in net sales was primarily the result of our cost recovery efforts to pass input cost increases to our customers by increasing selling prices. Our net sales continue to be less than in comparable periods in recent years prior to the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of decreased demand for our products as automotive OEMs cancelled or reduced planned production primarily due to semiconductor and other supply shortages.
Cost of Sales
The major components of cost of sales are raw materials purchased from third parties, direct labor and benefits, and manufacturing overhead, including facility costs, utilities, supplies, repairs and maintenance, insurance, freight costs of products shipped to customers, and depreciation.
Cost of Sales as a Percent of Net Sales
Material costs were negatively impacted in 2021 due to price increases from our vendors and increased freight costs driven by supply chain constraints. Direct labor costs as a percentage of net sales were negatively impacted by operating inefficiencies resulting from customer release cancellations and reductions due to the previously described sudden supply shortages affecting customers. The increase in manufacturing overhead as a percentage of net sales was due to higher overhead costs including utilities, packaging, plant supplies, and freight as well as increases in employee related costs, including salaries, employer taxes, and health and welfare benefit costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.9 million to $22.6 million, compared to $25.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily related to the completion of amortization of certain customer relationships and of non-patented technology, lower human capital costs, including salaries, employer taxes, and benefits, partially offset by increased legal and professional fees in 2021 in support of our forbearance agreement and continued negotiations with our lenders in addition to the costs associated with remediating the material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting previously identified in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Loss
Operating loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $11.0 million compared to an operating loss of $6.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increased operating loss in the current year is primarily driven by goodwill impairment charge of $5.1 million, lower gross profit as a result of higher input costs and operating inefficiencies due to changes in planned customer production schedules, partially offset by lower selling, general, and administrative expenses and restructuring expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $3.1 million compared to other expense of $3.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The change in other income (expense) was primarily driven by the gain on the full forgiveness of the PPP loan and accrued interest of $6.1 million and reduced mark to market adjustments on our interest rate swap compared to last year. These benefits were partially offset by higher interest expense due to higher borrowings and interest rates on our Revolver during 2021 compared to 2020.
Loss before Income Taxes
As a result of the foregoing factors, loss before income taxes for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $7.8 million, compared to a loss of $9.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Provision
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, income tax benefit was $0.9 million, and the effective income tax rate was 11%. The effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate of 21% due to losses recorded in the U.S. without a corresponding
tax benefit due to a valuation allowance, which was partially offset by tax credits recognized in the current year from the realization of prior year net operating loss carry backs. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the income tax benefit was $3.8 million, and the effective income tax rate was 40%. The effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of net operating loss carry backs from 2020 and 2019.
Net Loss
Net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $7.0 million compared to net loss of $5.7 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net loss is primarily the result of the goodwill impairment charge of $5.1 million and increased input costs and inefficiencies due to changes in planned customer production schedules. These were partially offset by the forgiveness of the PPP loan and related accrued interest, lower selling, general, and administrative expenses, and restructuring charges in 2020 that did not recur.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flow from operations and borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement from our senior lenders. Our primary uses of cash are payment of vendors, payroll, operating costs, capital expenditures, and debt service.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of $0.7 million and $0.8 million, respectively. Our excess cash balance is swept daily and applied to reduce borrowings under our revolving line of credit, which remains available for re-borrowing, as needed, subject to compliance with the terms of the facility. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $2.2 million and $5.7 million, respectively, available for borrowing under our credit facility, subject, in each case, to borrowing base restrictions, compliance with the terms of the facility and outstanding letters of credit. Assuming that we are able to agree on a waiver of defaults by our lenders and an amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, which do not restrict borrowings, we believe that our sources of liquidity, including cash flow from operations, existing cash and our revolving credit facility, are sufficient to meet our projected cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
In 2021, the Company made capital expenditures of $3.4 million, which was for new production equipment as we expand and automate our production capabilities, upgrade existing equipment and facilities, and improve our information technology software and hardware throughout our locations. The Forbearance Agreement, during the forbearance period, prohibits any payment to acquire illiquid assets other than ordinary course capital expenditures. During 2022, the Company currently plans to make capital expenditures of approximately $2.3 million to upgrade existing equipment and facilities.
We may elect to pursue additional growth opportunities that could require additional debt or equity financing. If we are unable to secure additional financing at favorable terms in order to pursue such additional growth opportunities, our ability to pursue such opportunities could be materially adversely affected.
Dividends
Our payment of dividends on our common stock in the future will be determined by our board of directors in its sole discretion and will depend on business conditions, our financial condition, earnings, liquidity, and capital requirements. Our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement contains financial covenants which may have the effect of precluding or limiting the amounts that we can pay as dividends.
Cash Flow Data
The following table presents cash flow data for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities consists of net income adjusted for non-cash and cash items, including depreciation and amortization; amortization of debt issuance costs; gain or loss on sale of assets; gain or loss on extinguishment of debt; gain or loss on derivative instruments; asset impairments; bad debt adjustments; stock option expense; changes in deferred income taxes; accrued and other liabilities; prepaid expenses and other assets; and the effect of working capital changes.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $3.7 million, compared to cash used in operating activities of $1.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used by operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased primarily due to material and supply chain cost increases and other operating inefficiencies that more than offset cash from net working capital.
The net cash used in operating activities for both the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of purchases of property, plant and equipment. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we made capital expenditures of $3.4 million. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we made capital expenditures of $2.4 million.
Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by financing activities consisted primarily of borrowings and payments under our senior credit facilities, issuance of common stock, and payment of debt issuance costs.
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had inflows from financing activities of $7.0 million, primarily due to net borrowings on our revolving line of credit of $7.9 million and a $4.0 million cash influx from the issuance of common stock in a private placement in the third quarter of 2021. This inflow was partially offset by $4.2 million in payments on our term loans and capital expenditure loan, as further discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2021, $19.8 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility, gross of debt issuance costs. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility are subject to a borrowing base which is reduced to the extent of letters of credit issued under the senior credit facility. The maximum amount available after giving effect to the borrowing base restrictions, was $2.2 million at December 31, 2021, which includes a reduction for a $0.1 million letter of credit issued for the benefit of the landlord of one of the Company’s leased facilities. Further reducing the net availability at December 31, 2021 was an erroneous duplicate withdrawal by the lenders for our Canadian Term Loan for principal and interest payments of $411 thousand. A prepaid expense for this amount was recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. Amounts repaid under the revolving credit facility are to be re-borrowed, subject to borrowing base restrictions and compliance with the terms of the facility.
As of December 31, 2020, $11.7 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility, gross of debt issuance costs. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility are subject to a borrowing base, which is reduced to the extent of letters of credit issued under the credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, the maximum additional available borrowings under the revolving credit facility were $5.7 million, which were further subject to borrowing base restrictions.
Our Debt
The Company’s financial results for the six months ended December 31, 2020 and the nine months ended March 31, 2021 resulted in violations of one or more of the following financial covenants: (1) Maximum Total Leverage Ratio; (2) Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio; and (3) Minimum Consolidated EBITDA; as defined in the Company’s Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. The Company entered into a Forbearance Agreement, providing for a period commencing on April 9, 2021 and through and including June 15, 2021, during which the Company was able to borrow on its Revolver, subject to the terms and conditions to making a revolving credit advance, including availability, and the Lenders agreed, subject to the terms of the Forbearance Agreement, to forbear from enforcing their rights or seeking to collect payment of the Company’s debt or disposing of the collateral securing the debt.
On June 14, 2021, the Company entered into the First Amendment to the Forbearance Agreement, which among other things, extended the forbearance period from June 15, 2021 to February 28, 2022, and waived the testing of the Maximum Total Leverage Ratio and Minimum Debt Service Coverage ratios for the duration of the Forbearance Period. The First Amendment also substituted Minimum Liquidity and Minimum Consolidated EBITDA requirements, which were tested monthly beginning with the month ending July 31, 2021.
On September 21, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment to the Forbearance Agreement, which among other things, made changes to the calculations of financial covenants, contained revised requirements for Minimum Liquidity and Minimum Consolidated EBITDA, as defined, for the monthly periods through and including February 28, 2022, and revised the Revolving Credit Aggregate Commitment from $30 million to $27 million.
On December 9, 2021, the Company entered into the Third Amendment to the Forbearance Agreement. The Lenders in the Third Amendment to the Forbearance Agreement, among other things, agreed to forbear with respect to a Minimum Consolidated EBITDA covenant violation as of September 30, 2021, and to suspend compliance with the Minimum Consolidated EBITDA covenant during the remainder of the forbearance period. The Third Amendment included a new
covenant which has been tested weekly on a rolling basis, beginning December 15, 2021, and requires that the Company’s actual cumulative total cash disbursements for the period being tested to not exceed total cash disbursements projected by the Company for the same period by more than 15% at any time during the forbearance period. The Third Amendment also reduced the maximum amount that may be borrowed under the revolving line of credit to $25 million from $27 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in violation of the required Minimum Liquidity covenant, as provided in the Second Amendment to the Forbearance Agreement, dated September 21, 2021. As a result, on February 4, 2022, the Company entered into the Fourth Amendment to Forbearance Agreement. The Lenders in the Fourth Amendment agreed to waive the Minimum Liquidity covenant violation. The Company did have the required Minimum Liquidity by the conclusion of the first week of 2022.
On February 25, 2022, the Company entered into the Fifth Amendment to Forbearance Agreement, which extended the Forbearance Period from February 28, 2022, to March 11, 2022. The Company used the short-term extension of its Forbearance Agreement, provided by the Fifth Amendment, to conduct negotiations of a longer extension with the Lenders.
On March 11, 2022, the Company entered into the Sixth Amendment to Forbearance Agreement, which extends the Forbearance Period from March 11, 2022, to May 30, 2022.
During the extended Forbearance Period, the Company expects it will continue to be able to borrow under the revolving line of credit, subject to availability and satisfaction of certain other conditions. The Company has used and intends to use the forbearance period to continue negotiations with the Lenders to enter into an amendment and waiver to cure the defaults. During the forbearance period, the Company may not make any payment, transfer, or distribution out of the ordinary course of business or payments, including salary or compensation or distributions to or for the benefit of any member, owner, or director, other than normal and customary employment salaries which do not exceed sums paid for similar positions in the Company’s marketplace.
Reconciliation of Net Income to Consolidated EBITDA
The Third Amendment to Forbearance Agreement suspended the Minimum Consolidated EBITDA Covenant for the remainder of the Forbearance Period. We are continuing to disclose the below reconciliation of net income, as reported, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined in our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, and subject to the Forbearance Agreement to keep the reader informed on how our performance measures against previously required covenants.
The following is a reconciliation of net income, as reported, which is a U.S. GAAP measure of our operating results, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined in our Credit Agreement, as amended and forbore, a non-GAAP measure:
______________________________________
(a)Represents any other non-recurring, non-cash gains during such period, including without limitation, (i) gains from the sale or exchange of assets other than in the ordinary course of business, and (ii) gains from early extinguishment of Indebtedness or Hedging Agreements
(b)Represents costs incurred with respect to employee severance payments made to terminated employees of US Borrower. The Forbearance Agreement limits such costs for purposes of calculating Consolidated EBITDA to an aggregate amount not to exceed Four Hundred Fifty Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($450,000) during US Borrower’s 2021 fiscal year and the two-month period ending February 28, 2022
(c)Represents costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Forbearance Agreement, the First Amendment to Forbearance Agreement, and Second Amendment to Forbearance Agreement, and risk mitigation costs in an aggregate amount which for purposes of the calculation of EBITDA may not exceed $1,000,000, including the Lenders’ and Agent’s legal fees and the Financial Advisor’s fees
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, result in changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to an investment in our securities.
Indemnification Agreements
In the normal course of business, we provide customers with indemnification provisions of varying scope against claims of intellectual property infringement by third parties arising from the use of our products. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations, consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity or consolidated cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect amounts reported in those statements. We have made our best estimates of certain amounts contained in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. These form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. However, actual results could differ materially from these estimates that are based upon the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions, and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized by the Company once all performance obligations under the terms of a contract with the Company's customers are satisfied. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of its products. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring its products. The Company’s payment terms vary by the type and location of its customers and the products offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant.
In general, for sales arrangements, the Company deems control to transfer at a single point in time and recognizes revenue when it ships products from its manufacturing facilities to its customers. Once a product has shipped, the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the asset. The Company considers control to transfer upon shipment because the Company has a present right to payment at that time, the customer has legal title to the asset, and the customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership of the asset. Provisions for discounts and rebates to customers, estimated returns and allowances, and other adjustments are provided for in the same period the related sales are recorded.
Stock Based Compensation. The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation using the fair value of the award estimated at the grant date of the award. The Company estimates the fair value of awards, consisting of stock options, using the Black Scholes option pricing model. Compensation expense is recognized in earnings using the straight-line method over the vesting period, which represents the requisite service period.
Accounts Receivable Allowance. Establishing valuation allowances for doubtful accounts requires the use of estimates and judgment regarding the risks associated with ultimate realization. We establish the allowance for doubtful accounts based upon an analysis of the aging of receivables at the end of each period with consideration given to specific customer credit issues. Changes to our assumptions could materially affect our recorded allowance. The Company has a large and diverse customer base, however, a general economic downturn or other significant economic factors could result in higher than expected defaults resulting in the need to revise the allowance.
Inventories. Inventories are valued at lower of cost or net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Inventory includes the cost of materials, labor, and overhead. Abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight in, handling costs, and spoilage are recognized as current period charges. Overhead is allocated to inventory based upon normal capacity at the production facility.
Goodwill. We review our goodwill for impairment every year as part of our annual planning process, or whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate a possible impairment. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value is greater than the carrying value of a reporting unit then a qualitative assessment may be used for the annual impairment test. Otherwise, a one-step process is used, which requires estimating the fair value of each reporting unit compared to the
carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, goodwill impairment will be the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
The determination of the fair value of the reporting unit and corresponding goodwill require us to make significant judgments and estimates and are subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty. We believe that the assumptions and estimates in our review of goodwill for impairment are reasonable. However, different assumptions could materially affect our conclusions on this matter.
The Company performed an interim quantitative assessment as of September 30, 2021, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches. The results of the quantitative analysis performed indicated that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded the fair value. As such, a $5.1 million goodwill impairment charge was recorded during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 14.8%, forecasted revenue for the 2022 through 2025, EBITDA margin of 10.8% by 2025 and a terminal growth rate for cash flows of 3%. The guideline public company method was also used to determine the fair value of the reporting unit under the market approach. Key assumptions used in this method included revenue and EBITDA multiples for each guideline company.
In 2021, the Company elected to move it’s annual assessment to October 1 from December 31. The reasons for this change are to more closely align the annual goodwill impairment assessment with the Company’s annual planning process, as well as allowing management to do a more thorough analysis if needed, as it will no longer coincide with the Company’s annual SEC reporting process. Management does not believe that moving the annual testing date from December 31 to October 1 has materially impacted the results of its assessment.
The Company performed its annual assessment of goodwill as of October 1, the assessment concluded no impairment. The qualitative assessment of goodwill compared the expected financial results used in the most recent quantitative assessment to finalized expectations resulting from the 2021 annual planning process. The Company also performed an interim qualitative assessment as of December 31, 2021, which concluded no impairment. The interim assessment considered fourth quarter results compared to expectations, the status of the automotive industry and volume forecasts, and other qualitative factors.
There are many uncertainties regarding the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic that could negatively affect the Company's results of operations, financial position, and cash flows. As a result, if there is an adverse change to the Company’s projected financial information due to business performance or market conditions, this may be indicative that the fair value of its reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets have declined below their carrying values, which may result in non-cash goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges in a future period.
Impairment and Amortization of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets. Our identifiable intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis, which approximates the pattern in which the economic benefit of the respective intangible is realized, over its estimated useful life. The remaining useful lives of intangible assets are reviewed annually to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Our long-lived assets and intangible assets subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amount may be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying value of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. Significant judgments and estimates are used by management when evaluating long-lived assets for impairment. If management used different estimates and assumptions in its impairment tests, then the Company could recognize different amounts of expense over future periods.
Income Taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. Such amounts are adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Changes in tax laws or accounting standards and methods may affect recorded deferred taxes in future periods.
When establishing a valuation allowance, we consider future sources of taxable income such as “future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carry-forwards” and “tax planning strategies.” A tax planning strategy is defined as “an action that: is prudent and feasible; an enterprise ordinarily might not take but would take to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carry-forward from expiring unused; and would result in realization of deferred tax assets.” In the event we determine it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future, the valuation adjustment to the deferred tax assets will be charged to earnings in the period in which we make such a determination. The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment and accounting for the deferred tax effect of events that have been recorded in the financial statements or in tax returns and our future projected profitability. Changes in our estimates, due to unforeseen events or otherwise, could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
We calculate our current and deferred tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed in subsequent years. Adjustments based on filed returns are recorded when
identified. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. We use a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured and tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. We report tax-related interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the tax related balances or valuation allowance balances. However, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may be materially different from the current estimate.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.