ITEM 7:
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a leading asset-light provider of customized transportation and logistics solutions throughout the United States, and in Mexico, Canada and Colombia. We provide a comprehensive suite of transportation and logistics solutions that allow our customers to reduce costs and manage their global supply chains more efficiently. We market our services through a direct sales and marketing network focused on selling our portfolio of services to large customers in specific industry sectors, through company-managed facilities and full-service freight forwarding and customs house brokerage offices, and through a contract network of agents who solicit freight business directly from shippers.
We operate, manage or provide services at 114 logistics locations in the United States, Mexico, Canada and Colombia and through our network of agents and owner-operators located throughout the United States and in Ontario, Canada. Thirty-seven of our value-added service operations are located inside customer plants or distribution operations; the other facilities are generally located close to our customers’ plants to optimize the efficiency of their component supply chains and production processes. Our facilities and services are often directly integrated into the production processes of our customers and represent a critical piece of their supply chains. To support our asset-light business model, we generally coordinate the duration of real estate leases associated with our value-added services with the end date of the related customer contract associated with such facility, or use month-to-month leases, in order to mitigate exposure to unrecovered lease costs.
We offer our customers a wide range of transportation services by utilizing a diverse fleet of tractors and trailing equipment provided by us, our owner-operators and third-party transportation companies. Our owner-operators provided us with 2,421 tractors and 977 trailers. We own 1,749 tractors, 3,838 trailers, 2,830 chassis and 176 containers. Our agents and owner-operators are independent contractors who earn a fixed commission calculated as a percentage of the revenue or gross profit they generate for us and who bring an entrepreneurial spirit to our business. Our transportation services are provided through a network of both union and non-union employee drivers, owner-operators, contract drivers, and third-party transportation companies.
As of December 31, 2021, we employed 8,004 people in the United States, Mexico, Canada, and Colombia, including 3,142 employees subject to collective bargaining agreements. We also engaged contract staffing vendors to supply an average of 1,448 additional personnel on a full-time-equivalent basis.
Our use of agents, owner-operators, third-party providers and contract staffing vendors allows us to maintain both a highly flexible cost structure and a scalable business operation, while reducing investment requirements. These benefits are passed on to our customers in the form of cost savings and increased operating efficiency, while enhancing our cash generation and the returns on our invested capital and assets.
We believe that our flexible business model also offers us substantial opportunities to grow through a mixture of organic growth and acquisitions. We intend to continue our organic growth by recruiting new agents and owner-operators, expanding into new industry verticals and targeting further penetration of our key customers. We believe our integrated suite of transportation and logistics services, our network of facilities in the United States, Mexico, Canada, and Colombia, our long-term customer relationships and our reputation for operational excellence will allow us to capitalize on these growth opportunities. We also expect to continue to make strategic acquisitions of companies that complement our asset light business model, as well as companies that derive a portion of their revenues from asset based operations.
We report our financial results in four distinct reportable segments, contract logistics, intermodal, trucking, and company-managed brokerage. Operations aggregated in our contract logistics segment deliver value-added and/or dedicated transportation services to support in-bound logistics to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and major retailers on a contractual basis, generally pursuant to terms of one year or longer. Our intermodal segment is associated with local and regional drayage moves predominately coordinated by company-managed terminals using a mix of owner-operators, company equipment and third-party capacity providers (broker carriers). Operations aggregated in our trucking segment are associated with individual freight shipments coordinated by our agents and company-managed terminals using a mix of owner-operators, company equipment and broker carriers. Our company-managed brokerage segment provides for the pick-up and delivery of individual freight shipments using broker carriers, coordinated by our company-managed operations.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The Company remains committed to doing its part to protect its employees, customers, vendors and the general public from the spread of the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19). We have distributed cleaning and protective supplies to our workforce, increased cleaning frequency and coverage, and provided employees direction on precautionary measures, such as sanitizing truck interiors, personal hygiene, and social distancing. We will continue to adapt our operations as required to ensure safety while continuing to provide a high level of service to our customers.
The spread of COVID-19 resulted in governmental authorities enforcing measures to try to contain the virus, which severely disrupted economic and commercial activity during the latter part of the first and most of the second quarter of 2020. To mitigate the impact on our business, we implemented numerous cost reduction measures including furloughing a large portion of our direct labor force, requiring personnel to take unpaid time-off, restricting travel, and reducing discretionary spending. During the third quarter 2020, we experienced a rebound in demand for transportation and manufacturing support services and experienced a more normalized level of business activity. Although we estimate COVID-19 had the largest impact on our business during the second quarter 2020, we are unable to predict with any certainty the future impact COVID-19 may have on our operational and financial performance. The ultimate magnitude of COVID-19, including the extent of its impact on the Company’s financial and operating results, which could be material, will be determined by the length of time the pandemic continues, its severity, government regulations imposed in response to the pandemic, and to its general effect on the economy and transportation demand.
While operating cash flows may be negatively impacted by the pandemic, the Company believes we will be able to finance our near term needs for working capital over the next twelve months, as well as any planned capital expenditures during such period, with cash balances, cash flows from operations, and loans and extensions of credit under our credit facilities and on margin against our marketable securities. Should the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic last longer than anticipated, and/or our cash flow from operations decline more than expected, we may need to obtain additional financing. The Company’s ability to fund future operating expenses and capital expenditures, as well as its ability to meet future debt service obligations or refinance indebtedness will depend on future operating performance, which will be affected by general economic, financial, and other factors beyond our control.
Factors Affecting Our Revenues
Operating Revenues. We generate substantially all of our revenues through fees charged to customers for the transportation of freight and for the customized logistics services we provide. We also derive revenue from fuel surcharges, where separately identifiable, loading and unloading activities, equipment detention, container management and storage and other related services. Operations in our intermodal, trucking and company-managed brokerage segments are associated with individual freight shipments coordinated by our agents and company-managed terminals. In contrast, our contract logistics segment delivers value-added services and/or transportation services to specific customers on a dedicated basis, generally pursuant to contract terms of one year or longer. Our segments are further distinguished by the amount of forward visibility we have into pricing and volumes, and also by the extent to which we dedicate resources and company-owned equipment. Fees charged to customers by our full service international freight forwarding and customs house brokerage are based on the specific means of forwarding or delivering freight on a shipment-by-shipment basis.
Our truckload, intermodal and brokerage revenues are primarily influenced by fluctuations in freight volumes and shipping rates. The main factors that affect these are competition, available truck capacity, and economic market conditions. Our value-added and dedicated transportation business is substantially driven by the level of demand for outsourced logistics services. Major factors that affect our revenues include changes in manufacturing supply chain requirements, production levels in specific industries, pricing trends due to levels of competition and resource costs in logistics and transportation, and economic market conditions.
We recognize revenue as control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for its services. For our transportation services businesses, which include truckload, brokerage, intermodal and dedicated services, revenue is recognized over time as the performance obligations on the in-transit services are completed. For the Company’s value-added service businesses, we have elected to use the “right to invoice” practical expedient, reflecting that a customer obtains the benefit associated with value-added services as they are provided. For additional information on revenue recognition, see Item 8, Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Factors Affecting Our Expenses
Purchased transportation and equipment rent. Purchased transportation and equipment rent represents the amounts we pay to our owner-operators or other third party equipment providers to haul freight and, to the extent required to deliver certain logistics services, the cost of equipment leased under short-term contracts from third parties. The amount of the purchased transportation we pay to our owner-operators is primarily based on a contractually agreed-upon rates for each load hauled, net of any rental income we receive by leasing our trailers to owner-operators. The expense also includes the amount of fuel surcharges, where separately identifiable, that we receive from our customers and pass through to our owner-operators. Our strategy is to maintain a highly flexible business model that employs a cost structure that is mostly variable in nature. As a result, purchased transportation and equipment rent is the largest component of our costs and increases or decreases proportionately with changes in the amount of revenue generated by our owner-operators and other third party providers and with the production volumes of our customers. We recognize purchased transportation and equipment rent as the services are provided.
Direct personnel and related benefits. Direct personnel and related benefits include the salaries, wages and fringe benefits of our employees, as well as costs related to contract labor utilized in selling and operating activities. These costs are a significant component of our cost structure and increase or decrease proportionately with the expansion, addition or closing of operating facilities. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 37% of our employees in the United States, Canada and Colombia, and 91% of our employees in Mexico were subject to collective bargaining agreements. Any changes in union agreements will affect our personnel and related benefits cost. The operations in the United States, Mexico and Canada that are subject to collective bargaining agreements have separate, individualized agreements with several different unions that represent employees in these operations. While there are some facilities with multiple unions, each collective bargaining agreement with each union covers a single facility for that union. Such agreements have expiration dates that are generally independent of other collective bargaining agreements and include economics and operating terms tailored to the specific operational requirements of a customer. Our operation in Mexico provides competitive compensation within the Mexican statutory framework for managerial and supervisory personnel.
Operating supplies and expenses. These expenses include items such as fuel, tires and parts repair items primarily related to the maintenance of company owned and leased tractors, trailers and lift equipment, as well as licenses, dock supplies, communication, utilities, operating taxes and other general operating expenses. Because we maintain a flexible business model, our operating expenses generally relate to equipment utilization, fluctuations in customer demand and the related impact on our operating capacity. Our transportation services provided by company owned equipment depend on the availability and pricing of diesel fuel. Although we often include fuel surcharges in our billing to customers to offset increases in fuel costs, other operating costs have been, and may continue to be, impacted by fluctuating fuel prices. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred and the related income as it is earned.
Commission expense. Commission expense represents the amount we pay our agents for generating shipments on our behalf. The commissions we pay to our agents are generally established through informal oral agreements and are based on a percentage of revenue or gross profit generated by each load hauled. Traditionally, commission expense increases or decreases in proportion to the revenues generated through our agents. We recognize commission expense at the time we recognize the associated revenue.
Occupancy expense. Occupancy expense includes all costs related to the lease and tenancy of terminals and operating facilities, except utilities, unless such costs are otherwise covered by our customers. Although occupancy expense is generally related to fluctuations in overall customer demand, our contracting and pricing strategies help mitigate the cost impact of changing production volumes. To minimize potential exposure to inactive or underutilized facilities that are dedicated to a single customer, we strive where possible to enter into lease agreements that are coterminous with individual customer contracts, and we seek contract pricing terms that recover fixed occupancy costs, regardless of production volume. Occupancy expense may also include certain lease termination and related occupancy costs that are accelerated for accounting purposes into the fiscal year in which such a decision was implemented.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense includes the salaries, wages and benefits of administrative personnel, related support costs, taxes (other than income and property taxes), adjustments due to foreign currency transactions, bad debt expense, and other general expenses, including gains or losses on the sale or disposal of assets. These expenses are generally not directly related to levels of operating activity and may contain other expenses related to general business operations. We recognize general and administrative expense when it is incurred.
Insurance and claims. Insurance and claims expense represents our insurance premiums and the accruals we make for claims within our self-insured retention amounts. Our insurance premiums are generally calculated based on a mixture of a percentage of line-haul revenue and the size of our fleet. Our accruals have primarily related to cargo and property damage claims. We may also make accruals for personal injuries and property damage to third parties, physical damage to our equipment, general liability and workers' compensation claims if we experience a claim in excess of our insurance coverage. To reduce our exposure to non-trucking use liability claims (claims incurred while the vehicle is being operated without a trailer attached or is being operated with an attached trailer which does not contain or carry any cargo), we require our owner-operators to maintain non-trucking use liability coverage, which the industry refers to as deadhead bobtail coverage, of $2.0 million per occurrence. Our exposure to liability associated with accidents incurred by other third party providers who haul freight on our behalf is reduced by various factors including the extent to which they maintain their own insurance coverage. Our insurance expense varies primarily based upon the frequency and severity of our accident experience, insurance rates, our coverage limits and our self-insured retention amounts.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense relates primarily to the depreciation of owned tractors, trailers, computer and operating equipment, and buildings as well as the amortization of the intangible assets recorded for our acquired customer contracts and customer and agent relationships. We estimate the salvage value and useful lives of depreciable assets based on current market conditions and experience with past dispositions.
Operating Revenues
We broadly group our services into the following categories: truckload services, brokerage services, intermodal services, dedicated services and value-added services. Our truckload, brokerage and intermodal services associated with individual freight shipments coordinated by our agents and company-managed terminals, while our dedicated and value-added services to specific customers on a contractual basis, generally pursuant to contract terms of one year or longer. The following table sets forth operating revenues resulting from each of these service categories for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, presented as a percentage of total operating revenues:
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth items derived from our Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, presented as a percentage of operating revenues:
2021 Compared to 2020
Operating revenues. Operating revenues for 2021 increased $359.9 million, or 25.9%, to $1,751.0 million from $1,391.1 million in 2020. Included in operating revenues are separately-identified fuel surcharges of $96.9 million for 2021 compared to $67.9 million in 2020. Consolidated income from operations increased $22.6 million, or 28.1%, to $103.0 million for 2021 compared to $80.4 million during the same period last year. Overall results for 2020 were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in a substantial portion of our customers being shuttered. Results for 2021 include a favorable legal settlement which resulted in a $5.7 million pre-tax gain recorded in other non-operating income, as well as $6.0 million in charges for auto liability claims expected to settle in excess of policy limits, $5.8 million in charges for on-going legal matters, and $18.9 million of losses incurred in connection with a recent contract logistics program launch.
In the contract logistics segment, which includes value-added and dedicated services, operating revenues increased $167.6 million, or 36.5%, to $627.2 million in 2021 compared to $459.7 million in the previous year. Income from operations in the contract logistics segment increased $8.8 million, or 24.6%, to $44.8 million for 2021 compared to $36.0 million in the same period last year. In 2021, Universal managed 63 value-added programs compared to 58 in the prior year period. During 2021, dedicated transportation load count increased 20.5% to 594,748 from 493,733 in 2020. Results for 2021 in the contract logistics segment include approximately $18.9 million of losses incurred in connection with a recent program launch. Results in the contract logistics segment for 2020 were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused a substantial portion of our customers to temporarily suspend operations. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin for the contract logistics segment for 2021 was 7.1% compared to 7.8% during the same period last year. The launch losses recorded in 2021 adversely impacted this segment’s operating margin by 310 basis points.
In the intermodal segment, operating revenues increased $79.4 million, or 20.2%, to $473.1 million in 2021 compared to $393.6 million in the previous year. Intermodal revenues for 2021 included $51.2 million in separately identified fuel surcharges, compared to $40.1 million in the same period last year. During 2021, Universal moved 665,088 intermodal loads compared to 719,947 in 2020, a decrease of 7.6%, while its average operating revenue per load, excluding fuel surcharges increased 13.2% to $522 from $461. In 2021, other accessorial charges such as detention, demurrage and storage increased $45.0 million to $84.9 million compared to $39.9 million one year earlier. Income from operations in the intermodal segment was unchanged at $30.4 million in both 2021 and 2020. Included in intermodal segment results were litigation related charges totaling $5.8 million in 2021. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin in the intermodal segment was 6.4% in 2021 compared to 7.7% in the prior year period. The litigation related charges recorded in 2021 adversely impacted this segment’s operating margin by 120 basis points.
In the trucking segment, which includes agent-based and company-managed trucking operations, operating revenues increased $84.9 million to $403.3 million in 2021 compared to $318.4 million in the prior year. Included in trucking segment revenues for 2021 were $24.4 million in separately identified fuel surcharges compared to $16.1 million during 2020. Income from operations in the trucking segment increased $3.2 million to $19.6 million for 2021 compared to $16.4 million in the same period last year. During 2021, load volumes increased 12.0% to 288,378 loads compared to 257,562 in 2020. Average operating revenue per load, excluding fuel surcharges, also increased 11.3% to $1,356 from $1,218 in the prior year period. 2021 trucking segment results also included a $6.0 million charge for auto liability claims expected to settle in excess of policy limits. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin in the trucking segment was 4.9% in 2021 compared to 5.2% in the same period last year. The claim charges recorded in 2021 adversely impacted the trucking segment’s operating margin by 140 basis points.
In the company-managed brokerage segment, operating revenues increased $24.7 million, or 11.3%, to $242.8 million in 2021 compared to $218.1 million in 2020. Company-managed brokerage load volumes decreased 16.3% to 121,944 in 2021 from 145,655 during the same period last year. However, average operating revenue per load, excluding fuel surcharges, increased 31.5% to $1,845 in 2021 from $1,403 in 2020. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin for the company-managed brokerage segment was 2.9% for 2021 compared to a negative 1.2% in the same period last year.
Purchased transportation and equipment rent. Purchased transportation and equipment rental costs for 2021 increased $150.6 million, or 22.3%, to $824.8 million from $674.1 million during the same period last year. Purchased transportation and equipment rent generally increases or decreases in proportion to the revenues generated through owner-operators and other third party providers and is generally correlated with changes in demand for transportation-related services, which includes truckload, brokerage, intermodal and to a lesser extent, dedicated services, which uses a higher mix of company-drivers compared to owner-operators. The absolute increase in purchased transportation and equipment rental costs was primarily the result of an increase in transportation-related service revenues. In 2021, transportation-related service revenues increased 25.4% over the same period last year. As a percentage of operating revenues, purchased transportation and equipment rent expense decreased to 47.1% compared to 48.5% during the same period last year. The decrease was due to a decrease in the mix of brokerage services revenue, where the cost of transportation is typically higher than our other transportation businesses. As a percentage of total revenues, brokerage services revenue decreased to 22.9% for 2021 compared to 24.2% in the same period last year.
Direct personnel and related benefits. Direct personnel and related benefits for 2021 increased by $119.0 million, or 35.3%, to $456.6 million compared to $337.6 million during the same period last year. Trends in these expenses are generally correlated with changes in operating facilities and headcount requirements and, therefore, increase and decrease with the level of demand for our value-added services and staffing needs of our operations. The increase was due to the launch of new business wins and robust volumes in our contract logistics segment in 2021, as well as the impact of temporary layoffs and furloughs in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a percentage of operating revenues, personnel and related benefits increased to 26.1% for 2021, compared to 24.3% in 2020. The percentage is derived on an aggregate basis from both existing and new programs, and from customer operations at various stages in their lifecycles. Individual operations may be impacted by additional production shifts or by overtime at selected operations. While generalizations about the impact of personnel and related benefits costs as a percentage of total revenue are difficult, we manage compensation and staffing levels, including the use of contract labor, to maintain target economics based on near-term projections of demand for our services.
Operating supplies and expenses. Operating supplies and expenses increased by $38.3 million, or 34.5%, to $149.4 million for 2021 compared to $111.1 million for 2020. These expenses include items such as fuel, maintenance, cost of materials, communications, utilities and other operating expenses, and generally relate to fluctuations in customer demand. The main elements of the increase included increases of $16.5 million in fuel expense, $5.3 million in legal charges and professional fees, $8.2 million in vehicle and other maintenance, $4.0 million in travel and entertainment, and $3.3 million in other operating expenses.
Commission expense. Commission expense for 2021 increased by $7.2 million, or 27.1%, to $33.9 million from $26.7 million in 2020. Commission expense increased due to increased revenue in the agency based truckload business. As a percentage of operating revenues, commission expense was unchanged at 1.9% for both 2021 and 2020.
Occupancy expense. Occupancy expenses increased by $2.7 million, or 7.8%, to $37.3 million for 2021. This compares to $34.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in building rents and property taxes.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense for 2021 increased by $6.4 million to $39.6 million from $33.3 million in 2020. The increase was attributable to a $4.1 million increase in salaries, wages, and benefits and a $2.5 million increase in professional fees. As a percentage of operating revenues, general and administrative expense was 2.3% in 2021 compared to 2.4% for 2020.
Insurance and claims. Insurance and claims expense for 2021 increased by $19.6 million to $38.8 million from $19.3 million in 2020. The increase was attributable to increases of $11.1 million in cargo and service failure claims and $8.5 million in auto liability premiums and claims. Included in insurance and claims expense were $6.0 million in charges for auto liability claims expected to settle in excess of policy limits. As a percentage of operating revenues, insurance and claims increased to 2.2% for 2021 compared to 1.4% in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense for 2021 decreased by $6.6 million, or 8.9%, to $67.5 million from $74.1 million for 2020. Depreciation expense decreased $5.3 million and amortization expense decreased $1.3 million. The decrease in depreciation expense is attributable to the limited availability of transportation equipment for purchase in 2021. If equipment manufacturers implement solutions to overcome production issues, depreciation expense is expected to increase as capital expenditures return to normalized levels.
Interest expense, net. Net interest expense was $11.6 million for 2021 compared to $14.6 million for 2020. The decrease in net interest expense reflects a decrease in outstanding borrowings and a decrease in interest rates on our debt. As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding borrowings totaled $428.4 million compared to $461.7 million at the same time last year.
Other non-operating income (expense). Other non-operating income was $7.2 million for 2021 compared to $1.9 million of other non-operating expense for 2020. Other non-operating income for 2021 includes a $5.7 million pre-tax gain from a favorable legal settlement. Other non-operating income in 2021 also includes a $1.5 million pre-tax holding gain on marketable securities due to changes in fair value recognized in income compared to a pre-tax holding loss of $1.6 million in 2020.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense for 2021 was $24.8 million, compared to $15.8 million for 2020, based on an effective tax rate of 25.2% and 24.7% respectively. The increase in income taxes in 2021 is the result of an increase in taxable income and our effective tax rate for 2021 compared to 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
Operating revenues. Operating revenues for 2020 decreased $120.9 million, or 8.0%, to $1,391.1 million from $1,512.0 million in 2019. Included in operating revenues are separately-identified fuel surcharges of $67.9 million in 2020 compared to $89.6 million in 2019. Excluding intermodal, the Company experienced decreases in each of its service lines in 2020 compared to the prior year. Consolidated income from operations increased $15.0 million, or 22.9%, to $80.4 million for 2020 compared to $65.4 million during the same period last year. Included in 2019 income from operations were $30.0 million in litigation related charges related to previously disclosed legal matters.
In the contract logistics segment, which includes value-added and dedicated services, operating revenues decreased $55.5 million to $459.7 million in 2020 compared to $515.2 million in the previous year. Income from operations in the contract logistics segment decreased $12.4 million, or 25.7%, to $36.0 million for 2020 compared to $48.4 million in 2019. The decrease in operating revenues and income is primarily attributable to the shutdown of North American automotive and heavy-truck manufacturing in the first half of 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the intermodal segment, operating revenues increased $3.3 million to $393.6 million in 2020 compared to $390.3 million in the previous year. Intermodal revenues for 2020 included $40.1 million in separately identified fuel surcharges, compared to $47.1 million in the same period last year. Income from operations in the intermodal segment decreased $8.8 million to $30.4 million for 2020 compared to $39.2 million in 2019. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin decreased to 7.7% in 2020 compared to 10.0% in 2019. During 2020, Universal’s intermodal segment increased the number of loads hauled by 7.3%, however its average operating revenue per load, excluding fuel surcharges, more than offset this increase falling 11.0% compared to the same period last year.
In the trucking segment, which includes agent-based and company-managed trucking operations, operating revenues decreased $71.2 million to $318.4 million in 2020 compared to $389.6 million in the previous year. Income from operations in the trucking segment increased $37.9 million to $16.4 million for 2020 compared to an operating loss of $21.5 million in 2019, which included the settlement of a previously disclosed legal matter. In 2020, the trucking segment experienced a 5.6% increase in its average operating revenue per load, excluding fuel surcharges, however, the number of loads hauled fell 19.8% compared to the same period last year.
Operating revenues in the company-managed brokerage segment, increased $2.4 million to $218.1 million in 2020 compared to $215.8 million in the previous year. As a percentage of revenue, operating margin decreased to a negative 1.2% in 2020 compared to 0.8% in 2019. Although 2020 underperformed 2019, the fourth quarter of 2020 was an improvement sequentially as the Company continues to rationalize both lanes and customers. The company-managed brokerage segment’s average operating revenue per load increased 1.6% in 2020 while the loads moved decreased 0.7% compared to the same period last year.
Purchased transportation and equipment rent. Purchased transportation and equipment rental costs for 2020 decreased by $48.9 million, or 6.8%, to $674.1 million from $723.1 million during the same period last year. Purchased transportation and equipment rent generally increases or decreases in proportion to the revenues generated through owner-operators and other third party capacity providers and is generally correlated with changes in demand for transportation-related services, which includes truckload, brokerage, intermodal and dedicated services. The absolute decrease in purchased transportation and equipment rental costs was primarily the result of a decrease in transportation-related service revenues. In 2020, transportation-related service revenues decreased 6.7% compared to 2019. As a percentage of operating revenues, purchased transportation and equipment rent expense increased to 48.5% compared to 47.8% during the same period last year. The increase was due to an increase in the mix of transportation-related service revenue. As a percentage of total revenues, transportation-related service revenue increased to 76.1% for 2020 compared to 75.1% in the same period last year.
Direct personnel and related benefits. Direct personnel and related benefits for 2020 decreased by $30.6 million, or 8.3%, to $337.6 million compared to $368.2 million during the same period last year. Trends in these expenses are generally correlated with changes in operating facilities and headcount requirements and, therefore, increase and decrease with the level of demand for our value-added services and staffing needs of our operations. The decrease was due to layoffs and temporary furloughs to right-size staffing as a cost cutting measure in response to the economic slowdown as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a percentage of operating revenues, personnel and related benefits slightly decreased to 24.3% for 2020, compared to 24.4% for 2019. The percentage is derived on an aggregate basis from both existing and new programs, and from customer operations at various stages in their lifecycles. Individual operations may be impacted by additional production shifts or by overtime at selected operations. While generalizations about the impact of personnel and related benefits costs as a percentage of total revenue are difficult, we manage compensation and staffing levels, including the use of contract labor, to maintain target economics based on near-term projections of demand for our services.
Operating supplies and expenses. Operating supplies and expenses decreased by $9.7 million, or 8.0%, to $111.1 million for 2020 compared to $120.8 million for 2019. These expenses include items such as fuel, maintenance, cost of materials, communications, utilities and other operating expenses, and generally relate to fluctuations in customer demand. The main elements of the decrease included decreases of $7.3 million in fuel expense on company tractors, $2.9 million in operating supplies and material costs in operations supporting heavy-truck programs, $2.4 million in vehicle and other maintenance, and $1.9 million in travel and entertainment. These decreases were partially offset by increases of $3.3 million in professional fees and $2.0 million in bad debt expense.
Commission expense. Commission expense for 2020 decreased by $4.5 million, or 14.6%, to $26.7 million from $31.2 million for 2019. Commission expense decreased due to decreased revenue in the agency based truckload business. As a percentage of operating revenues, commission expense decreased to 1.9% for 2020, compared to 2.1% one year earlier.
Occupancy expense. Occupancy expenses decreased by $2.1 million, or 5.6%, to $34.6 million for 2020. This compares to $36.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in building rents and property taxes as we consolidated facilities for certain value-added programs.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense for 2020 decreased by $11.2 million to $33.3 million from $44.5 million in 2019. The decrease was attributable to a $6.6 million decrease in salaries, wages, and benefits and a $6.0 million decrease in professional fees. Included in professional fees for 2019 was a $5.1 million charge for a previously disclosed legal matter. As a percentage of operating revenues, general and administrative expense was 2.4% for 2020 compared to 2.9% for 2019.
Insurance and claims. Insurance and claims expense for 2020 decreased by $28.2 million to $19.3 million from $47.4 million in 2019. As a percentage of operating revenues, insurance and claims decreased to 1.4% for 2020 compared to 3.1% for 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $24.8 million charge for a legal settlement in the third quarter of 2019 as well as a decrease in our auto liability premiums and contractor insurance. This was partially offset by an increase in cargo and service failure claims, including $0.5 million in service claims related to the June 2020 cyber-attack.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense for 2020 decreased by $0.6 million, or 0.8%, to $74.1 million from $74.8 million for 2019. Depreciation expense decreased $0.1 million in 2020 and amortization expense decreased $0.5 million.
Interest expense, net. Net interest expense was $14.6 million for 2020 compared to $17.0 million for 2019. The decrease in net interest expense reflects a decrease in the average interest rate on our outstanding borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding borrowings totaled $461.7 million compared to $459.7 million at the same time last year.
Other non-operating (expense) income. Other non-operating expense was $1.9 million for 2020 compared to other non-operating income of $1.8 million in 2019. Included in other non-operating expense during 2020 was $1.6 million in losses on marketable securities compared to $1.5 million in gains in 2019.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense for 2020 was $15.8 million, compared to $12.6 million for 2019, based on an effective tax rate of 24.7% and 25.1% respectively. The increase in income taxes in 2020 is the result of an increase in taxable income for 2020 compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are funds generated by operations, loans and extensions of credit under our credit facilities, on margin against our marketable securities, funds from installment notes, and proceeds from the sales of marketable securities. We use secured, asset lending to fund a substantial portion of purchases of tractors, trailers and material handling equipment.
We employ an asset-light operating strategy which we believe lowers our capital expenditure requirements. In general, our facilities used in our value-added services are leased on terms that are either substantially matched to our customer’s contracts, are month-to-month or are provided to us by our customers. We also utilize owner-operators and third-party carriers to provide a significant portion of our transportation and specialized services. A significant portion of the tractors and trailers used in our business are provided by our owner-operators. In addition, our use of agents reduces our overall need for large terminals. As a result, our capital expenditure requirements are limited in comparison to most large transportation and logistics service providers, which maintain significant properties and sizable fleets of owned tractors and trailers.
In 2021, our capital expenditures totaled $38.8 million. These expenditures primarily consisted of transportation equipment and investments in support of our value-added service operations. Due to widespread shortages, production backlogs, and limited availability of transportation equipment in 2021, our expenditures were somewhat lower than our customary capital expenditures. Our asset-light business model depends largely on the customized solutions we implement for specific customers. As a result, our capital expenditures will also depend on specific new contracts and the overall age and condition of our owned transportation equipment. In 2022, exclusive of acquisitions of businesses, we expect our capital expenditures to be in the range of 4% to 5% of operating revenues. We expect to make these capital expenditures for the acquisition of transportation equipment, to support our new and existing value-added service operations, and for improvements to our existing terminal yard and container facilities. If equipment manufacturers identify and implement solutions enabling them to overcome these supply-side constraints, then we would expect to return to a normalized level of capital expenditures in future periods.
We have a cash dividend policy that anticipates a regular dividend of $0.42 per share of common stock, payable in quarterly increments of $0.105 per share of common stock. After considering the regular quarterly dividends made during the year, the Board of Directors also evaluates the potential declaration of an annual special dividend payable in the first quarter of each year. The Board of Directors did not declare a special dividend in the first quarter of 2022. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid a total of $0.42 per common share, or $11.3 million. Future dividend policy and the payment of dividends, if any, will be determined by the Board of Directors in light of circumstances then existing, including our earnings, financial condition and other factors deemed relevant by the Board of Directors.
While operating cash flows may be negatively impacted by a prolonged pandemic, the Company believes we will be able to finance our near term needs for working capital over the next twelve months, as well as any planned capital expenditures during such period, with cash balances, cash flows from operations, and loans and extensions of credit under our credit facilities and on margin against our marketable securities. Should the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic last longer than anticipated, and/or our cash flow from operations decline more than expected, we may need to obtain additional financing. The Company’s ability to fund future operating expenses and capital expenditures, as well as its ability to meet future debt service obligations or refinance indebtedness will depend on future operating performance, which will be affected by general economic, financial, and other factors beyond our control.
We continue to evaluate business development opportunities, including potential acquisitions that fit our strategic plans. There can be no assurance that we will identify any opportunities that fit our strategic plans or will be able to execute any such opportunities on terms acceptable to us. Depending on prospective consideration to be paid for an acquisition, any such opportunities would be financed first from available cash and cash equivalents and availability of borrowings under our credit facilities.
Revolving Credit, Promissory Notes and Term Loan Agreements
Our secured credit facility provides for maximum borrowings of $350 million in the form of a $150 million term loan and a $200 million revolver at a variable rate of interest based on LIBOR or a base rate and matures on November 26, 2023. The credit facility, which is secured by cash, deposits, accounts receivable, and selected other assets of the applicable borrowers, includes customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default, as well as financial covenants requiring minimum fixed charge coverage and leverage ratios, and customary mandatory prepayments provisions. Our credit facility includes an accordion feature which allows us to increase availability by up to $100 million upon our request. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the credit facility, and $36.7 million was available for borrowing.
A wholly-owned subsidiary issued a series of promissory notes in order to finance transportation equipment. The notes issued in connection with this equipment financing, which are secured by liens on selected titled vehicles, include certain affirmative and negative covenants, are generally payable in 60 monthly installments and bear interest at fixed rates ranging from 2.25% to 5.13%.
A wholly-owned subsidiary issued a series of promissory notes in order to finance certain purchases of real property. The promissory notes, which are secured by first mortgages and assignment of leases on specific parcels of real estate and improvements, include certain affirmative and negative covenants and are generally payable in 120 monthly installments. Each of the notes bears interest at a variable rate ranging from LIBOR plus 1.85% to LIBOR plus 2.25%. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants.
We also maintain a short-term line of credit secured by our portfolio of marketable securities. It bears interest at LIBOR plus 1.10%. The amount available under the margin facility is based on a percentage of the market value of the underlying securities. We did not have any amounts advanced against the line as of December 31, 2021, and the maximum available borrowings were $4.3 million.
Discussion of Cash Flows
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $13.9 million compared to $8.8 million at December 31, 2020. Operating activities provided $83.3 million in net cash, and we used $33.2 million in investing activities and $44.6 million in financing activities.
The $83.3 million in net cash provided by operations was primarily attributed to $73.7 million of net income, which reflects non-cash depreciation and amortization, noncash lease expense, amortization of debt issuance costs, gains on marketable equity securities and equipment sales, stock-based compensation, provisions for doubtful accounts and a change in deferred income taxes totaling $94.7 million, net. Net cash provided by operating activities also reflects an aggregate increase in net working capital totaling $85.1 million. The primary drivers behind the increase in working capital were principal reductions in operating lease liabilities during the period, an increase in trade and other accounts receivable, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, and a decrease in income taxes payable. These were partially offset by increases in accruals for insurance and claims, trade accounts payable, and accrued expenses and other current liabilities. Affiliate transactions increased net cash provided by operating activities by $1.2 million. The decrease in net cash resulted from an increase in accounts payable to affiliates of $0.8 million and a decrease in accounts receivable from affiliates of $0.4 million.
The $33.2 million in net cash used in investing activities consisted of $38.8 million in capital expenditures and $0.1 million in marketable securities purchases. These uses were partially offset by $5.6 million in proceeds from the sale of equipment and $0.1 million in proceeds from the sale of marketable securities.
We used $44.6 million in financing activities. During the period we paid cash dividends of $11.3 million. We had outstanding borrowings totaling $428.4 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $461.7 million at December 31, 2020. During the period we had net borrowings on our revolving lines of credit totaling $11.9 million and borrowed an additional $16.0 million for new equipment. We also made term loan, and equipment and real estate note payments totaling $61.2 million during the period.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations related to our long-term debt of $366.1 million and $8.8 million for principal borrowings and interest, respectively, which become due through 2030. See Item 8, Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our debt obligations. We also have contractual obligations for operating leases commitments and purchase commitments related to agreements to purchase equipment. See Item 8, Note 13 and Note 16, respectively, to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding lease obligations and purchase commitments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Legal Matters
We are subject to various legal proceedings and other contingencies, the outcomes of which are subject to significant uncertainty. We accrue for estimated losses if it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. We use judgment and evaluate, with the assistance of legal counsel, whether a loss contingency arising from litigation should be disclosed or recorded. The outcome of legal proceedings is inherently uncertain, so typically a loss cannot be precisely estimated. Accordingly, if the outcome of legal proceedings is different than is anticipated by us, we would have to record the matter at the actual amount at which it was resolved, in the period resolved, impacting our results of operations and financial position for the period. See Item 8, Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, operating revenues and operating expenses.
Critical accounting policies are those that are both (1) important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and (2) require management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. As the number of variables and assumptions affecting the possible future resolution of the uncertainties increase, those judgments become even more subjective and complex. In order to provide an understanding about how our management forms its judgments about future events, including the variables and assumptions underlying the estimates, and the sensitivity of those judgments to different circumstances, we have identified our critical accounting policies below.
Insurance and Claim Costs
We maintain auto liability, workers compensation and general liability insurance with licensed insurance carriers. We are self-insured for all cargo and equipment damage claims. Insurance and claims expense represents premiums paid by us and the accruals made for claims within our self-insured retention amounts. A liability is recognized for the estimated cost of all self-insured claims including an estimate of incurred but not reported claims based on historical experience and for claims expected to exceed our policy limits. In addition, legal expenses related to auto liability claims are covered under our policy. We are responsible for all other legal expenses related to claims.
We establish reserves for anticipated losses and expenses related to cargo and equipment damage claims and auto liability claims. The reserves consist of specific reserves for all known claims and an estimate for claims incurred but not reported, and losses arising from known claims ultimately settling in excess of insurance coverage using loss development factors based upon industry data and past experience. In determining the reserves, we specifically review all known claims and record a liability based upon our best estimate of the amount to be paid. In making our estimate, we consider the amount and validity of the claim, as well as our past experience with similar claims. In establishing the reserve for claims incurred but not reported, we consider our past claims history, including the length of time it takes for claims to be reported to us. Based on our past experience, the time between when a claim occurs and when it is reported to us is short. As a result, we believe that the number of incurred but not reported claims at any given point in time is small. These reserves are periodically reviewed and adjusted to reflect our experience and updated information relating to specific claims. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had accruals of $23.0 million and $9.2 million, respectively, for estimated claims net of insurance receivables. If we experience claims that are not covered by our insurance or that exceed our estimated claim reserve, it could increase the volatility of our earnings and have a materially adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. Based on our 2021 reserve for claims incurred but not reported, a 10% increase in claims incurred but not reported, would increase our insurance and claims expense by approximately $0.5 million.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, including Goodwill and Intangible Assets
At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, our goodwill balance was $170.7 million. We are required to test goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently, whenever events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill below its carrying amount. We annually test goodwill impairment during the third quarter. Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired in connection with our acquisitions. We continually assess whether any indicators of impairment exist, which requires a significant amount of judgment. Such indicators may include a sustained significant decline in our share price and market capitalization; a decline in our expected future cash flows; a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate; unanticipated competition; overall weaknesses in our industry; and slower growth rates. Adverse changes in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. The Company has the option to first assess qualitative factors such as current performance and overall economic conditions to determine whether or not it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we choose that option, then we would not be required to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test unless we determine that, based on a qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not, or if we choose not to perform a qualitative assessment, we then proceed with the quantitative assessment. Under the quantitative test, if the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, then goodwill of the reporting unit is considered to not be impaired. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess, up to the value of the goodwill.
During each of the third quarters of 2021 and 2020, we completed our goodwill impairment testing by performing a quantitative assessment using the income approach for each of our reporting units with goodwill. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make estimates and assumptions related to future revenue, operating income and discount rates. Based on the results of this test, no impairment loss was recognized. There were no triggering events identified from the date of our assessment through December 31, 2021 that would require an update to our annual impairment test.
We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets, other than goodwill, for impairment by analyzing the operating performance and anticipated future cash flows for those assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of such assets may not be recoverable. We evaluate the need to adjust the carrying value of the underlying assets if the sum of the expected cash flows is less than the carrying value. Our projection of future cash flows, the level of actual cash flows, the methods of estimation used for determining fair values and salvage values can impact impairment. Any changes in management's judgments could result in greater or lesser annual depreciation and amortization expense or impairment charges in the future. Depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Currently Effective
See Item 8: Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of new accounting pronouncements.