ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto, “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item IA, “Forward-looking Statements” and other risks described elsewhere in this Annual Report.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. In some cases you can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “seek,” “should,” “will,” and “would,” or similar words. Statements that contain these words and other statements that are forward-looking in nature should be read carefully because they discuss future expectations, contain projections of future results of operations or of financial positions or state other “forward-looking” information.
Forward-looking statements involve inherent uncertainty and may ultimately prove to be incorrect. These statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions, which are based on currently available information. These assumptions could prove inaccurate. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Except as otherwise may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or actual operating results. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to:
•our dependence on principal customers;
•the relatively low margins of our business, which are sensitive to inflationary and deflationary pressures;
•the impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•our ability to operate, and rely on third parties to operate, reliable and secure technology systems;
•labor and other workforce shortages and challenges;
•our ability to realize anticipated benefits of our strategic initiatives, including any acquisitions;
•the addition or loss of significant customers or material changes to our relationships with these customers;
•our sensitivity to general economic conditions including inflation, changes in disposable income levels and consumer spending trends;
•our ability to continue to grow sales, including of our higher margin natural and organic foods and non-food products, and to manage that growth;
•increased competition in our industry, including as a result of continuing consolidation of retailers and the growth of chains, direct distribution by large retailers and the growth of online distributors;
•our ability to timely and successfully deploy our warehouse management system throughout our distribution centers and our transportation management system across the Company and to achieve efficiencies and cost savings from these efforts;
•the potential for disruptions in our supply chain or our distribution capabilities from circumstances beyond our control, including due to lack of long-term contracts, severe weather, labor shortage or work stoppages or otherwise;
•moderated supplier promotional activity, including decreased forward buying opportunities;
•union-organizing activities that could cause labor relations difficulties and increased costs;
•the potential for additional asset impairment charges;
•our ability to maintain food quality and safety;
•volatility in fuel costs;
•volatility in foreign exchange rates; and
•our ability to identify and successfully complete asset or business acquisitions.
You should carefully review the risks described under “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A, as well as any other cautionary language in this Annual Report, as the occurrence of any of these events could have an adverse effect, which may be material, on our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Business Overview
UNFI is a leading distributor of grocery and non-food products, and support services provider to retailers in the United States and Canada. We believe we are uniquely positioned to provide the broadest array of products and services to customers throughout North America. Our diversified customer base includes over 30,000 customer locations ranging from some of the largest grocers in the country to smaller independents as well. We offer approximately 260,000 products consisting of national, regional and private label brands grouped into six product categories: grocery and general merchandise; produce; perishables and frozen foods; nutritional supplements and sports nutrition; bulk and foodservice products; and personal care items. We believe we are North America’s premier wholesaler with 56 distribution centers and warehouses representing approximately 30 million square feet of warehouse space. We are a coast-to-coast distributor with customers in all 50 states as well as all ten provinces in Canada, making us a desirable partner for retailers and consumer product manufacturers. We believe our total product assortment and service offerings are unmatched by our wholesale competitors. We plan to continue to pursue new business opportunities with independent retailers that operate diverse formats, regional and national chains, as well as international customers with wide-ranging needs. Our business is classified into two reportable segments: Wholesale and Retail; and also includes a manufacturing division and a branded product line division.
We are committed to executing our Fuel the Future strategy with the mission of building a food ecosystem that is better for all by delivering great food, more choices and fresh thinking for our customers and suppliers. Our Fuel the Future strategy consists of six pillars and is underpinned by four focus areas, which are detailed in Business in Part I. Item 1 of this Annual Report. Collectively, the actions and plans behind each focus area are meant to capitalize on our unique position in the food distribution industry, including the number and location of distribution centers we operate, the array of services and the data driven insights that we are able to customize for each of our customers, our innovation platforms and the growth potential we see in each, our commitment to our people and the planet and the positioning of our retail operations.
We expect to continue to use available capital to re-invest in our business to support our Fuel the Future initiatives and to reduce outstanding debt and are committed to improving our financial leverage. As our financial leverage has declined over time, it also offers us increased flexibility to invest in growing our business and selectively return cash to shareholders as appropriate.
We believe our Fuel the Future strategy will further accelerate our growth through increasing sales of products and services, providing tailored, data-driven solutions to help our customers run their businesses more efficiently and contributing to customer acquisitions. We believe the key drivers for new customer growth will be the benefits of our significant scale, product and service offerings and nationwide footprint.
Trends and Other Factors Affecting our Business
Our results are impacted by macroeconomic and demographic trends, changes in the food distribution market structure and changes in consumer behavior. We believe food-at-home expenditures as a percentage of total food expenditures are subject to these trends, including changes in consumer behaviors in response to social and economic trends, such as levels of disposable income and the health of the economy in which our customers and our stores operate.
The U.S. economy has experienced economic volatility in recent years due to uncertain economic conditions, which have had and we expect may continue to have an impact on consumer confidence in the future. Consumer spending may be impacted by levels of discretionary income and consumers trading down to a less expensive mix of products for grocery items. In addition, inflation has increased and continues to be unpredictable. For example, we experienced volatility in our energy operating costs and commodity input costs of our manufacturers impacted prices of products we procured. We believe our product mix ranging from high-quality natural and organic products to national and local conventional brands, including cost conscious private label brands, positions us to serve a broad cross section of North American retailers and end customers, and lessens any impact of shifts in consumer and industry trends in grocery product mix.
We continued to experience a tight labor market for our warehouse and driver associates in fiscal 2022, which has caused additional reliance on third-party resources, incremental hiring and increases in wages, all of which led to higher labor expenses. We believe this operating environment has been impacted by labor force availability, in part as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which we refer to as the pandemic. We continue to take actions to maintain existing employment levels, fill open roles and prepare for future employment needs.
Uncertainty remains regarding the longer-term impact of the pandemic on our business, as global economies, markets and supply chains respond to the ongoing effects. We continue to monitor guidelines released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization and, when appropriate, implement mitigation measures to protect our associates, including safety protocols and strongly encouraging vaccinations/boosters. Our results could be impacted by, among other factors, any resurgence of infection rates and new variants of COVID-19 with higher transmissibility, the availability and efficacy of vaccines and treatments, actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic such as health and safety orders and mandates, companies’ remote work policies, any economic downturn, the impact on capital and financial markets, food-at-home purchasing levels and other consumer trends, each of which is uncertain. Any of these disruptions could adversely impact our business and results of operations.
We believe that changes in work being done outside of the traditional office setting will continue to contribute to more food being consumed at home. The impact of the pandemic, also drove growth in eCommerce utilization by grocery consumers. We have benefited from this trend through the growth of our traditional eCommerce customers, our online marketplace connecting suppliers and retailers, and our EasyOptions website, which directly services non-traditional customers. We are also impacted by changes in food distribution trends affecting our Wholesale customers, such as direct store deliveries and other methods of distribution. Our Wholesale customers manage their businesses independently and operate in a competitive environment.
Wholesale Distribution Center Network
We evaluate our distribution center network to optimize its performance and expect to incur incremental expenses related to any future network realignment, expansion or improvements and are working to both minimize these costs and obtain new business to further improve the efficiency of our transforming distribution network.
In fiscal 2022, our Allentown, Pennsylvania distribution center began operations, with a capacity of 1.3 million square feet to service customers in the surrounding geographic area. We incurred start-up costs and operating losses, as the volume in this facility ramped up to its operating capacity.
Retail Operations
We currently operate 73 continuing operations Retail grocery stores, including 54 Cub Foods corporate stores and 19 Shoppers Food Warehouse stores. In addition, we supply another 26 Cub Foods stores operated by our Wholesale customers through franchise and equity ownership arrangements. We operate 81 pharmacies primarily within our stores we operate and the stores of our franchisees. In addition, we operate 23 “Cub Wine and Spirit” and “Cub Liquor” stores.
We’re committed to investing in our Retail segment in areas such as customer-facing merchandising initiatives, physical facilities, technology, and operational tools. Cub Foods and Shoppers Food Warehouse also invested in improving the customer and associate experience through express remodels focused on customer facing elements; 14 projects were completed in fiscal 2022 with a majority finishing in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022.
Impact of Inflation
We experienced a mix of inflation across product categories during fiscal 2022. In the aggregate across our businesses, including the mix of products, management estimates our businesses experienced product cost inflation of approximately six percent in fiscal 2022. Cost inflation estimates are based on individual like items sold during the periods being compared. Changes in merchandising, customer buying habits and competitive pressures create inherent difficulties in measuring the impact of inflation on Net sales and Gross profit. Absent any changes in units sold or the mix of units sold, inflation generally has the effect of increasing sales. Under the last-in, first out (“LIFO”) method of inventory accounting, product cost increases are recognized within Cost of sales based on expected year-end inventory quantities and costs, which has the effect of decreasing Gross profit and the carrying value of inventory during periods of inflation.
Our pricing to our customers is determined at the time of sale primarily based on the then prevailing vendor listed base cost, and includes discounts we offer to our customers. Generally, in an inflationary environment as a wholesaler, rising vendor costs result in higher Net sales driven by higher vendor prices when other variables such as quantities sold and vendor promotions are constant. In addition, as discussed above, we have experienced higher costs of services from labor, transportation and other services expenses.
Composition of Consolidated Statements of Operations and Business Performance Assessment
Net sales
Our Net sales consist primarily of product sales of natural, organic, specialty, produce and conventional grocery and non-food products, and support services revenue from retailers, adjusted for customer volume discounts, vendor incentives when applicable, returns and allowances, and professional services revenue. Net sales also include amounts charged by us to customers for shipping and handling and fuel surcharges.
Cost of sales and Gross profit
The principal components of our Cost of sales include the amounts paid to suppliers for product sold, plus transportation costs necessary to bring the product to, or move product between, our distribution centers and retail stores, partially offset by consideration received from suppliers in connection with the purchase or promotion of the suppliers’ products. Our gross margin may not be comparable to other similar companies within our industry that may include all costs related to their distribution network in their costs of sales rather than as operating expenses.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses include distribution expenses of warehousing, delivery, purchasing, receiving, selecting, and outbound transportation expenses, and selling and administrative expenses. These expenses include salaries and wages, employee benefits, occupancy, insurance, depreciation and amortization expense, and share-based compensation expense.
Restructuring, acquisition and integration related expenses
Restructuring, acquisition and integration related expenses reflect expenses resulting from restructuring activities, including severance costs, facility closure asset impairment charges and costs, share-based compensation acceleration charges and acquisition and integration related expenses. Integration related expenses include certain professional consulting expenses related to business transformation and incremental expenses related to combining facilities required to optimize our distribution network as a result of acquisitions.
Net periodic benefit income, excluding service cost
Net periodic benefit income, excluding service cost reflects the recognition of expected returns on benefit plan assets and interest costs on plan liabilities.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net includes primarily interest expense on long-term debt, net of capitalized interest, loss on debt extinguishment, interest expense on finance lease obligations, amortization of financing costs and discounts, and interest income.
Adjusted EBITDA
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). In addition to the GAAP results, we consider certain non-GAAP financial measures to assess the performance of our business and understand underlying operating performance and core business trends, which we use to facilitate operating performance comparisons of our business on a consistent basis over time. Adjusted EBITDA is provided as a supplement to our results of operations and related analysis, and should not be considered superior to, a substitute for or an alternative to, any financial measure of performance prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain items because they are non-cash items or items that do not reflect management’s assessment of ongoing business performance.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors and financial institutions because it provides additional information regarding factors and trends affecting our business, which are used in the business planning process to understand expected operating performance, to evaluate results against those expectations, and because of its importance as a measure of underlying operating performance, as the primary compensation performance measure under certain compensation programs and plans. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is reflective of factors that affect our underlying operating performance and facilitate operating performance comparisons of our business on a consistent basis over time. Investors are cautioned that there are material limitations associated with the use of non-GAAP financial measures as an analytical tool. Certain adjustments to our GAAP financial measures reflected below exclude items that may be considered recurring in nature and may be reflected in our financial results for the foreseeable future. These measurements and items may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should be reviewed in conjunction with our results reported in accordance with GAAP in this Annual Report.
There are significant limitations to using Adjusted EBITDA as a financial measure including, but not limited to, it not reflecting the cost of cash expenditures for capital assets or certain other contractual commitments, finance lease obligation and debt service expenses, income taxes and any impacts from changes in working capital.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as a consolidated measure inclusive of continuing and discontinued operations results, which we reconcile by adding Net income (loss) from continuing operations, less Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, plus Non-operating income and expenses, including Net periodic benefit income, excluding service cost, Interest expense, net and Other, net, plus Provision (benefit) for income taxes and Depreciation and amortization all calculated in accordance with GAAP, plus adjustments for Share-based compensation, non-cash LIFO charge or benefit, Restructuring, acquisition and integration related expenses, Goodwill impairment charges, (Gain) loss on sale of assets, certain legal charges and gains, certain other non-cash charges or other items, as determined by management, plus Adjusted EBITDA of discontinued operations calculated in a manner consistent with the results of continuing operations, outlined above.
During fiscal 2022, we revised our definition of Adjusted EBITDA to exclude the impact of the non-cash LIFO charge or benefit. We believe that this change provides a better indicator of our underlying operating performance and permits better comparability between periods. Refer to footnote four in the table below and Note 16-Business Segments in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information regarding the impact of the change in definition of Adjusted EBITDA.
Assessment of Our Business Results
The following table sets forth a summary of our results of operations and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated. We have revised the following tables for the change in segment profit measurement for Adjusted EBITDA as discussed in Note 16-Business Segments within Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to Net income (loss) from continuing operations and to Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax.
(1)Fiscal 2021 includes a postretirement settlement gain of $17 million associated with the termination of remaining corporate plans. Fiscal 2020 includes a lump sum defined benefit pension plan settlement expense of $11 million associated with the acceleration of a portion of the accumulated unrecognized actuarial loss as a result of the lump sum settlement payments.
(2)Fiscal 2020 includes the tax benefit from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act, which includes the impact of tax loss carrybacks to 35% tax years allowed under the CARES Act.
(3)Fiscal 2020 primarily reflects a goodwill impairment charge attributable to a reorganization of our reporting units and a sustained decrease in market capitalization and enterprise value of the Company, resulting in a decline in the estimated fair value of the U.S. Wholesale reporting unit. In addition, this charge includes a goodwill finalization charge attributable to the Supervalu acquisition and an asset impairment charge. Refer to Note 6-Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
(4)During fiscal 2022, we revised our definition of Adjusted EBITDA to exclude the impact of the non-cash LIFO charge. The following illustrates the impact of the revised definition on previously reported periods to show the effect of this change:
(5)Fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 primarily reflects costs associated with advisory and transformational activities to position our business for further value-creation. In addition, fiscal 2021 includes costs associated with distribution center consolidations. Fiscal 2020 primarily reflects Shoppers asset impairment charges, closed property and distribution center impairment charges and costs, and administrative fees associated with integration activities. Refer to Note 4-Restructuring, Acquisition and Integration Related Expenses in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
(6)Fiscal 2022 primarily reflects the gain on sale of our Riverside, California distribution center in the third quarter of fiscal 2022. Fiscal 2020 primarily reflects a $50 million accumulated depreciation and amortization charge related to the requirement to move Retail from discontinued operations to continuing operations, partially offset by $32 million of gains on the sale of distribution centers and other assets.
(7)Fiscal 2022 reflects an adjustment to multiemployer withdrawal charge estimates. Fiscal 2021 includes charges related to withdrawal liabilities from three Retail multiemployer pension plans.
(8)Reflects reserves and charges for notes receivable issued by Supervalu prior to our acquisition to finance the purchase of stores by its customers.
(9)Reflects a charge to settle a legal proceeding and income received to settle a separate legal proceeding.
(10)Reflects expenses associated with event-specific damages to certain retail stores.
(11)We believe the inclusion of discontinued operations results within Adjusted EBITDA provides investors a meaningful measure of performance.
(12)Amounts represent store closure charges and costs, operational wind-down and inventory charges, and asset impairment charges related to discontinued operations. Fiscal 2021 also reflects income related to a severance benefit.
The following includes a comparison of our consolidated results of operations, our segment results and financial position for fiscal years 2022 and 2021. For a comparison of our consolidated results of operations, segment results and financial position for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, see Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 28, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal year ended July 30, 2022 (fiscal 2022) compared to fiscal year ended July 31, 2021 (fiscal 2021)
Net Sales
Our Net sales by customer channel was as follows (in millions except percentages):
(1)Refer to Note 3-Revenue Recognition in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for our channel definitions and additional information.
Our Net sales for fiscal 2022 increased 7.3% from fiscal 2021. The increase in Net sales for fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by inflation and new business from both existing and new customers, including the benefit of cross-selling, partially offset by supply chain challenges and reduced unit sales growth.
Chains Net sales increased primarily due to growth in sales to existing customers, including an increase from higher product costs, which drove higher wholesale selling prices to our customers, partially offset by supply chain challenges and reduced unit sales growth.
Independent retailers Net sales increased primarily due to sales under a supply agreement with a new customer for East Coast locations commencing in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and growth in sales to existing customers, including an increase from higher product costs, which drove higher wholesale selling prices to our customers, partially offset by supply chain challenges and reduced unit sales growth.
Supernatural Net sales increased primarily due to growth in existing store sales, including the supply of new product categories previously impacted by the pandemic and new fresh categories, such as bulk and ingredients used for prepared foods, inflation, and increased sales to new stores.
Retail’s Net sales increased primarily due to a 0.9% increase in identical store sales from higher average basket sizes, including an increase from higher product costs.
Other Net sales increased primarily due to a $93 million increase in sales to eCommerce customers.
Eliminations Net sales primarily relate to Wholesale’s sales to Retail.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Our Gross profit increased $243 million, or 6.2%, to $4,182 million in fiscal 2022, from $3,939 million in fiscal 2021. Our Gross profit as a percentage of Net sales decreased slightly to 14.5% in fiscal 2022 compared to 14.6% in fiscal 2021. The LIFO charge was $158 million and $24 million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Excluding the non-cash LIFO charge, Gross profit rate was 15.0% of Net sales and 14.7% of Net sales for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. The increase in the Gross profit rate, excluding the LIFO charge, was driven by improvements in the Wholesale segment margin rate, including the impact of inflation and the Company’s efficiency initiatives, partially offset by approximately 60 basis points from changes in certain larger customer mix.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased $232 million, or 6.5%, to $3,825 million, or 13.2% of Net sales, in fiscal 2022 compared to $3,593 million, or 13.3% of Net sales, in fiscal 2021. Operating expenses in fiscal 2022 included an $8 million Retail multiemployer pension plan withdrawal benefit, compared to a $63 million Retail multiemployer pension plan withdrawal charge in fiscal 2021 discussed below. Excluding the multiemployer pension plan withdrawal impacts in both periods, Operating expenses were 13.3% and 13.1% in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The remaining 20 basis point increase in Operating expenses as a percent of Net sales was primarily driven by continued investments in servicing our customers, which led to approximately 50 basis points of higher transportation expenses and distribution labor costs in fiscal 2022, higher occupancy costs, and the temporary, voluntary closure of a distribution center in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. These increases were partially offset by leveraging fixed expenses and the non-recurrence of distribution center start-up and consolidation costs incurred in the Pacific Northwest last year.
In fiscal 2021, our Retail optimization efforts included updating our benefit plan offerings to a defined contribution plan as a replacement for three multiemployer pension plans to which we contributed pursuant to Cub Foods collective bargaining agreements. In fiscal 2021, we withdrew from participating in these Retail multiemployer pension plans, resulting in a $63 million withdrawal charge. This estimated withdrawal liability was adjusted to $55 million in fiscal 2022, resulting in the benefit discussed above. It is possible we could incur withdrawal liabilities for certain additional multiemployer pension plan obligations in the future as we negotiate new collective bargaining agreements with a number of our unions in normal course.
Restructuring, Acquisition and Integration Related Expenses
Restructuring, acquisition and integration related expenses were $21 million for fiscal 2022, which primarily included integration costs associated with transformational and advisory activities to position our business for further value creation. Expenses for fiscal 2021 were $56 million, which included $50 million of integration costs primarily associated with advisory and transformational activities to position our business for further value creation following the Supervalu acquisition and $6 million of closed property charges.
Gain on Sale of Assets
Gain on sale of assets was $87 million in fiscal 2022, which increased $83 million from $4 million in fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2022, we acquired the real property of our Riverside, California distribution center for approximately $153 million. Immediately following this acquisition, we monetized this property through a sale-leaseback transaction, pursuant to which we received $225 million in aggregate proceeds for the sale of the property, which represented the fair value of the property. Under the terms of the sale-leaseback agreement, we entered into a lease for the distribution center for a term of 15 years. We recorded a pre-tax Gain on sale of approximately $87 million in fiscal 2022 as a result of the transactions, which primarily reflects the pre-tax net proceeds.
Operating Income
Reflecting the factors described above, Operating income increased $129 million to $423 million in fiscal 2022, from $294 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in Operating income was primarily driven by an increase in Gross profit, Gain on sale of assets and lower Restructuring, acquisition and integration related expenses, partially offset by an increase in Operating expenses.
Net Periodic Benefit Income, Excluding Service Cost
Net periodic benefit income, excluding service cost decreased $45 million to $40 million in fiscal 2022, from $85 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease in Net periodic benefit income, excluding service cost was primarily driven by $22 million of lower income from expected returns on plan assets from a higher target investment allocation to fixed income assets in 2022 and a $17 million settlement gain for the purchase of an irrevocable annuity to settle participants’ post-employment obligations in fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense, Net
The decrease in interest expense on long-term debt, net of capitalized interest, for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by lower outstanding debt balances and lower net interest expense related to our portfolio of interest rate swaps.
The decrease in loss on debt extinguishment costs primarily reflects the acceleration of unamortized debt issuance costs and original issue discounts related to mandatory and voluntary prepayments on the Term Loan Facility made in fiscal 2021. Refer to Note 9-Long-Term Debt in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further information.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate for continuing operations was an expense of 18.1% compared to an expense of 18.6% in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. For fiscal 2022, the effective tax rate was reduced by the impact of discrete tax benefits related to employee stock awards and the release of unrecognized tax positions, partially offset by non-deductible executive compensation. For fiscal 2021, the effective tax rate was reduced by solar and employment tax credits, including the tax credit impact of a fiscal 2021 investment in an equity method partnership, the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits, excess tax deductions attributable to share-based compensation and inventory deductions, as well as the impact of favorable return-to-provision adjustments.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
The results of discontinued operations for fiscal 2021 reflect Net sales of $42 million for which we recognized $14 million of Gross profit and $9 million of Income from discontinued operations, net of tax. Discontinued operations results of operations in fiscal 2022 were insignificant. Refer to Note 18-Discontinued Operations in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Net Income Attributable to United Natural Foods, Inc.
Reflecting the factors described in more detail above, Net income attributable to United Natural Foods, Inc. was $248 million, or $4.07 per diluted common share, in fiscal 2022, compared to $149 million, or $2.48 per diluted common share, in fiscal 2021.
Segment Results of Operations
In evaluating financial performance in each business segment, management primarily uses Net sales and Adjusted EBITDA of its business segments as discussed and reconciled within Note 16-Business Segments within Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report and the above table within the Executive Overview section. The following tables set forth Net sales and Adjusted EBITDA by segment for the periods indicated.
(1)Adjusted EBITDA amounts as previously reported by segment have been recast to conform with the revised segment profit measure of Adjusted EBITDA, which excludes the non-cash LIFO charge. The effect of the revision increased Adjusted EBITDA for Wholesale and Retail by $23 million and $2 million in fiscal 2021, respectively, decreased Adjusted EBITDA of Other by $1 million in fiscal 2021, and increased Adjusted EBITDA of Wholesale and Retail in fiscal 2020 by $17 million and $1 million, respectively.
Net Sales
Wholesale’s Net sales increased in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to growth in sales to existing customers, including an increase from higher product costs, in Independent retailers, Supernatural and Chains, as discussed in Results of Operations- Fiscal year ended July 30, 2022 (fiscal 2022) compared to fiscal year ended July 31, 2021 (fiscal 2021) - Net Sales above.
Retail’s Net sales increased for fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a 0.9% increase in identical store sales from higher average basket sizes, including an increase from higher product costs.
Adjusted EBITDA
Wholesale’s Adjusted EBITDA increased 3% in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was driven by gross profit expansion, excluding the LIFO charge, in excess of higher operating costs. Wholesale’s Gross profit increase excluding the LIFO charge for fiscal 2022 was $386 million and gross profit rate increased approximately 51 basis points driven by margin rate expansion from the benefits of inflation and the Company’s ValuePath initiative, which was partially offset by changes in customer mix. Wholesale’s Operating expense increased $366 million, which excludes depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, LIFO charge and other adjustments as outlined in Note 16-Business Segments. Wholesale’s operating expense rate increased 62 basis points primarily driven by continued investments in servicing our customers, which led to approximately 50 basis points of higher transportation expenses and distribution labor costs in fiscal 2022, higher occupancy costs, and the temporary, voluntary closure of a distribution center in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. These increases were partially offset by leveraging fixed expenses and distribution center start-up and consolidation costs incurred in the Pacific Northwest last year. Wholesale’s depreciation expense increased $2 million compared to fiscal 2021.
Retail’s Adjusted EBITDA was unchanged in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. Retail’s Gross profit dollar growth excluding the LIFO charge in fiscal 2022 was $12 million and its gross profit rate increased 20 basis points from lower promotional activity. This increase was primarily offset by higher employee and occupancy costs. Retail’s Adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, LIFO charge and other adjustments as outlined in Note 16-Business Segments in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. Retail’s depreciation and amortization expense was unchanged compared to fiscal 2021.
Other Adjusted EBITDA improved 540% in fiscal 2022 primarily due to lower corporate overhead costs, including pandemic related costs and administrative costs.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Highlights
•Total liquidity as of July 30, 2022 was $1,671 million and consisted of the following:
◦Unused credit under our $2,600 million secured asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”, described below) was $1,627 million as of July 30, 2022, which increased $347 million from $1,280 million as of July 31, 2021, primarily due to entering into a new, larger ABL Facility in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 as described below, partially offset by cash utilized to fund a voluntary prepayment on the Term Loan Facility (described below).
◦Cash and cash equivalents was $44 million as of July 30, 2022, which increased $3 million from $41 million as of July 31, 2021.
•Our total debt decreased $65 million to $2,123 million as of July 30, 2022 from $2,188 million as of July 31, 2021, primarily driven by debt repayments from net cash flow contributions from operating activities and net proceeds from asset sales, partially offset by payments for capital expenditures during fiscal 2022.
•In the second quarter of fiscal 2022, we made a voluntary prepayment of $150 million on the term loan agreement (the “Term Loan Agreement”) related to our $1,950 million term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) funded with incremental borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility that reduced our interest costs. Also in the second quarter of fiscal 2022, prior to transitioning to Secured Overnight Financing Rates (“SOFR”), we amended our Term Loan Agreement to reduce the applicable margin for London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) and base rate loans under the Term Loan Facility by 25 basis points.
•In the third quarter of fiscal 2022, we acquired the real property of our Riverside, California distribution center for approximately $153 million, which reduced our Current portion of long-term debt and finance lease liabilities by $96 million with the remainder primarily reducing our Accrued expenses and other current liabilities. Immediately following this acquisition, we monetized this property through a sale-leaseback transaction, pursuant to which we received $225 million in aggregate proceeds for the sale of the property. In March 2022, we made a $44 million voluntary prepayment on the Term Loan Facility from the after-tax net proceeds from the transactions.
•In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we entered into a new loan agreement (the “ABL Loan Agreement”), which provides for a $2,600 million ABL Credit Facility with an extended maturity to fiscal 2027, and we used borrowings thereunder to repay all amounts outstanding under and terminate the then outstanding ABL credit facility. Our total available liquidity increased by $500 million in connection with this refinancing, which reflects our borrowing base levels at closing. The ABL Loan Agreement utilizes Term SOFR and Prime rates as the benchmark interest rates. Borrowings under the ABL Loan Agreement bear interest at rates that, at the applicable borrowers’ option, can be either: (i) a base rate plus a 0.00% - 0.25% margin or (ii) a Term SOFR rate plus a 1.00% - 1.25% margin. Refer to Note 9-Long-Term Debt in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. Also in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we amended the Term Loan Agreement to change the Term Loan Facility reference rate from LIBOR to Term SOFR.
•In fiscal 2023, scheduled debt maturities are expected to be $14 million. Based on our Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Term Loan Agreement) at the end of fiscal 2022, no prepayment from Excess Cash Flow in fiscal 2022 is required to be made in fiscal 2023.
•Working capital increased $317 million to $1,380 million as of July 30, 2022 from $1,063 million as of July 31, 2021, primarily due to the increase in inventory and accounts receivable levels related to new customers and sales growth of existing customers combined with the decrease in the current portion of finance lease liabilities and accrued expenses related to the contractual requirement to acquire the Riverside, California distribution center discussed above, which were partially offset by an increase in accounts payable related to inventories.
Sources and Uses of Cash
We expect to continue to replenish operating assets and pay down debt obligations with internally generated funds. A significant reduction in operating earnings or the incurrence of operating losses could have a negative impact on our operating cash flow, which may limit our ability to pay down our outstanding indebtedness as planned. Our credit facilities are secured by a substantial portion of our total assets. We expect to be able to fund debt maturities and finance lease liabilities through fiscal 2023 with internally generated funds and borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility.
Our primary sources of liquidity are from internally generated funds and from borrowing capacity under the ABL Credit Facility. We believe our short-term and long-term financing abilities are adequate as a supplement to internally generated cash flows to satisfy debt obligations and fund capital expenditures as opportunities arise. Our continued access to short-term and long-term financing through credit markets depends on numerous factors, including the condition of the credit markets and our results of operations, cash flows, financial position and credit ratings.
Primary uses of cash include debt service, capital expenditures, working capital maintenance and income tax payments. We typically finance working capital needs with cash provided from operating activities and short-term borrowings. Inventories are managed primarily through demand forecasting and replenishing depleted inventories.
We currently do not pay a dividend on our common stock. In addition, we are limited in the aggregate amount of dividends that we may pay under the terms of our Term Loan Facility, ABL Credit Facility and Senior Notes. Subject to certain limitations contained in our debt agreements and as market conditions warrant, we may from time to time refinance indebtedness that we have incurred, including through the incurrence or repayment of loans under existing or new credit facilities or the issuance or repayment of debt securities. Proceeds from the sale of any properties mortgaged and encumbered under our Term Loan Facility are required to be used to make additional Term Loan Facility payments or to be reinvested in the business.
Long-Term Debt
During fiscal 2022, we made voluntary prepayments of $202 million on the Term Loan Facility and borrowed a net $139 million under the ABL Credit Facility. We entered into a second amendment to the Term Loan Agreement to, among other things, reduce the applicable reference rate margin by 0.25%, and a third amendment to the Term Loan Agreement to amend the reference rate thereunder from LIBOR to Term SOFR. Refer to Note 9-Long-Term Debt in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a detailed discussion of the provisions of our credit facilities and certain long-term debt agreements.
Our Term Loan Agreement and the indenture governing our unsecured 6.75% Senior Notes due October 15, 2028 (the “Senior Notes”) do not include any financial maintenance covenants. Our ABL Loan Agreement subjects us to a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0 calculated at the end of each of our fiscal quarters on a rolling four quarter basis, if the adjusted aggregate availability is ever less than the greater of (i) $210 million and (ii) 10% of the aggregate borrowing base. We have not been subject to the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant under the ABL Loan Agreement, including through the filing date of this Annual Report. The Term Loan Agreement, Senior Notes and ABL Loan Agreement contain certain operational and informational covenants customary for debt securities of these types that limit our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur debt, declare or pay dividends or make other distributions to our stockholders, transfer or sell assets, create liens on our assets, engage in transactions with affiliates, and merge, consolidate or sell all or substantially all of our and our subsidiaries’ assets on a consolidated basis. We were in compliance with all such covenants for all periods presented. If we fail to comply with any of these covenants, we may be in default under the applicable debt agreement, and all amounts due thereunder may become immediately due and payable.
The following chart outlines our scheduled debt maturities by fiscal year, which excludes debt prepayments that may be required from Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Term Loan Agreement) generated or sales of mortgaged properties in fiscal 2023 or beyond. Based on our Consolidated First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Term Loan Agreement) at the end of fiscal 2022, no prepayment from Excess Cash Flow in fiscal 2022 is required to be made in fiscal 2023.
Derivatives and Hedging Activity
We enter into interest rate swap contracts from time to time to mitigate our exposure to changes in market interest rates as part of our strategy to manage our debt portfolio to achieve an overall desired position of notional debt amounts subject to fixed and floating interest rates. Interest rate swap contracts are entered into for periods consistent with related underlying exposures and do not constitute positions independent of those exposures.
As discussed above, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we (i) entered into the ABL Loan Agreement, (ii) amended the Term Loan Agreement to change the Term Loan Facility reference rate from LIBOR to Term SOFR and (iii) amended our outstanding interest rate swap contracts to replace One-Month LIBOR with One-Month Term SOFR. We did not record any gains or losses upon the conversion of the reference rates in these interest rate swap contracts, and we believe these amendments will not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. The cumulative effect of these changes includes the replacement of LIBOR with Term SOFR as the benchmark interest rate for all remaining credit facilities. As such, we adopted ASU 2020-04, as discussed in Note 2-Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, which will allow us to continue to apply hedge accounting to our outstanding interest rate swap contracts and terminated or novated interest rate swap contracts for which the hedged interest rate transactions are still probable of occurring.
As of July 30, 2022, we had an aggregate of $1,229 million of floating rate notional debt subject to active interest rate swap contracts, which effectively hedge the SOFR component of our interest rate payments through pay fixed and receive floating interest rate swap agreements. These fixed rates range from 1.795% to 2.875%, with maturities between August 2022 and October 2025. The fair value of these interest rate derivatives represents a total net asset of $2 million and are subject to volatility based on changes in market interest rates. In fiscal 2021, we paid $17 million to terminate or novate $1,204 million of interest rate swap contracts over our floating rate notional debt. The termination payments reflect the amount of accumulated other comprehensive loss that will continue to be amortized into interest expense over the original interest rate swap contract terms as long as the hedged interest rate transactions are still probable of occurring. See Note 8-Derivatives in Part II, Item 8 and -Interest Rate Risk in Part II,