ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion and analysis presented in this section should be read in conjunction with the "Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" included below the Table of Contents, "Risk Factors" included herein Item 1A, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8.
Executive Summary
2021 Operating Performance and Capital Management
For 2021, we reported net income of $824.2 million, or $4.02 per diluted common share, compared to net income of $793.0 million, or $3.89 per diluted common share, in 2020.
Included in our results for 2021 are:
•A net investment gain, excluding the net realized investment gain related to the second phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, of $9.1 million before tax and $7.2 million after tax, or $0.03 per diluted common share;
•The impact from the second phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, which resulted in a net loss of $71.7 million before tax and $56.7 million after tax, or $0.27 per diluted common share;
•Amortization of the cost of reinsurance of $79.1 million before tax and $62.3 million after tax, or $0.31 per diluted common share;
•A net reserve decrease related to assumption updates of $181.4 million before tax and $143.3 million after tax, or $0.70 per diluted common share;
•An impairment loss on internal-use software of $12.1 million before tax and $9.6 million after tax, or $0.05 per diluted common share;
•Cost related to the early retirement of debt of $67.3 million before tax and $53.2 million after tax, or $0.26 per diluted common share;
•An impairment loss on the right-of-use (ROU) asset relating to one of our operating leases of $13.9 million before tax and $11.0 million after tax, or $0.05 per diluted common share; and,
•Tax expense related to a U.K. tax rate increase of $24.2 million, or $0.12 per diluted common share.
Included in our 2020 results are:
•A net investment loss, excluding the net realized investment gain related to the first phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, of $103.2 million before tax and $82.3 million after tax, or $0.40 per diluted common share;
•The impact from the first phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, which resulted in a net loss of $3.2 million before tax and a net gain of $34.0 million after tax, or $0.17 per diluted common share;
•Amortization of the cost of reinsurance of $2.6 million before tax and $2.0 million after tax, or $0.01 per diluted common share;
•A reserve increase related to assumption updates of $169.0 million before tax and $133.5 million after tax, or $0.66 per diluted common share;
•Costs related to an organizational design update in the amount of $23.3 million before tax and $18.6 million after tax, or $0.09 per diluted common share; and,
•An impairment loss on the ROU asset related to one of our operating leases of $12.7 million before tax and $10.0 million after tax, or $0.05 million per diluted common share.
Adjusting for these items, after-tax adjusted operating income for 2021 was $890.7 million, or $4.35 per diluted common share compared to $1,005.4 million, or $4.93 per diluted common share for 2020. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP and Other Financial Measures" contained herein in this Item 7 for a reconciliation of these items.
Our Unum US segment reported a decrease in income before income tax and net investment gains and losses of 17.6 percent in 2021 compared to 2020, which includes a reserve decrease related to an assumption update in our group disability product line of $215.0 million. Excluding this item, our Unum US segment reported a decrease in adjusted operating income of 43.7 percent in 2021 compared to 2020, due to unfavorable benefits experience, particularly in the group disability and life product lines. The benefit ratio, excluding the previously discussed reserve decrease, for our Unum US segment for 2021 was 74.9 percent, compared to 68.8 percent in 2020. Unum US sales decreased 5.8 percent in 2021 compared to 2020. Overall persistency was generally consistent relative to the prior year period. See "Reserve Assumption Updates" contained herein for further discussion.
Our Unum International segment reported an increase in adjusted operating income, as measured in U.S. dollars, of 38.0 percent in 2021 compared to 2020. As measured in local currency, our Unum UK line of business reported an increase in adjusted operating income of 33.3 percent compared to 2020 due primarily to higher net investment income and lower operating expenses, partially offset by unfavorable benefits experience. The benefit ratio for our Unum UK line of business was 79.6 percent in 2021 compared to 78.9 percent in 2020. Unum International sales, as measured in U.S. dollars, increased 16.9 percent in 2021 compared to 2020. Unum UK sales, as measured in local currency, increased 7.6 percent in 2021 compared to 2020. Overall persistency was higher relative to the prior year period.
Our Colonial Life segment reported a slight decrease in adjusted operating income of 1.8 percent in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to lower premium income and unfavorable benefits experience, mostly offset by higher net investment income and lower operating expenses. The 2021 benefit ratio for Colonial Life was 53.9 percent, compared to 52.9 percent in 2020. Colonial Life sales increased 16.1 percent in 2021 compared to 2020. Overall persistency was higher relative to the prior year period.
Our Closed Block segment reported income before income tax and net investment gains and losses of $142.7 million in 2021, which includes reserve increases related to the assumption updates, the impact related to the second phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, and the amortization of the cost of reinsurance, compared to a loss of $1,235.7 million in 2020, which includes reserve increases related to the assumption updates, the impact related to the first phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, and the amortization of the cost of reinsurance. Excluding these items, our Closed Block segment reported adjusted operating income of $394.7 million in 2021 compared to $241.4 million in 2020. The long-term care interest adjusted loss ratio for 2021, excluding the reserve assumption updates, was less favorable compared to 2020 but continues to be lower than our long-term expectations. The individual disability interest adjusted loss ratio, excluding the reserve assumption update in 2021 and the reserve recognition impacts from both phases of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, was favorable in 2021 compared to 2020. See "Reserve Assumption Updates" and "Closed Block Individual Disability Reinsurance Transaction" contained herein for further discussion.
Our net investment income yields continue to be pressured by the low interest rate environment as we maintain consistent credit quality in our invested asset portfolio. The net unrealized gain on our fixed maturity securities was $5.9 billion at December 31, 2021, compared to $7.6 billion at December 31, 2020, with the decrease due primarily to an increase in U.S. Treasury rates. The earned book yield on our investment portfolio increased to 4.85 percent for 2021 compared to a yield of 4.75 percent for 2020 driven primarily by increases in the net asset values (NAV) of our private equity partnerships in 2021.
We believe our capital and financial positions are strong. At December 31, 2021, the RBC ratio for our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 395 percent, which is in line with our expectations. We repurchased 1.9 million shares of Unum Group common stock under our share repurchase program, at a cost of approximately $50 million during 2021. Our weighted average common shares outstanding, assuming dilution, equaled 204.8 million for 2021 compared to 203.8 million for 2020. As of December 31, 2021, Unum Group and our intermediate holding companies had available holding company liquidity of $1,515 million that was held primarily in bank deposits, commercial paper, money market funds, corporate bonds, and asset-backed securities.
Closed Block Individual Disability Reinsurance Transaction
In December 2020, we completed the first phase of a reinsurance transaction, pursuant to which Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company, The Paul Revere Life Insurance Company, and Unum Life Insurance Company of America, wholly-owned domestic insurance subsidiaries of Unum Group, and collectively referred to as "the ceding companies", each entered into separate reinsurance agreements with Commonwealth Annuity and Life Insurance Company (Commonwealth), to reinsure on a coinsurance basis effective as of July 1, 2020, approximately 75 percent of the Closed Block individual disability business, primarily direct business written by the ceding companies. In March 2021, we completed the second phase of the reinsurance transaction, pursuant to which the ceding companies and Commonwealth amended and restated their respective reinsurance agreements to reinsure on a coinsurance and modified coinsurance basis effective as of January 1, 2021, a substantial portion of the remaining Closed Block individual disability business that was not ceded in December 2020, primarily business previously assumed by the ceding companies. Commonwealth established and will maintain collateralized trust accounts for the benefit of the ceding companies to secure its obligations under the reinsurance agreements.
In December 2020, Provident Life and Casualty Insurance Company (PLC), also a wholly-owned domestic insurance subsidiary of Unum Group, entered into an agreement with Commonwealth whereby PLC will provide a 12-year volatility cover to Commonwealth for the active life cohort (ALR cohort). As part of this agreement, PLC received a payment from Commonwealth of approximately $62 million. On March 31, 2021, PLC and Commonwealth amended and restated this agreement to incorporate the ALR cohort related to the additional business that was reinsured between the ceding companies and Commonwealth as part of the second phase of the transaction. As part of the amended and restated volatility cover, PLC received a payment from Commonwealth of approximately $18 million. At the end of the 12-year coverage period, Commonwealth will retain the remaining incidence and claims risk on the ALR cohort of the ceded business.
In connection with the first phase of the reinsurance transaction which occurred in December 2020, the ceding companies paid a total ceding commission to Commonwealth of $437.7 million. In connection with the second phase of the reinsurance transaction which occurred in March 2021, Commonwealth paid a ceding commission to the ceding companies of $18.2 million. The ceding companies transferred assets, which consisted primarily of cash and fixed maturity securities, of $6,669.8 million and $767.0 million for the first phase in December 2020 and the second phase in March 2021, respectively. In addition, we recognized the following items for the first phase in December 2020 and the second phase in March 2021, respectively:
•Net realized investment gains totaling $1,302.3 million and $67.6 million before tax, or $1,028.8 million and $53.4 million after tax, related to the transfer of investments.
•Increase in benefits and change in reserves for future benefits of $1,284.5 million and $133.1 million, or $1,014.7 million and $105.1 million after tax, resulting from the realization of previously unrealized investment gains and losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income.
•Transaction costs totaling $21.0 million and $6.2 million, or $16.6 million and $5.0 million after tax.
•Reinsurance recoverable of $6,141.5 million and $990.0 million related to the policies on claim status (DLR cohort).
•Cost of reinsurance, or prepaid reinsurance premium, of $815.7 million and $43.1 million related to the DLR cohort. The related amortization of the cost of reinsurance was $2.6 million and $79.1 million, or $2.0 million and $62.3 million after tax.
•Deposit asset of $88.2 million and $5.0 million related to the ALR cohort.
•Tax benefit of $36.5 million, in connection with the first phase.
•Payable of $307.2 million related to the portfolio of invested assets associated with the business ceded on a modified coinsurance basis, in connection with the second phase.
We released approximately $200 million of capital during the first quarter of 2021 in addition to the $400 million that was released in December 2020. See "Reinsurance" contained herein in Item 1; "Segment Results," and "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Cash Available from Subsidiaries" contained herein in Item 7, and Notes 12 and 16 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the impacts related to this reinsurance transaction.
Reserve Assumption Updates
During the third quarter of 2021, we completed our annual review of policy and claim reserve adequacy, which incorporated our most recent experience and included a review of all material assumptions. Based on our analysis, during the third quarter of 2021, we updated our reserve assumptions to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations and determined that our claim reserves should be reduced by $215.0 million before tax, or $169.9 million after tax, in our Unum US group long-term disability product line due primarily to sustained improvement in claim recovery trends since our last assumption update. We also increased our claim reserves for our Closed Block long-term care and individual disability product lines by $2.1 million and $6.4 million before tax, or $1.7 million and $5.1 million after tax, respectively. We determined that our policy reserves should be increased by $25.1 million before tax, or $19.8 million after tax, in our Closed Block group pension product line to reflect updated discount rate assumptions.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed our annual review of policy and claim reserve adequacy, which incorporated our most recent experience and included a review of all material assumptions. Based on our analysis, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we updated our reserve assumptions to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations and determined that our gross policy and claim reserves should be increased by $151.5 million before tax, or $119.7 million after tax, for our Closed Block long-term care product line due primarily to an update to our interest rate assumptions, partially offset by favorable premium rate increase approvals and inventory updates. Also during the fourth quarter of 2020, we updated our reserve assumptions and determined that our policy and claim reserves should be increased by $17.5 million before tax, or $13.8 million after tax, in our Closed Block group pension product line to reflect updated discount rate assumptions.
For further information related to the reserve assumption updates, see "Trends in Key Assumptions" contained herein in the "Critical Accounting Estimates" of this Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained in Item 8.
Impairment Loss on Internal-Use Software
During the third quarter of 2021, we recognized an impairment loss of $12.1 million before tax, or $9.6 million after tax, for previously capitalized internal-use software that we no longer plan to utilize. We determined that this internal-use software would no longer be developed in order to focus our efforts on the development of software that better supports our long-term strategic goals. For further information related to the impairment loss on internal-use software, see Note 13 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained in Item 8.
Impairment Losses on ROU Asset
During the second quarters of 2021 and 2020, we recognized impairment losses of $13.9 million and $12.7 million before tax, respectively, or $11.0 million and $10.0 million after tax, on the ROU asset related to one of our operating leases for office space that we do not plan to continue using to support our general operations. The impairment losses were recorded as a result of a decrease in the fair value of the ROU asset compared to its carrying value. For further information related to the impairment losses on the ROU asset, see Note 15 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained in Item 8.
Costs Related to Organizational Design Update
During the third quarter of 2020, we realigned certain parts of our organizational structure by shifting resources to accelerate growth, fund priority investments, and simplify and improve our business practices. In connection with this update, we incurred charges of $23.3 million before tax, or $18.6 million after tax, which primarily consisted of employee severance and benefit costs as well as costs related to lease terminations and the disposal of certain fixed assets. This update did not result in the exit or disposal of any of our lines of business.
U.K. Tax Law Change
On June 10, 2021, the Finance Act 2021 was enacted, resulting in a U.K. tax rate increase from 19 percent to 25 percent, effective April 1, 2023, which resulted in $24.2 million of additional tax expense in operating earnings for the revaluation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities in 2021. On July 22, 2020, the Finance Act 2020 was enacted, resulting in a U.K. tax rate increase from 17 percent to 19 percent, retroactively effective April 1, 2020, which resulted in $9.3 million of additional tax expense in operating earnings for the revaluation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities in 2020.
U.K. Referendum
On January 31, 2020, an official bill was passed formalizing the withdrawal of the U.K. from the European Union (EU). A deal was reached on December 24, 2020 on the future trading relationship with the EU, which focused primarily on the trading of goods rather than the U.K.’s service sector. A memorandum of understanding on regulatory cooperation was signed by the U.K. and EU in March 2021, but no agreement on the equivalence of the regulatory regimes has yet been reached. The U.K. government is now reviewing the regulatory framework of financial services companies which may result in changes to U.K. regulatory capital or U.K. tax regulations. We do not expect that the underlying operations of our U.K. business, nor the Polish business which is in the EU, will be significantly impacted by the withdrawal, but it is possible that we may experience some short-term volatility in financial markets, which could impact the fair value of investments, our solvency ratios, or the British pound sterling to dollar exchange rate. See "Regulation" contained herein in Item 1, "Risk Factors" contained herein in Item 1A, and "Unum International Segment" contained herein in this Item 7.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization identified the spread of COVID-19 as a pandemic. COVID-19 continues to cause significant disruption to the global economy and has unfavorably impacted our company as well as the overall insurance industry. Due to the volatile and unprecedented nature of these events, we still cannot fully estimate the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to closely monitor pandemic trends that have and may continue to have adverse impacts on our business.
Results of Operations
We continue to see some pressure on our overall sales resulting from the impacts of COVID-19 including increased competition in the large-case market while we maintain risk and pricing discipline. Though we experienced improvements in sales activity during 2021 in certain of our product lines, if we continue to experience disruptions, our premium income in our principal operating segments may continue to be impacted. In addition, in certain of our product lines, we continued to see pressure in the number of lives insured with our customers as they navigated the current environment. With respect to premium collectability, as our outlook regarding the economic environment and the financial condition of our customers improved, we began to reduce the allowance for expected credit losses on our premiums receivable balances that we established during 2020. However, circumstances may deteriorate quickly which could result in the decline of persistency levels and sales growth in the near term, and potentially longer if the impacts of the pandemic persist, which may materially impact our results of operations.
We have experienced higher mortality in our life product lines and higher claim incidence in certain of our disability product lines. In the second half of 2021, we also experienced elevated mortality among working-age individuals who are covered by our Unum US group life and voluntary benefits products lines and typically have higher benefit amounts. With respect to our long-term care product line, we have experienced higher claimant mortality. We continue to monitor the benefits experience of all our products for trends potentially correlated with COVID-19. For further discussion regarding the benefits experience for each of our operating business segments, see "Segment Results" herein in this Item 7. See Notes 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information on our allowances for credit losses.
Financial Condition
Investments
We continue to monitor capital market activity on a regular basis and to the extent that there is increased volatility and ratings downgrades related to the issuers of our fixed maturity securities, we could experience further credit losses, an increase in defaults, and the need for additional capital in our insurance subsidiaries. However, we remain confident in the overall strength and credit quality of our investment portfolio.
Other
As a result of lower profitability in the short-term in our Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment product line, largely driven by the higher level of mortality experienced, we deferred less acquisition costs in 2021 which also lowered the profitability of that product line. If we continue to experience unfavorable trends in the above areas of focus, including a decline in persistency or a decline in profitability of the underlying business, our ability to defer acquisition costs may continue to be affected and we may also experience certain additional, correlated impacts such as an increase in the amortization of deferred acquisition costs, the write-off or impairment of certain assets such as premiums receivable, reinsurance recoverable, property and equipment, ROU assets, value of business acquired and goodwill. Furthermore, if the profitability of our businesses declines, we may also be required to establish a valuation allowance regarding the realization of our deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have strengthened our liquidity position through actions such as maintaining a high level of short-term investments and a high level of collateral posted with the regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB) from certain of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries. In November 2021, we entered into a 20-year facility agreement with a Delaware trust that gives us the right to issue and to sell to the trust, up to $400.0 million of 4.046% senior notes in exchange for a corresponding amount of U.S. Treasury securities held by the trust. We believe we have the appropriate liquidity and access to capital to avoid significant disruption to our operations. We have not yet experienced a significant impact to our liquidity as a result of the collection of premiums and submitted claims activity; however, we continually monitor the developments of these items. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources" contained herein in this Item 7, and Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information on the facility agreement with a Delaware trust.
As of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed $160.9 million of funds through our memberships with the regional FHLBs. Those funds are used for the purpose of investing in either short-term investments or fixed maturity securities, and we have additional borrowing capacity of approximately $992 million that can be utilized for liquidity if the need arises. Additionally, we have access to an unsecured revolving credit facility that allows us to borrow up to a total of $500.0 million. There are currently no outstanding borrowings on this facility, but we remain in compliance with required covenants should we choose to borrow in the future. We have no significant upcoming debt maturities until 2024. We continue to meet the financial covenants contained in our current debt agreements and credit facilities, and we expect that we will continue to meet those covenants in subsequent periods.
To the extent that we begin to experience a significant impact to our liquidity, we would likely suspend planned share repurchases, sell highly liquid invested assets and/or borrow funds on our credit facility to meet operational cash flow requirements.
Business Operations
We have not experienced a significant disruption to our operational processes as a result of COVID-19. We have been able to successfully implement our business continuation plans to accommodate remote work arrangements for the safety of our employees and customers. We also have not experienced significant disruption to our financial reporting systems or internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures as a result of COVID-19.
For further information, see "Risk Factors" contained herein in Item 1A.
Consolidated Company Outlook for 2022
We believe our strategy of providing financial protection products at the workplace puts us in a position of strength. The products and services we provide have never been more important to employers, employees and their families, especially given the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to fulfill our corporate purpose of helping the working world thrive throughout life’s moments by providing excellent service to people at their time of need. Our strategy remains centered on growing our core businesses, through investing and transforming our operations and technology to anticipate and respond to the changing needs of our customers, expanding into new adjacent markets through meaningful partnerships and effective deployment of our capital across our portfolio.
Our near-term results will be influenced by COVID trends, specifically the mortality rate in the working-age individuals and the rate and severity of infections. As the pandemic impacts lessen, we anticipate seeing a recovery in our core business earnings
from the underlying strength of our business. We expect positive operating trends in our core businesses during 2022, with solid premium growth and improving claim experience as impacts from COVID-19 lessen.
The low interest rate environment continues to place pressure on our profit margins by impacting net investment income yields as well as potentially discount rates on our insurance liabilities. We also may continue to experience further volatility in miscellaneous investment income primarily related to changes in partnership net asset values and bond call activity.
As part of our discipline in pricing and reserving, we continuously monitor emerging claim trends and interest rates. We will continue to take appropriate pricing actions on new business and renewals that are reflective of the current environment.
Our business is well-diversified by geography, industry exposures and case size, and we continue to analyze and employ strategies that we believe will help us navigate the current environment. These strategies allow us to maintain financial flexibility to support the needs of our businesses, while also returning capital to our shareholders. We have strong core businesses that have a track record of generating significant capital, and we will continue to invest in our operations and expand into adjacent markets where we can best leverage our expertise and capabilities to capture market growth opportunities as those opportunities emerge. We believe that consistent operating results, combined with the implementation of strategic initiatives and the effective deployment of capital, will allow us to meet our financial objectives.
Further discussion is included in "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures," "Consolidated Operating Results," "Segment Results," "Investments," and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" contained herein in this Item 7 and in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP and Other Financial Measures
We analyze our performance using non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company's performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measure of "after-tax adjusted operating income" differs from net income as presented in our consolidated operating results and income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of investment gains or losses and the amortization of the cost of reinsurance as well as certain other items as specified in the reconciliations below. Investment gains or losses primarily include realized investment gains or losses, expected investment credit losses, and gains or losses on derivatives. We believe after-tax adjusted operating income is a better performance measure and better indicator of the profitability and underlying trends in our business.
Investment gains or losses depend on market conditions and do not necessarily relate to decisions regarding the underlying business of our segments. Our investment focus is on investment income to support our insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of investment gains or losses. Although we may experience investment gains or losses which will affect future earnings levels, a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business since our underlying business is long-term in nature, and we need to earn the interest rates assumed in calculating our liabilities.
As previously discussed, we have exited a substantial portion of our Closed Block individual disability product line through the two phases of the reinsurance transaction that were executed in December 2020 and March 2021. As a result, we exclude the amortization of the cost of reinsurance that was recognized upon the exit of the business related to the DLR cohort of policies. We believe that the exclusion of the amortization of the cost of reinsurance provides a better view of our results from our ongoing businesses.
We may at other times exclude certain other items from our discussion of financial ratios and metrics in order to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur and does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of our overall profitability.
See "Executive Summary" contained herein in Item 7 and Notes 3, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, and 15 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion regarding the items specified in the reconciliations below.
A reconciliation of GAAP financial measures to our non-GAAP financial measures is as follows:
We measure and analyze our segment performance on the basis of "adjusted operating revenue" and "adjusted operating income" or "adjusted operating loss", which differ from total revenue and income before income tax as presented in our consolidated statements of income due to the exclusion of investment gains and losses and the amortization of the cost of reinsurance as well as certain other items as specified in the reconciliations below. These performance measures are in accordance with GAAP guidance for segment reporting, but they should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenue, income before income tax, or net income.
A reconciliation of total revenue to "adjusted operating revenue" and income before income tax to "adjusted operating income" is as follows:
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates and assumptions could change in the future as more information becomes known, which could impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our financial statements. The accounting estimates deemed to be most critical to our financial position and results of operations are those related to reserves for policy and contract benefits, deferred acquisition costs, valuation of investments, pension and postretirement benefit plans, income taxes, and contingent liabilities. For additional information, refer to our significant accounting policies in Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits
Reserves for policy and contract benefits are our largest liabilities and represent claims that we estimate we will eventually pay to our policyholders. The two primary categories of reserves are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred or are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to us. Reserves for policy and contract benefits equaled $45.3 billion each at December 31, 2021 and 2020, or approximately 77.1 percent and 75.8 percent of our total liabilities, respectively. Reserves ceded to reinsurers were $13.5 billion and $13.2 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020 and are reported as a reinsurance recoverable in our consolidated balance sheets.
Policy Reserves
Policy reserves are established in the same period we issue a policy and equal the difference between projected future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves relate primarily to our non-interest sensitive products, including our individual disability and voluntary benefits products in our Unum US segment; individual disability and life products in our Unum International segment; voluntary benefits products in our Colonial Life segment; and individual disability, long-term care, and other products in our Closed Block segment. The reserves are calculated based on assumptions that were appropriate at the date the policy was issued and are not subsequently modified unless the policy reserves become inadequate (i.e. loss recognition occurs).
•Persistency assumptions are based on our actual historical experience adjusted for future expectations.
•Claim incidence and claim resolution rate assumptions related to mortality and morbidity are based on actual experience or industry standards adjusted as appropriate to reflect our actual experience and future expectations.
•Discount rate assumptions are based on our current and expected net investment returns.
In establishing policy reserves, we use assumptions that reflect our best estimate while considering the potential for adverse variances in actual future experience, which results in a total policy reserve balance that has an embedded reserve for adverse deviation. We do not, however, establish an explicit and separate reserve as a provision for adverse deviation from our assumptions.
We perform loss recognition tests on our policy reserves annually, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test, without a provision for adverse deviation. We group the policy reserves for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition tests. If the policy reserves determined using these best estimate assumptions are higher than our existing policy reserves net of any deferred acquisition cost balance, the existing policy reserves are increased or deferred acquisition costs are reduced to immediately recognize the deficiency. Thereafter, the policy reserves for the product line are calculated using the same method we used for the loss recognition testing, referred to as the gross premium valuation method, wherein we use our best estimate as of the gross premium valuation (loss recognition) date rather than the initial policy issue date to determine the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future gross premiums we will receive.
Because the key policy reserve assumptions for policy persistency, mortality and morbidity, and discount rates are all locked in at policy issuance based on assumptions appropriate at that time, policy reserve assumptions are generally not changed due to a change in claim status from active to disabled subsequent to policy issuance. Depending on the funding mechanism, a full policy reserve is held during disability reflecting continued funding of the full policy reserve during a disability claim, or a fractional policy reserve is held reflecting that the individual policyholder would need to recover before he or she can again generate future claims for a separate occurrence. The policy reserves build up and release over time based on assumptions made at the time of policy issuance such that the reserve is eliminated as policyholders either reach the terminal age for coverage, die, or voluntarily lapse the policy. Policy reserves for Unum US, Unum International, and Colonial Life products are determined using the net
level premium method as prescribed by GAAP. In applying this method, we use, as applicable by product type, morbidity and mortality incidence rate assumptions, claim resolution rate assumptions, and policy persistency assumptions, among others, to determine our expected future claim payments and expected future premium income. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims and claim expenses we will pay and the expected future premiums we will receive, with a provision for profit allowed.
Policy reserves for our Closed Block segment include certain older policy forms for individual disability, individual and group long-term care, and certain other products, all of which are no longer actively marketed. The reserves for individual disability and individual and group long-term care are determined using the gross premium valuation method. Key assumptions are persistency, mortality and morbidity, claim incidence, claim resolution rates, commission rates, and maintenance expense rates. For long-term care, premium rate increases are also a key assumption. We apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay as well as the expected future premiums we will receive, with no provision for future profit. The interest rate is based on our expected net investment returns on the investment portfolio supporting the reserves for these blocks of business. Under the gross premium valuation method, we do not include an embedded provision for the risk of adverse deviation from these assumptions. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient in the future.
Policy reserves for certain other products, excluding individual disability and individual and group long-term care, which are no longer actively marketed and are reported in our Closed Block segment represent $5.7 billion on a gross basis. We have ceded $5.0 billion of reserves related to these other products, which are primarily comprised of policy reserves, to reinsurers. The ceded reserve balance is reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a reinsurance recoverable. We continue to service a block of group pension products, which we have not ceded, and the policy reserves for these products are based on expected mortality rates and retirement rates. Expected future payments are discounted at interest rates reflecting the anticipated investment returns for the assets supporting the liabilities.
Claim Reserves
Claim reserves are established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported (IBNR) to us and, as prescribed by GAAP, equals our long-term best estimate of the present value of the liability for future claim payments and claim adjustment expenses. A claim reserve is based on actual known facts regarding the claim, such as the benefits available under the applicable policy, the covered benefit period, the age, and, as appropriate, the occupation and cause of disability of the claimant, as well as assumptions derived from our actual historical experience and expected future changes in experience for factors such as the claim duration, discount rate, and policy benefit offsets, including those for social security and other government-based welfare benefits. Reserves for IBNR claims, similar to incurred claim reserves, include our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates, but because we do not yet know the facts regarding the specific claims, these reserves are also established based on historical incidence rate assumptions, including claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Our incurred claim reserves and IBNR claim reserves do not include any provision for the risk of adverse deviation from our assumptions.
Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that our claim reserves are appropriate. If we believe, based on our actual experience and our view of future events, that our long-term assumptions need to be modified, we adjust our reserves accordingly with a charge or credit to our current period income.
Multiple estimation methods exist to establish claim reserve liabilities, with each method having its own advantages and disadvantages. Available reserving methods utilized to calculate claim reserves include the tabular reserve method, the paid loss development method, the incurred loss development method, the count and severity method, and the expected claim cost method. No single method is better than the others in all situations and for all product lines. The estimation methods we have chosen are those that we believe produce the most reliable reserves.
We use a tabular reserve methodology on reported claims for our Unum US group long-term disability and individual disability claims as well as for our Closed Block individual disability and group and individual long-term care claims. Under the tabular reserve methodology, reserves for reported claims are based on certain characteristics of the actual reported claimants, such as age, length of time disabled, and medical diagnosis, as well as assumptions regarding claim duration, discount rate, and policy benefit offsets. We believe the tabular reserve method is the most accurate to calculate long-term liabilities and allows us to use the most available known facts about each claim. IBNR claim reserves for our long-term products are calculated using the count and severity method using historical patterns of the claims to be reported and the associated claim costs. For Unum US group short-term disability products, an estimate of the value of future payments to be made on claims already submitted, as well as on
IBNR claims, is determined in aggregate using a paid loss development method rather than on the individual claimant basis that we use for reported claims on long-term products. The average length of time between the event triggering a claim under a policy and the final resolution of those claims is much shorter for these products than for our long-term liabilities and results in less estimation variability.
Claim reserves for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are related primarily to death claims reported but not yet paid, IBNR death claims, and a liability for waiver of premium benefits. The death claim reserve is based on the actual face amount to be paid, the IBNR reserve is calculated using the paid loss development method, and the waiver of premium benefits reserve is calculated using the tabular reserve methodology.
Claim reserves supporting the group and individual dental and vision products reported in our Unum US and Colonial Life segments have a short claim payout period. As a result, the reserves, which primarily represent IBNR and a small amount of claims pending payment, are calculated using the paid loss development method.
Claim reserves supporting our Unum International segment are calculated using generally the same methodology that we use for Unum US disability and group term life reserves. Claim reserves for our Unum UK group dependent life product are calculated using discounted cash flows, based on our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates. The assumptions used in calculating claim reserves for this segment are based on standard country-specific industry experience, adjusted for our own experience.
The majority of the Colonial Life segment and the Unum US voluntary line of business have short-term benefits, which generally have less estimation variability than our long-term products because of the shorter claim payout period. Claim reserving methods may vary by product depending on the nature of the liability. Our claim reserves for the Colonial Life segment and the Unum US voluntary line of business are predominantly determined using the incurred loss development method based on our own experience. The incurred loss development method uses the historical patterns of payments by loss date to predict future claim payments for each loss date. Where the incurred loss development method may not be appropriate, we estimate the incurred claims using an expected claim cost per policy or other measure of exposure. The key assumptions for claim reserves for the Colonial Life segment and the Unum US voluntary line of business are the timing, rate, and amount of estimated future claim payments; and the estimated expenses associated with the payment of claims.
The following table displays policy reserves, incurred claim reserves, and IBNR claim reserves by major product line, with the summation of the policy reserves and claim reserves shown both gross and net of the associated reinsurance recoverable. Incurred claim reserves represent the expected benefits payable under each incurred claim, along with other expenses associated with the payment of the claims. IBNR claim reserves include provisions for incurred but not reported claims and a provision for reopened claims for our disability products. The IBNR and reopened claim reserves for our disability products are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring. Impacting year over year comparability of policy and claim reserves in the following chart are the 2021 reserve assumptions updates for our Unum US group disability, Closed Block long-term care, Closed Block individual disability and Closed Block other product lines as well as the second phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction that we entered into in March 2021. See "Executive Summary" contained herein in this Item 7 and Notes 6 and 12 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion.
Key Assumptions
The calculation of policy and claim reserves involves numerous assumptions, but the primary assumptions used to calculate reserves are (1) the discount rate, (2) the claim resolution rate, and (3) the claim incidence rate for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves. Of these assumptions, our discount rate and claim resolution rate assumptions have historically had the most significant effects on our level of reserves because many of our product lines provide benefit payments over an extended period of time.
1.The discount rate, which is used in calculating both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the interest rate that we use to discount future claim payments to determine the present value. A higher discount rate produces a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to support our future claim payments. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. We set our assumptions based on our current and expected future investment yield of the assets supporting the reserves, considering current and expected future market conditions. If the investment yield on new investments that are purchased differs from the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, the discount rate assumption on claims may be adjusted to reflect the impact of the new investment yield.
2.The claim resolution rate, used for both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the probability that a disability or long-term care claim will close due to recovery or death of the insured. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. Claim resolution assumptions involve many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder's age, the type of contractual benefits provided, and the time since initial disability. We primarily use our own
claim experience to develop our claim resolution assumptions. These assumptions are established for the probability of death and the probability of recovery from disability. Our studies review actual claim resolution experience over a number of years, with more weight placed on our experience in the more recent years. We also consider any expected future changes in claim resolution experience.
3.The incidence rate, used for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves, is the rate at which new claims are submitted to us. The incidence rate is affected by many factors, including the age of the insured, the insured's occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. We establish our incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations.
Establishing reserve assumptions is complex and involves many factors. Reserves, particularly for policies offering insurance coverage for long-term disabilities and long-term care, are dependent on numerous assumptions other than just those presented in the preceding discussion. The impact of internal and external events, such as changes in claims operational procedures, economic trends such as the rate of unemployment and the level of consumer confidence, the emergence of new diseases, new trends and developments in medical treatments, and legal trends and legislative changes, including changes to social security and other government-based welfare benefits programs which provide policy benefit offsets, among other factors, may influence claim incidence rates, claim resolution rates, and claim costs. In addition, for policies offering coverage for disability or long-term care at advanced ages, the level and pattern of mortality rates at advanced ages will impact overall benefit costs. Reserve assumptions differ by product line and by policy type within a product line. Additionally, in any period and over time, our actual experience may have a positive or negative variance from our long-term assumptions, either singularly or collectively, and these variances may offset each other. We test the overall adequacy of our reserves using all assumptions and with a long-term view of our expected experience over the life of a block of business rather than test just one or a few assumptions independently that may be aberrant over a short period of time. Therefore, while it is possible to evaluate the sensitivity of overall adequacy results in our reserves based upon a change in each individual assumption, the actual impacts of changes to a variety of underlying assumptions must be considered in the aggregate by product line in order to judge the overall potential implications to reserve adequacy. The following section presents an overview of our trend analysis for key assumptions and the results of variability in our assumptions, in aggregate, for the reserves which we believe are reasonably possible to have a material impact on our future financial results if actual claims yield a materially different amount than what we currently expect and have reserved for, either favorable or unfavorable. In December 2020, we reinsured the majority of our Closed Block individual disability business pursuant to a reinsurance transaction with Commonwealth. In March 2021, we completed the second phase of the reinsurance transaction to reinsure a substantial portion of the remaining Closed Block individual disability business that was not ceded in December 2020, primarily business that was previously assumed. As a result, we are no longer incorporating this block of business into our discussion of trends in key assumptions below.
Trends in Key Assumptions
Our view on long-term mortality and morbidity expectations has not been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, given the limited experience relative to the long-term nature of our products, the extraordinary nature of the event, and the fast pace of medical advancements to fight the disease. We have experienced elevated mortality across our life product lines largely resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, and at this time we anticipate the mortality impacts of the pandemic may persist in the short-term.
We have also experienced elevated disability claims incidence rates largely resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic including, in our belief, the related impact on the social and economic environment. We have, at times, experienced an increase in our group long-term disability morbidity claim incidence trends during and following a recessionary period and believe claim incidence trends may continue to follow general economic conditions and shifts in the demographics of the general workforce.
Generally, we do not expect our persistency trends to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time.
Although both short-term and long-term interest rates increased slightly in 2021, the long-term interest rates supporting the majority of our lines of business remain below historical norms. The assumptions we used to discount reserves during this period were slightly lower than historical levels for certain of our product lines. Reserve discount rate assumptions for new policies and new claims are periodically adjusted to reflect our current and expected net investment returns. Changes in our average discount rate assumptions tend to occur gradually over a longer period of time because of the long-duration investment portfolios which support the reserves for the majority of our lines of business.
Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period, both favorably and unfavorably. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and have a greater chance of significant variability in a shorter period of time than our other reserve assumptions. These rates are reviewed on a quarterly basis for the death and recovery components separately. While claim resolution rates in our Unum US group long-term disability product line have shown some variability over the last several years, they have exhibited an increasing trend.
We monitor and test our reserves for adequacy relative to all of our assumptions in the aggregate. In our estimation, scenarios based on reasonably possible variations in each of our reserve assumptions for our Unum US group long-term disability product could produce a change of $100 million which represents 1.7 percent of our reserve balance. Of the assumptions impacting the estimated change in reserves, the largest contributor is the claim resolution rate for which we assumed a change of approximately 10 percent.
In addition to our Unum US group long-term disability line of business, we consider variability in our reserve assumptions related to long-term care policy reserves. These reserves are held under the gross premium valuation method and do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. As such, positive developments will result in the accumulation of reserve margin, while adverse developments would result in an additional reserve charge. Policy reserves for long-term care are based upon a number of key assumptions, and each assumption has various factors which may impact the long-term outcome. Key assumptions with respect to morbidity, mortality, claims incidence and resolutions, persistency, interest rates, and future premium rate increases must incorporate extended views of expectations for many years into the future. Reserves are highly sensitive to these estimates.
During the third quarter of 2021, we completed a review of policy and claim reserve adequacy, which incorporated our most recent experience and included a review of all material assumptions. Based on our analysis, during the third quarter of 2021, we updated our reserve assumptions to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations and determined that our claims reserves should be reduced by $215.0 million in our Unum US group long-term disability product line due primarily to sustained improvement in claim recovery trends since our last assumption update. We also increased our claim reserves for our Closed Block long-term care product line by $2.1 million.
Our long-term care discount rate assumption reflects our expectation that the low interest rate environment will continue to persist and our expected impact on future long-term care new money yield rates. Our expectation for long-term care new money yield rates assumes a 10-year treasury rate grading over a 7 year period, ending in 2025, to a rate of 3.25 percent, when we assume no further increase. Partially offsetting the impact from the discount rate assumption was a favorable update to our assumptions for premium rate increases based on approvals and inventory updates since the third quarter of 2018. The remaining key assumptions for our long-term care policy reserves remain materially unchanged from the third quarter of 2018.
Sensitivity analysis related to our key assumptions for long-term care reserves along with the potential impact to our reserve balance is as follows. This sensitivity analysis was completed as of the date of our assumption update in the fourth quarter of 2020 and will not be updated unless reserves are again determined to be deficient in the future.
Key assumptions and related impacts are also heavily interrelated in both their outcome and in their effects on reserves. For example, changes in the view of morbidity and mortality might be mitigated by either potential future premium rate increases
and/or morbidity improvements due to general improvement in health and/or medical breakthroughs. There is potentially a wide range of outcomes for each assumption and in totality.
We believe that these ranges provide a reasonable estimate of the possible changes in reserve balances for those product lines where we believe it is possible that variability in the assumptions, in the aggregate, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, but we record our reserves based on our long-term best estimate. Because these product lines have long-term claim payout periods, there is a greater potential for significant variability in claim costs, either positive or negative. We closely monitor emerging experience and use these results to inform our view of long-term assumptions.
Deferred Acquisition Costs (DAC)
We defer incremental direct costs associated with the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts and amortize these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral.
Approximately 93.4 percent of our DAC relates to non-interest sensitive products, and we amortize DAC for these products in proportion to the premium income we expect to receive over the life of the policies. DAC related to interest sensitive policies is amortized over the lives of the policies in relation to the present value of estimated gross profits from surrender charges, mortality margins, investment returns, and expense margins. Key assumptions used in developing the future amortization of DAC are persistency, premium income, and for our interest sensitive products, mortality margins and investment returns. We use our own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of our businesses in determining our assumptions. For non-interest sensitive products, the estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is generally higher than in the later years due to the anticipated cumulative effect of policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. Our key assumptions used to develop the future amortization of acquisition costs deferred during 2021 did not change materially from those used in 2020. Generally, we do not expect our key assumptions to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time.
Loss recognition and recoverability testing is performed on an annual basis, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as to future experience as of the date of the test. Insurance contracts are grouped for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition and recoverability tests. Key assumptions used in this testing include the discount rate, persistency and the claim assumptions. See "Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits" herein in this Item 7 for further discussion regarding loss recognition testing and the related key assumptions.
If loss recognition or recoverability testing indicates that deferred acquisition costs are not recoverable, the deficiency is charged to expense. Using our best estimate assumptions during the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that $15.1 million of acquisition costs related to the Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment product line were not recoverable driven by losses resulting from COVID-19 life claims, and, as a result these amounts were not deferred.
The following are our current assumptions regarding our DAC balances:
Amortization of DAC is adjusted to reflect actual experience for assumptions which deviate compared to the anticipated experience. Any deviations from projections may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. As an example, for our non-interest sensitive products, we may experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected, or we may experience a slower rate of amortization if policies persist longer than projected. Our actual experience has not varied materially from our assumptions during the last three years.
See Notes 1 and 13 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our DAC accounting policy and DAC activity.
Fair Value of Investments
All of our fixed maturity securities, which are classified as available-for-sale, and all of our unrestricted equity securities are reported at fair value. Our derivative financial instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts, are reported as either assets or liabilities and measured at fair value. We report our investments in private equity partnerships at our share of the partnerships' NAV per share or its equivalent , as a practical expedient for fair value.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and therefore represents an exit price, not an entry price. The exit price objective applies regardless of our intent and/or ability to sell the asset or transfer the liability at the measurement date. We generally use valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, and to a lesser extent, the income approach. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities and the income approach converts future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, to a single present amount, or a discounted amount. We believe the market approach valuation technique provides more observable data than the income approach, considering the types of investments we hold.
The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices in active markets generally have more pricing observability and less judgment utilized in measuring fair value. The market sources from which we obtain or derive the fair values of our assets and liabilities carried at market value include quoted market prices for actual trades, price quotes from third party pricing vendors, price quotes we obtain from outside brokers, discounted cash flow, and observable prices for similar publicly traded or privately traded issues that incorporate the credit quality and industry sector of the issuer. Our fair value measurements could differ significantly based on the valuation technique and available inputs.
Inputs to valuation techniques refer broadly to the assumptions that market participants use in pricing assets or liabilities, including assumptions about risk, for example, the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used to measure fair value and/or the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. We use observable and unobservable inputs in measuring the fair value of our financial instruments. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances.
Certain of our investments do not have readily determinable market prices and/or observable inputs or may at times be affected by the lack of market liquidity. For these securities, we use internally prepared valuations, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. We consider key assumptions, such as risk-free interest rates and risk premium adjustments, in the valuation of these types of securities. Additionally, we may obtain prices from independent third-party brokers to aid in establishing valuations for certain of these securities. Key assumptions used by us to determine fair value for these securities include risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involving significant assumptions which may or may not reflect those of an active market.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately 8.1 percent of our fixed maturity securities were categorized as Level 1, 89.4 percent as Level 2, and 2.5 percent as Level 3. Level 1 is the highest category of the three-level fair value hierarchy classification wherein inputs are unadjusted and represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. The Level 2 category includes assets or liabilities valued using inputs (other than those included in the Level 1 category) that are either directly or indirectly observable for the asset or liability through correlation with market data at the measurement date and for the duration of the instrument's anticipated life. The Level 3 category is the lowest category of the fair value hierarchy and reflects the judgment of management regarding what market participants would use in pricing assets or liabilities at the measurement date using unobservable inputs to extrapolate an estimated fair value.
Rapidly changing credit and equity market conditions can materially impact the valuation of securities, and the period to period changes in value can vary significantly.
See Note 2 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Investment Credit Losses
One of the significant estimates related to investments is our credit loss valuation. In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security represents a credit loss, we evaluate the following factors:
•Whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security
•Whether we intend to sell the security or will be required to sell the security before the recovery of its amortized cost basis
•Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments
•The significance of the decline in value
•Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings
•The valuation of the security’s underlying collateral
•Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles
•Market conditions
•Rating agency and governmental actions
•Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity
•Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments
•Changes in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date
•Any other key measures for the related security
We evaluate available information, including the factors noted above, both positive and negative, in reaching our conclusions. In particular, we also consider the strength of the issuer’s balance sheet, its debt obligations and near term funding requirements, cash flow and liquidity, the profitability of its core businesses, the availability of marketable assets which could be sold to increase liquidity, its industry fundamentals and regulatory environment, and its access to capital markets. Although all available and applicable factors are considered in our analysis, our expectation of recovering the entire amortized cost basis of the security, whether we intend to sell the security, whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost, and whether the security is current on principal and interest payments are the most critical factors in determining whether a credit loss is possible. The significance of the decline in value is also an important factor, but we generally do not record a credit loss based solely on this factor, since often other more relevant factors will impact our evaluation of a security.
While determining whether a credit loss exists is a judgmental area, we utilize a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate our fixed income investment portfolio, supported by issuer specific research and documentation as of the end of each period. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of credit losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have credit loss.
We use a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of our mortgage loans and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. We estimate an allowance for credit losses that we expect to incur over the life of our mortgage loans using a probability of default method. For each loan, we estimate the probability that the loan will default before its maturity (probability of default) and the amount of the loss if the loan defaults (loss given default). These two factors result in an expected loss percentage that is applied to the amortized cost of each loan to determine the expected credit loss. Mortgage loans are reported at amortized cost less the allowance for expected credit losses with the change in expected credit losses recognized as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of income.
There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring our investments for credit losses and determining when and if a credit loss exists. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities:
•The assessment of a borrower's ability to meet its contractual obligations will change.
•The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the investment may not recover in value.
•New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues.
•Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry.
•Significant increases in interest rates may occur and may not return to levels similar to when securities were initially purchased.
•Adverse rating agency actions may occur.
See Notes 1 and 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans
We sponsor several defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit (OPEB) plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans comprise the majority of our total benefit obligation and benefit cost. We maintain a separate defined benefit plan for eligible employees in our U.K. operation. The U.S. defined benefit pension plans were closed to new entrants on December 31, 2013, the OPEB plan was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2012, and the U.K. plan was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002.
Assumptions
Our net periodic benefit costs and the value of our benefit obligations for these plans are determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent our best estimate of future expected experience. Major assumptions used in accounting for these plans include the expected discount (interest) rate, the long-term rate of return on plan assets, and mortality rates. We also use, as applicable, expected increases in compensation levels and a weighted average annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered benefits, which reflects a health care cost trend rate, and the U.K. pension plan also uses expected cost of living increases to plan benefits.
The assumptions chosen for our pension and OPEB plans are reviewed annually, using a December 31 measurement date for each of our plans unless we are required to perform an interim remeasurement. The discount rate, expected long-term rate of return, and mortality rate assumptions have the most significant effect on our net periodic benefit costs associated with these plans. In addition to the effect of changes in our assumptions, the net periodic cost or benefit obligation under our pension and OPEB plans may change due to factors such as plan amendments, actual experience being different from our assumptions, special benefits to terminated employees, and/or changes in benefits provided under the plans.
•Discount rate - This interest assumption is based on the yield derived from a portfolio of high quality fixed income corporate debt instruments that reasonably match the timing and amounts of projected future benefits for each of our retirement-related benefit plans. The rate is determined at the measurement date. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases our net periodic benefit cost.
•Long-term rate of return - This assumption is selected from a range of probable return outcomes from an analysis of the asset portfolio. The market-related value as it relates to our estimate of long-term rate of return equals the fair value of plan assets, determined as of the measurement date. The return on plan assets recognizes all asset gains and losses, including changes in fair value, through the measurement date. Our expectations for the future investment returns of the asset categories are based on a combination of historical market performance, evaluations of investment forecasts obtained from external consultants and economists, and current market yields. The expected return for the total portfolio is calculated based on the plan's strategic asset allocation. The actual rate of return on plan assets is determined based on the fair value of the plan assets at the beginning and the end of the period, adjusted for contributions and benefit payments. A lower long-term rate of return on plan assets increases our net periodic benefit cost.
Investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through annual liability measurements, periodic asset/liability studies, and quarterly investment portfolio reviews. Risk tolerance is established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and corporate financial condition. We believe our investment portfolios are well diversified by asset class and sector, with no undue risk concentrations in any one category. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the investment portfolios for our plans.
•Mortality rate - This assumption reflects our best estimate, as of the measurement date, of the life expectancies of plan participants in order to determine the expected length of time for benefit payments. We derive our assumptions from industry mortality tables.
The weighted average assumptions used in the measurement of our net periodic benefit costs for the years ended December 31 are as follows:
The following illustrates the sensitivity of the below items to a 50 basis point change in the discount rate or the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets:
Benefit Obligation and Fair Value of Plan Assets
During 2021, the fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan increased $90.8 million, or 5.3 percent due to a favorable return on assets which resulted in a gain of approximately 9.8 percent, partially offset by the payment of benefits and expenses. The fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan increased £9.3 million, or 4.3 percent, due primarily to a favorable return on assets which resulted in a gain of approximately 6.1 percent. Although our rate of return on plan assets for 2021 exceeded our assumptions used in the measurement of our net periodic benefit costs, we believe our assumptions appropriately reflect the impact of the current economic environment and our expectations for the future investment returns based on the plan's asset allocation.
As of December 31, 2021, our pension and OPEB plans have an aggregate unrecognized net actuarial loss of $651.1 million and an unrecognized prior service credit of $1.9 million, which together represent the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses as well as the portion of prior service credits that have not been recognized in pension expense. The unrecognized net actuarial loss for our pension plans, which is $664.7 million at December 31, 2021, will be amortized over the average remaining life expectancy of the plan, which is approximately 25 years for the U.S. plan and 30 years for the U.K. plan, to the extent that it exceeds the 10 percent corridor, as described below. The unrecognized net actuarial gain of $13.6 million for our OPEB plan will be amortized over the average future working life of OPEB plan participants, estimated at two years, to the extent the gain is outside of the corridor. The corridor for the pension and OPEB plans is established based on the greater of 10 percent of the plan assets or 10 percent of the benefit obligation. At December 31, 2021, $400.2 million of the actuarial loss was outside of the corridor for the U.S. plans and £9.2 million was outside of the corridor for the U.K. plan. At December 31, 2021, $2.4 million of the actuarial gain was outside of the corridor for the OPEB plan.
The amortization of the unrecognized actuarial gain or loss and the unrecognized prior service credit is a component of our net periodic benefit cost and equaled $22.4 million, $19.7 million, and $18.4 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $1,801.7 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $1,710.9 million at December 31, 2020. The plan was in an underfunded position of $185.6 million and $339.0 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. This year-over-year change was due primarily to the decrease in the benefit obligation due to the increase in discount rate and a higher than expected return on plan assets.
The fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan was £224.4 million at December 31, 2021, compared to £215.1 million at December 31, 2020. The U.K. pension plan was in an overfunded position of £18.8 million and in an underfunded position of £4.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This year-over-year change was due primarily to the decrease in the benefit obligation due to the increase in discount rate and a higher than expected return on plan assets.
The fair value of plan assets in our OPEB plan was $9.0 million and $9.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These assets represent life insurance contracts to fund the life insurance benefit portion of our OPEB plan. Our OPEB plan represents a non-vested, non-guaranteed obligation, and current regulations do not require specific funding levels for these benefits, which are comprised of retiree life, medical, and dental benefits. It is our practice to use general assets to pay medical and dental claims as they come due in lieu of utilizing plan assets for the medical and dental benefit portions of our OPEB plan.
See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion.
Income Taxes
We provide for federal, state, and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as those deferred due to temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Our accounting for income taxes represents our best estimate of various events and transactions. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability.
We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining valuation allowances. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that we most likely will not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance is charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets will be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance is reversed.
In establishing a liability for unrecognized tax benefits, assumptions are made in determining whether, and to what extent, a tax position may be sustained. GAAP prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns. The evaluation of a tax position is a two step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The second step is to measure a position that satisfies the recognition threshold at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold but that now satisfy the recognition threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not recognition threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. If a previously recognized tax position is settled for an amount that is different from the amount initially measured, the difference will be recognized as a tax benefit or expense in the period the settlement is effective.
Changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on our provision for income tax and our effective tax rate, which could significantly affect the amounts reported in our financial statements.
See "Regulation" contained herein in Item 1. See Note 7 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Contingent Liabilities
On a quarterly basis, we review relevant information with respect to litigation and contingencies to be reflected in our consolidated financial statements. An estimated loss is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that our results of operations or cash flows in a particular period could be materially affected by an ultimate unfavorable outcome of pending litigation or regulatory matters depending, in part, on our results of operations or cash flows for the particular period. See Note 14 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Accounting Developments
In 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standard Update 2018-12, “Targeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts”. This update significantly amends the accounting and disclosure requirements for long-duration insurance contracts. These changes include a requirement to review and, if necessary, update cash flow assumptions used to measure the liability for future policy benefits for traditional and limited-payment contracts at least annually, with changes recognized in earnings. In addition, we will be required to update the discount rate assumption at each reporting date using a yield that is reflective of an upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument, with changes recognized in other comprehensive income. These changes result in the elimination of the provision for risk of adverse deviation and premium deficiency (or loss recognition) testing. We will adopt this guidance effective January 1, 2023 using the modified retrospective approach with changes applied as of the beginning of the earliest period presented or January 1, 2021, also referred to as the transition date.
We are continuing our implementation efforts and are evaluating the effects of complying with this update. We expect that the most significant impact at the transition date will be the requirement to update the discount rate assumption to reflect an upper-medium grade fixed-income instrument, which will be generally equivalent to a single-A interest rate matched to the duration of our insurance liabilities and will result in a decrease to accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) within our total stockholders’ equity balance of approximately $6.5 billion to $7 billion as of January 1, 2021. In order to illustrate the sensitivity of this adjustment, if we had used interest rates as of December 31, 2021, the transition adjustment would have been a decrease to AOCI and total stockholders' equity of approximately $5.8 billion to $6.3 billion. The decrease in AOCI is driven primarily by the difference between the discount rate currently applied, which is based on an expected investment yield from our current investment strategy, and the single-A discount rate that will be required for our longest duration products. Our investment strategy reflects the illiquid nature of the majority of our liability cash flows and results in yields in the investment portfolios supporting the cash outflows required for these products that are generally higher than a single-A yield. In addition, the current discount rate applied to reserves for very long liability duration products such as long-term care, include an assumption for long-term yields rising to more historical levels. After the transition date, we will be required to update the discount rate each subsequent reporting period with changes recorded in other comprehensive income (OCI) and expect that this could have a material impact on OCI.
We also expect that the adoption will have a material impact on our results of operations and will significantly expand our disclosures. We do not have products with market risk benefits.
Although this update will significantly impact our GAAP-based financial position and results of operations, the update will not impact cash flows, statutory-based financial position or results of operations, or our view of our businesses.
For information on new accounting standards and the impact, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Consolidated Operating Results
Fluctuations in exchange rates, particularly between the British pound sterling and the U.S. dollar for our U.K. operations, have an effect on our consolidated financial results. In periods when the pound weakens relative to the preceding period, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results relative to the prior period.
The weighted average pound/dollar exchange rate for our Unum UK line of business was 1.377, 1.287, and 1.279 for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. If the 2020 and 2019 results for our U.K. operations had been translated at the 2021 exchange rate, our adjusted operating revenue by segment would have been higher by approximately $49 million and $53 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Additionally, our adjusted operating income would have been higher by approximately $5 million and $8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. However, it is important to distinguish between translating and converting foreign currency. Except for a limited number of transactions, we do not actually convert pounds into dollars. As a result, we view foreign currency translation as a financial reporting item and not a reflection of operations or profitability in the U.K.
Premium income increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in our Unum US and Unum International segments, partially offset by a decrease in our Colonial Life segment. Premium income increased in 2020 compared to 2019 in each of our principal operating business segments, while premium income declined in our Closed Block segment.
Net investment income was lower in 2021, relative to 2020, due to a decrease in the level of invested assets supporting the Closed Block individual disability product line resulting from both phases of the previously discussed reinsurance transaction and a decline in the yield on invested assets, partially offset by higher miscellaneous investment income, particularly related to our private equity partnerships. Net investment income in 2020 was lower than 2019 due to a decline in the yield on invested assets, a decrease in the level of invested assets supporting the Closed Block individual disability product line resulting from the first phase of the reinsurance transaction that closed in December 2020, and lower income on our private equity partnerships.
Partially offsetting the decline in 2020 was an increase in the level of invested assets for our remaining product lines and higher miscellaneous investment income.
We recognized net realized investment gains of $67.6 million and $1,302.3 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the transfer of investments in the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction. Credit losses on fixed maturity securities of $9.3 million were recognized in net investment gains and losses in 2021 compared to $53.6 million and $25.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. We did not recognize any investment impairment losses in 2021 or 2019, but recognized $36.6 million of impairment losses in 2020 related to certain of our home office buildings available for lease and classified as investment real estate. Also, included in net investment gains and losses were changes in the fair value of an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement, which resulted in gains (losses) of $9.7 million, $(17.0) million, and $8.3 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion.
Other income is primarily comprised of fee-based service products in the Unum US segment, which include leave management services and administrative only (ASO) business, and the underlying results and associated net investment income of certain assumed blocks of individual disability reinsured business in the Closed Block segment.
Overall benefits experience was favorable in 2021 relative to 2020 with a consolidated benefit ratio of 80.1 percent in 2021, compared to 95.7 percent in 2020 and generally consistent with the consolidated benefit ratio of 80.0 percent in 2019. Excluding the impacts of the reserve assumption updates in both 2021 and 2020 and the impacts from both phases of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, the consolidated benefit ratios were 80.7 percent in 2021 and 80.2 percent in 2020. For further discussion on the reserve assumption updates and the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, see the "Executive Summary" contained herein in Item 7 and Notes 6 and 12 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. The underlying benefits experience for each of our operating business segments is discussed more fully in "Segment Results" contained herein in this Item 7.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower in 2021 compared to 2020 driven primarily by lower sales in our Unum US voluntary benefits product line and lower prior period sales in the Colonial Life segment. Also impacting the decrease in the deferral of acquisition costs in 2021 was lower expected recoverability in the short-term for the Unum US group life product line. The decrease in commissions was partially offset by in-force block growth in both the Unum US group disability product lines and the Unum International segment. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 driven primarily by lower sales in our Unum US voluntary benefits product line and Colonial Life segment. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was lower in 2021 compared to 2020, due to a decline in the level of the deferred asset primarily in our Unum US voluntary benefits product line. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs in 2020 was generally consistent with 2019.
Interest and debt expense decreased slightly compared to 2020, due primarily to an overall lower interest rate on outstanding debt, mostly offset by an overall higher level of debt. Interest and debt expense increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to a higher level of outstanding debt. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion.
In 2021, cost related to early retirement of debt includes costs associated with the purchase and retirement of $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.500% senior notes due 2025. In 2019, cost related to early retirement of debt includes costs associated with the purchase and retirement of $433.1 million aggregate liquidation/principal amount of our outstanding capital and debt securities. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information.
Other expenses and compensation expense, on a combined basis, increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the amortization of the cost of reinsurance related to the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, an impairment loss on internal-use software, and growth in our fee-based service products, partially offset by lower transaction costs related to the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, a decrease in the allowance for expected credit losses on premiums receivable and our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies. Other expenses and compensation expense, on a combined basis, increased in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to growth in our fee-based service products, the costs related to an organizational design update, transaction costs related to the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, an impairment loss on the ROU asset related to an operating lease for office space and an increase in the allowance for expected credit losses on premiums receivable.
Our effective income tax rate for 2021 was 22.5 percent, compared to 17.7 percent in 2020 and 20.4 percent in 2019. Our 2021 effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21 percent due to unfavorable impacts of the U.K. tax rate increase enacted in June 2021. Our 2020 effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate due to favorable adjustments related to the impact of the net operating loss carryback and favorable tax credits, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the U.K tax rate increase enacted in July 2020. Our 2019 effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate due to favorable tax credits. See Note 7 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion.
Consolidated Sales Results
Shown below are sales results for our three principal operating business segments.
Sales shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium income on new sales which we expect to receive and report as premium income during the next 12 months following or beginning in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income reported as revenue in accordance with GAAP. This is because new annualized sales premiums reflect current sales performance and what we expect to recognize as premium income over a 12 month period, while premium income reported in our financial statements is reported on an "as earned" basis rather than an annualized basis and also includes renewals and persistency of in-force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales.
Sales, persistency of the existing block of business, employment and salary growth, and the effectiveness of a renewal program are indicators of growth in premium income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, also indicate the potential for growth in our respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price levels and new product offerings. Sales results may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. The impact of COVID-19, which began in 2020, caused higher unemployment levels and general uncertainty around the financial condition of our customers as well as disruption in our sales processes. We have seen improvement in certain of these factors subsequent to the onset of COVID-19, which has resulted in an increase in sales for certain of our product lines during 2021, but we continue to see pressure on our overall sales compared to pre-pandemic levels.
See "Segment Results" as follows for a discussion of sales by segment.
Segment Results
Our reporting segments are comprised of the following: Unum US, Unum International, Colonial Life, Closed Block, and Corporate. Financial information for each of our reporting segments is as follows.
In describing our results, we may at times note certain items and exclude the impact on financial ratios and metrics to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur. We also measure and analyze our segment performance on the basis of "adjusted operating revenue" and "adjusted operating income" or "adjusted operating loss", which differ from total revenue and income before income tax as presented in our consolidated statements of income due to the exclusion of investment gains and losses and certain other items. These performance measures are in accordance with GAAP guidance for segment reporting, but they should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenue, income before income tax, or net income. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" contained herein in this Item 7.
Unum US Segment
The Unum US segment is comprised of the group disability, group life and accidental death and dismemberment, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business. The group disability line of business includes long-term and short-term disability, medical stop-loss, and fee-based service products. The supplemental and voluntary line of business includes individual disability, voluntary benefits, and dental and vision products.
Unum US Operating Results
Shown below are financial results for the Unum US segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment.
Unum US Group Disability Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group disability.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income increased compared to 2020, driven primarily by growth in our group short-term disability and medical stop-loss product lines, partially offset by lower persistency. Net investment income was lower relative to 2020 due to a decline in yield on invested assets, partially offset by higher miscellaneous investment income. Other income increased relative to 2020 due to continued growth in our fee-based service products.
Benefits experience, excluding the impact of the reserve assumption update, was unfavorable compared to 2020 due to higher claims incidence in both the group long-term and short-term disability product lines, partially offset by favorable recoveries in the long-term disability product line. See "Executive Summary” contained herein in this Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the reserve assumption update.
Commissions were higher compared to 2020 due primarily to in-force block growth in the group short-term disability and medical stop-loss product lines. The deferral of acquisition costs was generally consistent with 2020. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs decreased compared to 2020 due to a decline in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was consistent with 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income increased compared to 2019, driven primarily by growth in the in-force block resulting from higher prior period sales, partially offset by lower persistency in the short-term disability product line. Net investment income was lower relative to 2019 due to a decline in yield on invested assets and a lower level of invested assets, partially offset by higher miscellaneous investment income. Other income increased relative to 2019 due to continued growth in our fee-based service products.
Benefits experience was favorable compared to 2019 due primarily to favorable claim recovery experience in our group long-term disability product line, partially offset by higher claims incidence in the short-term disability product line, resulting from the impacts of COVID-19.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were slightly lower compared to 2019 due to lower sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased relative to 2019 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. Our other expense ratio for 2020 increased compared to 2019 due primarily to an increase in expenses associated with our fee-based service products, partially elevated from higher volumes due to the COVID-19 environment. Also contributing to the higher expense ratio was an increase in operational investments in our business which was balanced with our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Unum US Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income was generally consistent with 2020. Net investment income was higher compared to 2020 due to increased miscellaneous investment income and a higher level of invested assets, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets.
Benefits experience was unfavorable compared to 2020 due to higher mortality in the group life product line, resulting primarily from the impacts of COVID-19.
Commissions were higher compared to 2020 due primarily to in-force block growth. The deferral of acquisition costs was lower compared to 2020 due to lower expected recoverability in the short-term driven by COVID-19 related life claims. As a result, $15.1 million of current year acquisition costs were not deferred. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was lower compared to 2020 due to a decline in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio increased compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in operational investments in our business, partially offset by our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income decreased compared to 2019 due to lower sales and persistency. Net investment income was lower compared to 2019 due to a decline in yield on invested assets and a lower level of invested assets.
Benefits experience was unfavorable compared to 2019 due primarily to higher claims incidence in the group life product line, resulting from the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by favorable experience in the accidental death and dismemberment product line.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower compared to 2019 due to lower sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased relative to 2019 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was consistent with 2019.
Unum US Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income decreased compared to 2020, with a decline in the voluntary benefits product line partially offset by growth in the dental and vision and individual disability product lines. Net investment income increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher miscellaneous investment income, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets.
Benefits experience for the individual disability product line was favorable compared to 2020 due primarily to lower claims incidence. Benefits experience for voluntary benefits was less favorable compared to 2020 due primarily to higher incidence in the life product line, resulting from the impacts of COVID-19. Benefits experience for the dental and vision product line was unfavorable due primarily to higher claims incidence compared to 2020 where we experienced significantly lower claims incidence resulting from the impacts of COVID-19.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower compared to 2020 due primarily to lower sales in the voluntary benefits product line. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs decreased compared to 2020 due to a decline in the level of the deferred asset, primarily in the voluntary benefits product line. The other expense ratio improved compared to 2020 due to our continued focus on expense management and operational efficiencies. Also contributing to the improvement was the change in the allowance for expected credit losses on premiums receivable, which was lower in 2021 compared to 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income decreased compared to 2019, with a decline in the voluntary benefits product line mostly offset by growth in the individual disability and dental and vision product lines. Net investment income was higher compared to 2019 due to higher miscellaneous investment income and an increase in the level of invested assets, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets.
Benefits experience for the individual disability product line was favorable compared to 2019 due to both favorable claim recoveries and mortality experience. Benefits experience for voluntary benefits was unfavorable compared to 2019 due primarily to higher claims incidence in the life and disability product line, resulting from the impacts of COVID-19. Benefits experience for the dental and vision product line was favorable compared to 2019 driven by lower claims incidence resulting from the impacts of COVID-19.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to lower sales in the voluntary benefits product line. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs decreased in 2020 relative to 2019 due primarily to a decline in the level of the deferred asset in the voluntary benefits product line. The other expense ratio was consistent compared to 2019 due to our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Sales
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Group sales decreased compared to 2020 due primarily to lower sales to new and existing customers in the large case market and lower sales in our medical stop-loss product, partially offset by higher sales to existing customers in the core market. The sales mix in the group market sector for 2021 was approximately 65 percent core market and 35 percent large case market.
Individual disability sales, which are primarily concentrated in the multi-life market, increased compared to 2020 due to higher sales to existing customers, partially offset by a decline in sales to new customers. Voluntary benefits sales decreased compared to 2020, driven by lower new and existing customer sales in the large case market, partially offset by higher sales to new and existing customers in the core market. Dental and vision sales decreased slightly compared to 2020 driven by lower sales to new customers, mostly offset by higher sales to existing customers.
As 2021 progressed we saw a decline in the sales disruption caused by COVID-19, which has resulted in an increase in sales during the latter half of 2021 for certain of our product lines, particularly in the supplemental and voluntary product lines. However, we continue to see pressure on our overall sales resulting from the impacts of COVID-19 including increased competition in the large-case market while we maintain risk and pricing discipline as the recovery from the pandemic progresses. Further discussion of COVID-19 is contained herein in "Executive Summary" in this Item 7.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Group sales increased in the core market compared to 2019 due to growth in our medical stop-loss product, partially offset by lower sales to new and existing customers in our group disability and group life products. Group sales declined in the large case market compared to 2019 due to lower sales to new and existing customers in all products. The sales mix in the group market sector for 2020 was approximately 61 percent core market and 39 percent large case market.
Individual disability sales decreased compared to 2019 due to lower sales to both new and existing customers. Voluntary benefits sales decreased compared to 2019, driven by lower new and existing customer sales in both the core and large case markets. Dental and vision sales decreased compared to 2019 driven by lower sales to both new and existing customers.
We believe the lower sales levels during 2020 compared to 2019 were driven by the impact of COVID-19, which caused higher unemployment levels and general uncertainty around the financial condition of our customers as well as disruption in our sales processes.
Goodwill
We had total goodwill of $280.0 million for the Unum US segment at December 31, 2021, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment.
Segment Outlook
We remain committed to offering consumers a broad set of financial protection benefit products at the worksite. During 2022, we will continue to invest in a unique customer experience defined by simplicity, empathy, and deep industry expertise through the increased utilization of digital capabilities and technology to enhance enrollment, underwriting, and claims processing. In addition, we will continue to focus on the expansion of our portfolio of products. In particular, with respect to smaller employers, we will continue to provide comprehensive consumer-focused products, enhance our distribution model, and utilize our digital tools to bring industry leading enrollment capabilities and a fully integrated customer experience. Our differentiated offerings and significant investment in leave management services provides substantial growth opportunities, particularly with larger employers, and stronger persistency in our core products. We believe our active client management, integrated customer experience across our product lines, and strong risk management, will enable us to continue to grow our market over the long-term.
Our near-term results will be influenced by pandemic trends, specifically the working population mortality levels along with the level and severity of infection rates. As the pandemic impacts lessen, we anticipate seeing a recovery in earnings given the underlying strength of our business. We expect full year premium income to grow at a rate slightly higher than 2021. While we expect our claim experience to improve as impacts from COVID-19 lessen, we may also continue to experience claims volatility, particularly in our group disability and group and voluntary life products. We may also experience potential disruption in our overall claims processing activity, which can result in short-term unfavorable experience. Furthermore, we could continue to experience an increase in the volume of activity associated with our leave management services which would lead to an increase in expenses.
The low interest rate environment continues to place pressure on our profit margins by impacting net investment income yields as well as potentially discount rates on our insurance liabilities. Our net investment income may continue to be impacted by fluctuations in miscellaneous investment income.
As part of our discipline in pricing and reserving, we continuously monitor emerging claim trends and interest rates. We will continue to take appropriate pricing actions on new business and renewals that are reflective of the current environment.
We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and adjust our business plans accordingly.
Unum International Segment
The Unum International segment is comprised of our operations in both the United Kingdom and Poland. Our Unum UK products include insurance for group long-term disability, group life, and supplemental lines of business, which includes dental, individual disability, and critical illness products. Our Unum Poland products include insurance for individual and group life with accident and health riders. Unum International's products are sold primarily through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants.
Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum International segment.
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currencies of Unum UK and Unum Poland are the British pound sterling and Polish zloty, respectively. Premium income, net investment income, claims, and expenses are received or paid in the functional currency, and we hold functional currency-denominated assets to support functional currency-denominated policy reserves and liabilities. We translate functional currency-denominated financial statement items into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. We translate income statement items using an average exchange rate for the reporting period, and we translate balance sheet items using the exchange rate at the end of the period. We report unrealized foreign currency translation gains and losses in accumulated other comprehensive income in our consolidated balance sheets.
Fluctuations in exchange rates impact Unum International's reported financial results and our consolidated financial results. In periods when the functional currency strengthens relative to the preceding period, translation increases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the functional currency weakens, translation decreases current period results relative to the prior period.
Unum UK Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum UK product lines in functional currency.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income was higher compared to 2020 primarily due to growth in the in-force blocks resulting from the impact of rate increases in the group long-term disability product line and higher overall persistency.
Net investment income was higher compared to 2020 due to higher investment income from inflation index-linked bonds and a higher level of invested assets, partially offset by a lower yield on fixed-rate bonds. Our investments in inflation index-linked bonds support the claim reserves associated with certain group policies that provide for inflation-linked increases in benefits. The change in net investment income attributable to these inflation index-linked bonds is generally offset by a change in the reserves for future claim payments related to the inflation index-linked group long-term disability and group life policies.
Benefits experience was unfavorable relative to 2020 due to higher inflation-linked experience in benefits, higher claims incidence in the group life product line and lower claim resolutions in the group long-term disability product line that resulted
from continued disruptions to health services caused by COVID-19, partially offset by lower claims incidence in the group long-term disability product line.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were slightly higher relative to 2020 due to higher sales and in-force block growth. The amortization of acquisition costs was slightly lower than the prior year due to a decline in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio improved relative to 2020 due to certain prior year expenses related to COVID-19 that did not recur and our continued focus on expense management.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income increased compared to 2019 due to growth in the in-force blocks and the impact of rate increases in the group long-term disability product line.
Net investment income decreased compared to 2019 due to lower miscellaneous investment income that resulted from a higher than normal level of bond calls in 2019, a decline in the yield on fixed-rate bonds, and lower investment income from inflation index-linked bonds. The decrease in net investment income attributable to these index-linked bonds was largely offset by a decrease in the reserves for future claim payments related to the inflation index-linked group long-term disability and group life policies.
Benefits experience was unfavorable relative to 2019 due to lower claim resolutions in the group long-term disability product line that resulted from continued disruption in claim processes related to COVID-19 and higher claims incidence in the group life product line, partially offset by the impact of lower inflation-linked increases in benefits related to our group products.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs decreased relative to 2019 due to lower sales. The amortization of acquisition costs was generally consistent with the prior year. The other expense ratio increased relative to 2019 as certain expenses related to COVID-19 were mostly offset by our continued focus on expense management.
Sales
The following discussion of sales results relates only to our Unum UK product lines and is based on functional currency.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Group long-term disability sales were generally consistent with 2020, with an increase in sales to existing customers in the large case market mostly offset by lower sales to new customers in the large case market and lower sales to existing customers in the core market.
Group life sales increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in sales to new customers in both our core and large case markets and higher sales to existing customers in the large case market, partially offset by lower sales to existing customers in our core market.
Supplemental sales were lower in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to a decline in the group critical illness product, partially offset by an increase in dental product sales.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Group long-term disability sales were lower in 2020 compared to 2019, with lower sales to new and existing customers in both the core market and the large case market.
Group life sales declined in 2020 compared to 2019 due to a decrease in sales to new customers in both our core and large case markets and lower sales to existing customers in the large case market, partially offset by higher sales to existing customers in our core market.
Supplemental sales were lower in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to a decline in dental product sales, partially offset by an increase in the group critical illness product line.
Goodwill
We had total goodwill of $44.5 million for the Unum International segment at December 31, 2021, of which, $39.8 million is attributed to the Unum UK reporting unit and $4.7 million is attributed to the Unum Poland reporting unit. Fair value of our reporting units is estimated using a combination of the income and market approaches and the key assumptions used are projected earnings and discount rate. To the extent that the future profitability of these reporting units deteriorates from current assumptions, the goodwill related to the reporting units could be at risk for impairment.
Segment Outlook
We are committed to driving growth in the Unum International segment and will build on the capabilities that we believe will generate growth and profitability in our businesses over the long term. For our Unum UK line of business, achieving growth within our existing portfolio of products remains a priority. We will focus on delivering a high quality service and building best in class health and wellbeing services to continue to improve retention of our key customers and drive growth in small case business. We will also maintain our disciplined sales approach. Within our Unum Poland line of business, we will leverage our U.S. and U.K. expertise to grow existing distribution channels and expand our current product offerings. We continue to invest in digital capabilities, technology, and product enhancements which we believe will drive sustainable growth over the long term.
We expect to see increased demand for protection products as a result of the pandemic. We expect strong premium growth and improving claims experience but recognize that we could continue to experience claims volatility in our group life and disability product lines. Despite ongoing economic uncertainty, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize on future growth opportunities as the operating environment improves. As part of our continued pricing discipline and our reserving methodology, we continuously monitor emerging interest rate experience and adjust our pricing and reserve discount rates, as appropriate. We will likely continue to experience volatility in net investment income and our benefit ratio due to fluctuations in the level of inflation in the U.K. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and adjust our business plans accordingly to respond to external challenges.
Colonial Life Segment
The Colonial Life segment includes insurance for accident, sickness, and disability products, which includes our dental and vision products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued primarily by Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees, on both a group and an individual basis, at the workplace through an independent contractor agent sales force and brokers.
Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial Life segment.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income was lower compared to 2020 due to lower prior period sales, partially offset by favorable persistency. Net investment income was higher in 2021 compared to 2020 due to higher miscellaneous investment income and an increase in the level of invested assets, partially offset by a decline in the yield on invested assets.
Benefits experience was unfavorable relative to 2020 due primarily to unfavorable experience in the life product line resulting from the impacts of COVID-19.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were lower compared to 2020 due to lower prior period sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was generally consistent with 2020. The other expense ratio improved relative to 2020 due primarily to a decrease in the allowance for expected credit losses and our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income increased compared to 2019 due to growth in the in-force block resulting from prior period sales growth and stable persistency. Net investment income was higher in 2020 compared to 2019 due to higher miscellaneous investment income and an increase in the level of invested assets, partially offset by a decline in the yield on invested assets.
Benefits experience was unfavorable relative to 2019, with unfavorable experience in the life product line, resulting from the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by favorable experience in the cancer and critical illness and accident, sickness, and disability product lines.
Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs declined relative to 2019 due to lower sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was consistent with 2019. The other expense ratio improved relative to 2019 due to a decline in sales-related expenses and our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Sales
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
During 2021, we have seen an increase in sales for each of our product lines and market sectors relative to 2020 due to a decline in disruption to our sales processes caused by COVID-19. The number of new accounts increased 13.0 percent and average new case size decreased 3.2 percent in 2021 compared to 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
During 2020, the impact of COVID-19 caused higher unemployment levels and general uncertainty around the financial condition of our customers as well as disruption in our sales processes. As a result, sales for each of our product lines and market sectors declined during 2020 compared to 2019. The number of new accounts and average new case size decreased 27.9 percent and 1.9 percent, respectively, in 2020 compared to 2019.
Goodwill
We had goodwill of $27.7 million at December 31, 2021, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment.
Segment Outlook
We remain committed to providing employees and their families with simple, modern, and personal benefit solutions. During 2022, we will continue to utilize our strong distribution system of independent agents, benefit counselors and broker partnerships. We will also continue to invest in new solutions and digital capabilities to expand our reach and effectiveness, driving growth and improving productivity while enhancing the customer experience. In 2022, we will continue to bring an enhanced engagement and enrollment platform to market enabling deeper connections with employees through the enrollment process as well as maintaining stronger relationships throughout the customer lifecycle. We believe our distribution system, customer service capabilities, digital and virtual tools, and ability to serve all market sizes position us well for future growth.
In 2022, we expect positive operating trends with full year premium income to grow from the prior year, but at a rate that is below pre-pandemic levels. While we expect our claim experience to improve as impacts from COVID-19 lessen, we could continue to experience claims volatility, particularly in our life and disability products. The lower interest rate environment will continue to have an unfavorable impact on our profit margins, and volatility in miscellaneous investment income is likely to continue. While we believe our underlying profitability will remain strong, current economic conditions and increasing competition in the voluntary workplace market are risks to achievement of our business plans. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and adjust our business plans accordingly.
Closed Block Segment
The Closed Block segment consists of group and individual long-term care, individual disability, and other insurance products no longer actively marketed. We discontinued offering individual long-term care in 2009 and group long-term care in 2012. Individual disability in this segment generally consists of policies we sold prior to the mid-1990s and entirely discontinued selling in 2004. As of March 2021, we have ceded a significant portion of this individual disability business to a third party reinsurer. See "Executive Summary" herein Item 7 for further discussion. Other insurance products include group pension, individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, and other miscellaneous product lines.
Operating Results
Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Closed Block segment.
2Excludes the $133.1 million reserve recognition for the year ended 2021 related to the second phase of the reinsurance transaction that occurred during the first quarter of 2021. Also excluded from the year ended 2021 is the $6.4 million reserve increase related to the assumption update that occurred during the third quarter of 2021. Excludes the $1,284.5 million reserve recognition for the year ended 2020 related to the first phase of the reinsurance transaction that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020.
3Excludes $79.1 million of amortization of the cost of reinsurance during the during the year ended 2021 and $6.2 million of transaction costs related to the reinsurance transaction that occurred during the first quarter of 2021. Excludes $2.6 million of amortization of the cost of reinsurance during the year ended 2020 and $21.0 million of transactions costs related to the reinsurance transaction that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020.
N.M. = not a meaningful percentage
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Premium income for long-term care increased compared to 2020 due to rate increases, partially offset by policy terminations. We continue to file requests with various state insurance departments for premium rate increases on certain of our individual and group long-term care policies which reflect assumptions as of the date of filings. In states for which a rate increase is submitted and approved, we routinely provide customers options for coverage changes or other approaches that might fit their current financial and insurance needs. Premium income for individual disability decreased compared to 2020 due to policy terminations and maturities.
Net investment income was lower relative to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in the level of invested assets supporting individual disability resulting from the reinsurance transaction and a decline in the yield on invested assets, partially offset by higher miscellaneous investment income, primarily related to increases in the NAV on our private equity partnerships.
Other income, which primarily includes the underlying results and associated net investment income of certain assumed blocks of individual disability reinsured business, was generally consistent compared to 2020.
The interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care, excluding the reserve increases as previously discussed, was less favorable compared to 2020 driven primarily by lower claimant mortality and higher submitted claims, but continues to be favorable compared to our long-term expectations. The interest adjusted loss ratio for individual disability, excluding the reserve increase related to the assumption update and the reserve recognition impacts from the reinsurance transaction, was favorable relative to 2020 driven primarily by lower submitted claims. Also impacting benefits experience for the Closed Block segment in 2021 was the previously discussed group pension reserve increase within our "All Other" product line. Excluding this group pension reserve increase, benefits experience for the "All Other" product line was consistent with our expectations. See "Executive Summary” contained herein in Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the reserve assumption updates.
We no longer have interest and debt expense due to the December 2020 redemption of the senior secured notes issued by Northwind Holdings, LLC (Northwind Holdings).
The other expense ratio, excluding certain transaction costs incurred and the amortization of cost of reinsurance related to the previously discussed reinsurance transaction, was lower than 2020 driven by expense allowances related to the reinsurance transaction and our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Premium income for long-term care was higher compared to 2019, with rate increases more than offsetting policy terminations. Premium income for individual disability was lower compared to 2019 due to policy terminations and maturities as well as a one-time reinsurance cost related to a small block of policies during the first quarter of 2020.
Net investment income was lower relative to 2019 primarily due to a lower yield on invested assets, a decrease in the level of invested assets supporting individual disability resulting from the reinsurance transaction, and fluctuations in the NAV on our private equity partnerships that reflect the impact of COVID-19 on economic conditions throughout the year. These impacts were partially offset by an increase in the level of invested assets supporting long-term care. Other income decreased compared to 2020 due to expected terminations and maturities in certain assumed blocks of individual disability business.
The interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care, excluding the previously discussed reserve increase, was favorable to our expectations driven primarily by higher claimant mortality and lower submitted claims. The interest adjusted loss ratio for
individual disability, excluding the impacts from the reinsurance transaction, was unfavorable relative to 2019 driven by overall unfavorable claims activity and the impact of the one-time reinsurance cost during the first quarter of 2020. Also impacting benefits experience for the Closed Block segment was the previously discussed group pension reserve increase within our "All Other" product line. Excluding this group pension reserve increase, benefits experience for the "All Other" product line was consistent with our expectations. See "Executive Summary” contained herein in this Item 7 and in Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the reserve assumption updates.
Interest and debt expense was lower than 2019 due to the principal repayments on the outstanding debt issued by Northwind Holdings. In December 2020, Northwind Holdings redeemed the remaining $35.0 million of principal on the Northwind notes, and was released of any contractual collateral requirements.
The other expense ratio, excluding certain costs incurred and the amortization of cost of reinsurance related to the previously discussed reinsurance transaction in the fourth quarter of 2020, was lower than 2019 due to our continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies, partially offset by a decline in premium income for individual disability.
Segment Outlook
We will continue to execute on our well-defined strategy of implementing long-term care premium rate increases, efficient capital management, improved financial analysis, and operational effectiveness. We will continue to explore structural options to enhance financial flexibility. Despite continued anticipated premium rate increases in our long-term care business, we expect overall premium income and adjusted operating revenue to decline over time as these closed blocks of business wind down. We will likely experience volatility in net investment income due to fluctuations of miscellaneous investment income and the increased allocation towards alternative assets, primarily private equity partnership investments, in the long-term care product line portfolio. We record changes in our share of the NAV of the partnerships in net investment income. We receive financial information related to our investments in partnerships and generally record investment income on a one-quarter lag in accordance with our accounting policy. As these net asset values are volatile and can fluctuate materially with changes in market economic conditions, there may possibly be significant movements up or down in future periods as conditions change. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and adjust our business plans accordingly.
Profitability of our long-tailed products is affected by claims experience related to mortality and morbidity, resolutions, investment returns, premium rate increases, and persistency. We believe that the interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care will be relatively flat over the long term, but may continue to experience quarterly volatility, particularly in the near term as our claim block matures and as we continue the implementation of premium rate increases. Specific to our long-term care line of business, which is in loss recognition and should report levels of benefits plus operating expenses that equal the gross premium reported, we expect the long term interest adjusted loss ratio to be in the 85 to 90 percent range with some quarterly volatility. Claim resolution rates, which measure the resolution of claims from recovery, deaths, settlements, and benefit expirations, are very sensitive to operational and external factors and can be volatile. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. It is possible that variability in any of our reserve assumptions, including, but not limited to, interest rates, mortality, morbidity, resolutions, premium rate increases, benefit change elections, and persistency, could result in a material impact on the adequacy of our reserves, including adjustments to reserves established under loss recognition.
As a result of the execution of the reinsurance transaction related to our Closed Block individual disability line of business where we have fully ceded a significant portion of this business, we expect that the primary impact on earnings will be the amortization of the cost of reinsurance for that agreement which we expect will be approximately $70 million for 2022. The cost of reinsurance will continue to be amortized on a declining trajectory consistent with the expected run-off pattern of the ceded reserves, which we estimate to be approximately 25 years. Due to the relatively small amount of business that has been retained, we expect that the interest adjusted loss ratio will be more volatile from period to period and we expect minimal earnings related to the retained business.
In consideration of the COVID-19 pandemic and related impacts, we would expect our Closed Block segment earnings to return to pre-pandemic levels as the impact of COVID-19 lessens, but we could temporarily experience greater than normal volatility across multiple risk factors. Specific to our long-term care line of business, we expect that we may experience additional volatility as it relates to mortality, incidence, and interest rates.
Corporate Segment
The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, interest expense on corporate debt other than non-recourse debt, and certain other corporate income and expenses not allocated to a line of business.
Operating Results
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Adjusted operating loss, which excludes the items listed above, decreased in 2021 relative to 2020, due primarily to higher net investment income, which resulted from an increase in the yield on invested assets.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Adjusted operating loss, which excludes the items listed above, increased in 2020 relative to 2019, due primarily to lower net investment income, which resulted from a decrease in the yield on invested assets. Interest, debt, and other expenses in 2020 were generally consistent with 2019 with higher interest expense resulting from a higher level of outstanding debt, mostly offset by lower pension costs in 2020.
See "Executive Summary” contained herein in this Item 7 and in Notes 8, 13, and 15 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the impairment loss on internal-use software, costs related to the early retirement of debt, the ROU asset impairments, and the costs related to the organizational design update.
Segment Outlook
We expect to continue to generate excess capital on an annual basis through the statutory earnings in our insurance subsidiaries and believe we are well positioned with flexibility to preserve our capital strength while also returning capital to our shareholders. We may experience volatility in net investment income based on both the composition and level of invested assets that we allocate to our products from period to period.
Investments
Overview
Our investment portfolio is well diversified by type of investment and industry sector. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations and allow us to hold our securities through periods where significant decreases in fair value occur. We believe our emphasis on risk management in our investment portfolio has positioned us well and generally reduced the volatility in our results.
We have a formal investment policy that includes overall quality and diversification objectives and establishes limits by asset class, investment rating, and single issuer. The majority of our investments are in investment-grade publicly traded securities. This ensures the desired liquidity and preserves the capital value of our portfolios, although due to the long-term nature of our insurance liabilities we are also able to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns within the limits of our investment policy. Our asset mix guidelines and limits are established by us, reviewed by the risk and finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors, and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. We review our policies and guidelines annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary, and recommend adjustments as appropriate.
See "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained herein in this Item 7 for further discussion of our valuation of investments.
Closed Block Individual Disability Reinsurance Transaction
As part of the second phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction entered into in March 2021 with Commonwealth, we transferred fixed maturity securities of $226.8 million on an amortized cost basis and $293.7 million on a fair value basis, and recorded a total realized investment gain from the transfer of these securities, including a related net gain from cash flow hedges, of $67.6 million. In 2020, as part of the first phase of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction, we transferred fixed maturity securities of $4,686.8 million on an amortized cost basis and $5,958.4 million on a fair value basis, and we recorded a total realized investment gain from the transfer of these securities, including a related net gain from cash flow hedges of $1,302.3 million. Although we transferred a significant portion of our fixed maturity security portfolio as part of this transaction, the overall credit profile of our remaining portfolio has not changed. See "Executive Summary" contained herein in this Item 7 for further information on the reinsurance transaction.
Fixed Maturity Securities
The fair values and associated unrealized gains and losses of our fixed maturity securities portfolio, by industry classification, are as follows:
Fixed Maturity Securities - By Industry Classification
As of December 31, 2021
The following two tables show the length of time our investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities portfolios had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2021 and at the end of the prior four quarters. The relationships of the current fair value to amortized cost are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships after December 31, 2021. The increase in the unrealized loss on investment-grade fixed maturity securities during 2021 was due primarily to an increase in U.S. Treasury rates, while the decrease in the unrealized loss on below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities during 2021 was due primarily to a decrease in credit spreads, partially offset by the increase in U.S. Treasury rates.
Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities
Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position
Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities
Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position
At December 31, 2021, we held one investment-grade fixed maturity security with a gross unrealized loss greater than $10.0 million. The security was a foreign government debt obligation and had a fair value of $172.0 million and a gross unrealized loss of $14.6 million.
We had no individual net investment losses of $10.0 million or greater from credit losses or sales of fixed maturity securities during 2021.
During the first quarter of 2020, we recognized the following credit losses greater than $10 million:
•$20.8 million on fixed maturity securities issued by an oil and gas producer. The profitability of the company was impacted by the decline in oil prices which, given the environment at the time, may have made near term debt maturities difficult to refinance. We changed our intent to hold this security in the second quarter of 2020 and recognized a $1.4 million loss on the sale of the security in addition to the credit loss previously recorded.
•$17.1 million on fixed maturity securities issued by an oil and gas producer. The profitability of the company was impacted by the decline in oil prices and the company had a high level of debt. The company filed for bankruptcy as expected in early April 2020. We changed our intent to hold this security in the third quarter of 2020 and recognized a $1.0 million loss on the sale of the security in addition to the credit loss previously recorded.
•$10.2 million on fixed maturity securities issued by a paper company whose sales of lumber and other products were impacted by the slowdown in the economy. As a result of an improvement in lumber and other products, during the fourth quarter of 2020, we reversed the remainder of the allowance for credit losses that we had recognized in the previous quarters of 2020.
During the remainder of 2020, we did not experience any credit losses exceeding $10 million. We had no individual net investment losses of $10.0 million or greater from sales of fixed maturity securities in 2020. We had one net investment loss of $20.8 million from impairments and one individual net investment loss of $15.6 million from the sale of fixed maturity securities during 2019.
As of December 31, 2021, the amortized cost net of allowance for credit losses and fair value of our below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $2,754.2 million and $2,977.0 million, respectively, and our below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities as a percentage of our total investment portfolio decreased from 6.7 percent at December 31, 2020 to 5.8 percent at
December 31, 2021 on a fair value basis. Below-investment-grade securities are inherently riskier than investment-grade securities since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur, but we do not anticipate any liquidity problems resulting from our investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor do we expect these investments to adversely affect our ability to hold our other investments to maturity.
Fixed Maturity Securities - Foreign Exposure
Our investments in issuers in foreign countries are chosen for specific portfolio management purposes, including asset and liability management and portfolio diversification across geographic lines and sectors to minimize non-market risks. In our approach to investing in fixed maturity securities, specific investments within approved countries and industry sectors are evaluated for their market position and specific strengths and potential weaknesses. For each security, we consider the political, legal, and financial environment of the sovereign entity in which an issuer is domiciled and operates. The country of domicile is based on consideration of the issuer's headquarters, in addition to location of the assets and the country in which the majority of sales and earnings are derived. We do not have exposure to foreign currency risk, as the cash flows from these investments are either denominated in currencies or hedged into currencies to match the related liabilities. We continually evaluate our foreign investment risk exposure.
Mortgage Loans
The carrying value of our mortgage loan portfolio was $2,560.4 million and $2,432.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our investments in mortgage loans are carried at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses which was $8.3 million and $13.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our mortgage loan portfolio is comprised entirely of commercial mortgage loans. Our mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. Due to conservative underwriting, the incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity continues to be low. We held no impaired mortgage loans at December 31, 2021 or 2020. See Notes 1 and 3 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our mortgage loan portfolio and the allowance for expected credit losses.
Private Equity Partnerships
The carrying value of our investments in private equity partnerships was $978.6 million and $747.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These partnerships are passive in nature and represent funds that are primarily invested in private credit, private equity, and real assets. The carrying value of the partnerships is based on our share of the partnership's NAV and changes in the carrying value are recorded as a component of net investment income. We receive financial information related to our investments in partnerships and generally record investment income on a one-quarter lag in accordance with our accounting policy. We recorded net investment income totaling $165.4 million, $19.8 million, and $31.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The majority of our investments in partnerships are not redeemable. Distributions received from the funds arise from income generated by the underlying investments as well as the liquidation of the underlying investments. There is generally not a public market for these investments. We had $753.2 million of commitments for additional investments in the partnerships at December 31, 2021 which may or may not be funded. See Note 2 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our private equity partnerships.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We use derivative financial instruments primarily to manage reinvestment, duration, foreign currency, and credit risks. Historically, we have utilized current and forward-starting interest rate swaps, options on forward-starting interest rate swaps and U.S. Treasury rates, current and forward-starting currency swaps, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, forward contracts on specific fixed income securities, and credit default swaps. Credit exposure on derivatives is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, including accrued interest receivable less collateral held. Our credit exposure on derivatives was $1.3 million at December 31, 2021. We held $32.0 million of cash collateral from our counterparties at December 31, 2021. The carrying value of fixed maturity securities posted as collateral to our counterparties was $27.6 million at December 31, 2021. We believe that our credit risk is mitigated by our use of multiple counterparties, all of which have an investment-grade credit rating, and by our use of cross-collateralization agreements.
Other
Our exposure to non-current investments, defined as foreclosed real estate and invested assets which are delinquent as to interest and/or principal payments, totaled $19.8 million and $20.8 million on a fair value basis at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our investments and our derivative financial instruments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in our insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide additional sources of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments.
We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. We attempt to match our asset cash flows and durations with expected liability cash flows and durations to meet the funding requirements of our business. However, deterioration in the credit market may delay our ability to sell our positions in certain of our fixed maturity securities in a timely manner and adversely impact the price we receive for such securities, which may negatively impact our cash flows. Furthermore, if we experience defaults on securities held in the investment portfolios of our insurance subsidiaries, this will negatively impact statutory capital, which could reduce our insurance subsidiaries' capacity to pay dividends to our holding companies. A reduction in dividends to our holding companies could force us to seek external financing to avoid impairing our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders or meet our debt and other payment obligations.
Our policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and we have minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. A decrease in demand for our insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims could negatively impact our cash flows from operations. However, our historical pattern of benefits paid to revenues is generally consistent, even during cycles of economic downturns, which serves to minimize liquidity risk.
The liquidity requirements of the holding company Unum Group include common stock dividends, interest and debt service, and ongoing investments in our businesses. Unum Group's liquidity requirements are met by assets held by Unum Group and our intermediate holding companies, dividends from primarily our insurance subsidiaries, and issuance of common stock, debt, or other capital securities and borrowings from our existing credit facility, as needed. As of December 31, 2021, Unum Group and our intermediate holding companies had available holding company liquidity of $1,515 million that was held primarily in bank deposits, commercial paper, money market funds, corporate bonds, and asset backed securities. No significant restrictions exist on our ability to use or access funds in any of our U.S. or foreign intermediate holding companies. Dividends repatriated from our foreign subsidiaries are eligible for 100 percent exemption from U.S. income tax but may be subject to withholding tax and/or tax on foreign currency gain or loss.
As part of our capital deployment strategy, we may repurchase shares of Unum Group's common stock, as authorized by our board of directors. During the first nine months of 2021, we did not have an open share repurchase program and did not repurchase any shares. In October 2021, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $250.0 million of Unum Group's outstanding common stock through December 2022, with the timing and amount of repurchase activity to be based on market conditions and other considerations, including the level of available cash, alternative uses for cash, and our stock price. In November 2021, we entered into and settled an accelerated stock repurchase agreement with a financial counterparty to repurchase $50.0 million of Unum Group's common stock in aggregate. As part of this transaction, we paid $50.0 million to the financial counterparty and received 1.9 million shares of our common stock. The dollar value of shares remaining under the current repurchase program was approximately $200 million at December 31, 2021. See Note 10 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8.
Liquidity and Capital Resource Considerations - COVID-19
We have strengthened our liquidity position through actions such as maintaining a high level of short-term investments and a high level of collateral from certain of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries posted with regional FHLBs. In November 2021, we
entered into a 20-year facility agreement with a Delaware trust that gives us the right to issue and to sell to the trust, up to $400.0 million of 4.046% senior notes in exchange for a corresponding amount of U.S. Treasury securities held by the trust. We believe we have the appropriate liquidity and access to capital to avoid significant disruption to our operations. We have not yet experienced a significant impact to our liquidity as a result of the collection of premiums and submitted claims activity; however, we continually monitor the development of these items.
As of December 31, 2021, we have borrowed $160.9 million of funds through our memberships with the regional FHLBs. Similar to our previous advances, these funds are used for the purpose of investing in either short-term investments or fixed maturity securities and have additional borrowing capacity of approximately $992 million that can be utilized for liquidity if the need arises. Additionally, we have access to an unsecured revolving credit facility that allow us to borrow up to a total of $500 million. There are currently no outstanding borrowings on this facility, but we remain in compliance with required covenants should we choose to borrow in the future. We have no significant upcoming debt maturities until 2024. We continue to meet the financial covenants contained in our current debt agreements and credit facilities, and we expect that we will continue to meet those covenants in subsequent periods.
See "Debt, Credit Facilities and Other Sources of Liquidity" and "Transfers of Financial Assets" for further discussion of our debt arrangements, credit facilities, facility agreement for contingent debt issuance, and of our FHLB arrangements contained herein in this Item 7. For further discussion of the key considerations regarding the impacts of COVID-19 see "Executive Summary" herein in this Item 7.
Closed Block Individual Disability Reinsurance Transaction
In December 2020, we completed the first phase of a reinsurance transaction, pursuant to which Provident, Paul Revere, and Unum America, wholly-owned domestic insurance subsidiaries of Unum Group and collectively referred to as "the ceding companies", each entered into separate reinsurance agreements with Commonwealth to reinsure, on a coinsurance basis effective as of July 1, 2020, approximately 75 percent of the Closed Block individual disability insurance business, primarily direct business written by the ceding companies. In March 2021, we completed the second phase of the reinsurance transaction, pursuant to which the ceding companies and Commonwealth amended and restated their respective reinsurance agreements to reinsure on a coinsurance and modified coinsurance basis effective as of January 1, 2021, a substantial portion of the remaining Closed Block individual disability business that was not ceded in December 2020, primarily business previously assumed by the ceding companies. Commonwealth established and will maintain collateralized trust accounts for the benefit of the ceding companies to secure its obligations under the reinsurance agreements.
In connection with the first phase of the reinsurance transaction which occurred in December 2020, the ceding companies paid a total ceding commission to Commonwealth of $437.7 million. In connection with the second phase of the reinsurance transaction which occurred in March 2021, Commonwealth paid a ceding commission to the ceding companies of $18.2 million. The ceding companies transferred assets, which consisted primarily of cash and fixed maturity securities, of $6,669.8 million and $767.0 million for the first phase in December 2020 and the second phase in March 2021, respectively. We released approximately $400 million of capital during the fourth quarter of 2020 as a result of the closing of the first phase of the transaction. We released approximately $200 million of capital during the first quarter of 2021 as a result of the closing of the second phase of the transaction.
See "Reinsurance" contained herein in Item 1; "Segment Results" and "Executive Summary" contained herein in Item 7, and Notes 12 and 16 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion on the impacts related to this reinsurance transaction.
Cash Available from Subsidiaries
Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries depend on payments from subsidiaries to pay dividends to stockholders, to pay debt obligations, and/or to pay expenses. These payments by our insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of dividends, operating and investment management fees, and/or interest payments on loans from the parent to a subsidiary.
Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of dividends that can be paid to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the U.S., that limitation generally equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer's statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding
net realized capital gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of dividends to a parent company from a life insurance subsidiary is generally further limited to the amount of unassigned funds.
Unum America cedes blocks of business to Fairwind Insurance Company (Fairwind), which is an affiliated captive reinsurance subsidiary domiciled in the United States. The ability of Fairwind to pay dividends to Unum Group will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the business reinsured by Fairwind. Fairwind did not pay dividends in 2021 nor do we anticipate that Fairwind will pay dividends in 2022. Unum Group made $285.0 million in capital contributions to Fairwind during 2021 in order to ensure Fairwind has an appropriate level of capital supporting the business assumed from Unum America, including establishing the premium deficiency reserve resulting from the agreement between Unum America and the Maine Bureau of Insurance (MBOI).
In connection with a financial examination of Unum America, which closed at the end of the second quarter of 2020, the MBOI concluded that Unum America’s long-term care statutory reserves are deficient by $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2018, the financial statement date of the examination period. The amount reserves are deficient by may increase or decrease over time based on changes in assumed reinvestment rates, policyholder inventories, rate increase activity, and the underlying growth in the locked in statutory reserve basis as well as updates to other long term actuarial assumptions. The MBOI granted permission to Unum America on May 1, 2020, to phase in the additional statutory reserves over seven years beginning with year-end 2020 and ending with year-end 2026. During the fourth quarter of 2020, reserves were deficient by approximately $2.3 billion, prior to the 2020 phase-in adjustment. The increase in the reserve deficiency from the original $2.1 billion as of December 31, 2018 was primarily driven by changes in the assumed reinvestment rate. The 2020 phase-in amount was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2020 and was approximately $229 million, resulting in $2.1 billion remaining to be phased in as of December 31, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2021, reserves were deficient by approximately $2.7 billion, prior to the 2021 phase in adjustment. The increase in the reserve deficiency from the balance as of December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by changes in the assumed reinvestment rate. The 2021 phase in amount was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021 and was approximately $438 million, resulting in approximately $2.3 billion remaining to be phased in as of December 31, 2021. The phase in amounts for both 2020 and 2021 were funded using cash flows from operations and capital contributions from Unum Group. This strengthening is incorporated by using explicitly agreed upon margins into our existing assumptions for annual statutory reserve adequacy testing. These actions add margin to Unum America's best estimate assumptions. Our long-term care reserves and financial results reported under generally accepted accounting principles are not affected by the MBOI’s examination conclusion. We plan to fund the additional statutory reserves with expected cash flows and capital contributions from Unum Group.
The ability of Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries to continue to receive dividends from their insurance subsidiaries also depends on additional factors such as RBC ratios and capital adequacy and/or solvency requirements, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support desired ratings. The RBC ratios for our U.S. insurance subsidiaries at December 31, 2021 are in line with our expectations and are significantly above the level that would require state regulatory action.
Unum Group and/or certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries may also receive dividends from our U.K. subsidiaries, the payment of which may be subject to applicable insurance company regulations and capital guidance in the U.K. Unum Limited is subject to the requirements of Solvency II, an European Union (EU) directive that is part of retained UK law pursuant to the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018, which prescribes capital requirements and risk management standards for the European insurance industry. Our U.K. holding company is also subject to the Solvency II requirements relevant to insurance holding companies, while its subsidiaries (the Unum UK Solvency II Group), which includes Unum Limited, are subject to group supervision under Solvency II. The Unum UK Solvency II Group received approval from the U.K. Prudential Regulation Authority to use its own internal model for calculating regulatory capital and also received approval for certain associated regulatory permissions including transitional relief as the Solvency II capital regime continues to be implemented. In connection with the recent exit from the EU, the U.K. government is reviewing the regulatory framework of financial services companies which may result in changes to U.K. regulatory capital or U.K. tax regulations. Recent economic conditions have caused volatility in our solvency ratios used to monitor capital adequacy.
The payment of dividends to the parent company from our subsidiaries also requires the approval of the individual subsidiary's board of directors.
The amount available during 2021 for the payment of ordinary dividends from Unum Group's traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes Northwind Re and Fairwind, was approximately $947 million. During 2021, $583.0 million was declared and paid in cash, $8.3 million was declared and paid in fixed maturity securities, and $197.9 million was declared and paid in stock, of which $165.0 million was considered an extraordinary dividend, of one of Unum Group's traditional U.S.
insurance subsidiaries. Also during 2021, $25.7 million and $5.1 million in cash and fixed maturity securities, respectively, were paid to Unum Group from one of our traditional U.S. insurance companies as a return of capital. The amount available during 2021 from Unum Limited was approximately £170 million, of which none were declared and paid to Unum Group. As a result of the recapture of the Northwind Re reinsurance agreements and Northwind Re's status as a dormant captive insurance company, Northwind Re paid dividends of $916.4 million, comprised of cash of $210.2 million and fixed maturity securities of $706.2 million, to Northwind Holdings during 2021. Northwind Holdings then paid dividends of $917.0 million, comprised of cash of $210.8 million and fixed maturity securities of $706.2 million, to Unum Group.
During 2022, we intend to maintain a level of capital in our insurance subsidiaries above the applicable capital adequacy requirements and minimum solvency margins. As a result of our consideration of overall capitalization needs, we may not utilize the entire amount of dividends available in 2022, which are based on applicable restrictions under current law. Approximately $861 million is available, without prior approval by regulatory authorities, during 2022 for the payment of dividends from Unum Group's traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes our captive reinsurers. Approximately £130 million is considered distributable from Unum Limited during 2022, subject to local solvency standards and regulatory approval.
Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution from non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by Unum Group, which does not apply to our current entity structure.
Funding for Employee Benefit Plans
We made contributions of $65.7 million and £3.6 million to our U.S. and U.K. defined contribution plans, respectively, in 2021 and expect to make contributions of approximately $75 million and £4.2 million during 2022. We made no contributions to our U.S. and U.K. qualified defined benefit pension plans during 2021. We do not expect to make any contributions to either plan during 2022. We have met all minimum pension funding requirements set forth by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act. We have estimated our future funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and under applicable U.K. law and do not believe that any future funding requirements will cause a material adverse effect on our liquidity. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our employee benefit plans.
Debt, Credit Facilities and Other Sources of Liquidity
There are no significant financial covenants associated with any of our outstanding debt obligations. We continually monitor our debt covenants to ensure we remain in compliance. We have not observed any current trends that would cause a breach of any debt covenants.
Maturities, Purchases, and Retirement of Debt
In June 2021, we purchased and retired $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.500% senior notes due 2025, for which we incurred costs of $67.3 million related to the early retirement of debt.
Northwind Holdings made periodic principal payments on the Northwind notes of $45.0 million in 2020 and $60.0 million in 2019. In December 2020, Northwind Holdings redeemed the remaining $35.0 million of principal on the Northwind notes, and was released of any contractual collateral requirements.
In September 2020, our $400.0 million 5.625% senior unsecured notes matured.
During 2019 we purchased and retired (i) $22.8 million aggregate liquidation amount of our 7.405% capital securities due 2038; (ii) $30.3 million aggregate principal amount of our 7.190% medium-term notes due 2028; (iii) $30.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 7.250% senior notes due 2028; and (iv) $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 3.000% senior notes due 2021.
Issuance of Debt
In June 2021, we issued $600.0 million of 4.125% senior notes due 2051. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in the right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt.
In May 2020, we issued $500.0 million of 4.500% senior notes due 2025, which were subsequently purchased and retired in June 2021 as previously discussed.
In September 2019, we issued $450.0 million of 4.500% senior notes due 2049. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in the right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt.
In June 2019, we issued $400.0 million of 4.000% senior notes due 2029. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in the right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt.
Credit Facilities
We have a credit facility that is under a five-year agreement and is effective through April 2024. The terms of this agreement provide for a borrowing capacity of $500.0 million with an option to be increased up to $700.0 million. We may also request, on up to two occasions, that the lenders' commitment termination dates be extended by one year. The credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit subject to certain terms and limitations. At December 31, 2021, letters of credit totaling $0.4 million had been issued from this credit facility, but there were no borrowed amounts outstanding. Borrowings under the credit facility are for general corporate uses and are subject to financial covenants, negative covenants, and events of default that are customary.
In the third quarter of 2021, we terminated our three-year, $100.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility, which was originally set to expire in April 2022. There were no letters of credit issued from the credit facility and there were no borrowed amounts outstanding at the time of termination. Also in the third quarter of 2021, we entered into a new five-year, £75 million unsecured standby letter of credit facility with the same syndicate of lenders, pursuant to which a syndicated letter of credit was issued in favor of Unum Limited (as beneficiary), our U.K. insurance subsidiary, and is available for drawings up to £75 million until its scheduled expiration in July 2026. No amounts have been drawn on the letter of credit. If drawings are made in the future, we may elect to borrow such amounts from the lenders pursuant to term loans made under the credit facility.
The two primary financial covenants for the credit facilities include limitations based on our leverage ratio and consolidated net worth. We are also subject to covenants that limit subsidiary indebtedness. The credit facilities provide for borrowings at an interest rate based either on the prime rate or federal funds rate.
See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our debt.
Facility Agreement for Contingent Issuance of Senior Notes
During November 2021, we entered into a 20-year facility agreement with a Delaware trust that gives us the right to issue and to sell to the trust, on one or more occasions, up to $400.0 million of 4.046% senior notes in exchange for a corresponding amount of U.S. Treasury securities held by the trust. These senior notes will not be issued unless and until the issuance right is exercised. The exercise of the issuance right triggers recognition of the senior notes on our consolidated balance sheets. We may also direct the trust to grant the right to exercise the issuance right with respect to all or a designated amount of the senior notes to one or more assignees (who are our consolidated subsidiaries or persons to whom we have an obligation). We pay a semi-annual facility fee to the trust at a rate of 2.225% per year on the unexercised portion of the maximum amount of senior notes that we could issue and sell to the trust and we reimburse the trust for its expenses. For more information, see Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of this agreement.
Shelf Registration
We filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2020 to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants. The shelf registration enables us to raise funds from the offering of any securities covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and our capital needs.
Cash Requirements
As previously discussed, cash is applied primarily to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of investments. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations to meet cash payment requirements. Summarized below are our estimated material cash requirements, both in the short-term (within 12 months) and the long-term (beyond 12 months) resulting from contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
•Policyholder liabilities totaled $47,394.1 million, of which $4,885.7 million is estimated to be paid in 2022. We also maintain reinsurance agreements for which the recoverable under those agreements totaled $14,165.3 million of which $1,228.3 million is estimated to offset related policyholder liability payments in 2022. Policyholder liabilities and the related reinsurance recoverable represent the projected payout of the current in-force policyholder liabilities and the expected cash inflows from reinsurers for liabilities ceded and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. We utilize extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the in force business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly over time.
•Payments related to our long-term debt and our credit and facility agreements, which include contractual principal and interest payments and therefore exceeds the amount shown in the consolidated balance sheets, totaled $6,860.4 million, of which $187.8 million in interest payments is estimated to be paid in 2022. We have no debt principal payments due in 2022.
•Investment commitments which represent commitments we have made to purchase or fund investments including privately placed fixed maturity securities, commercial mortgage loans, and private equity partnerships totaled $889.0 million, all of which is estimated to be paid in 2022 based on the expiration date of the commitments. The funds due for these commitments are due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from appropriate external parties and may or may not be funded and are therefore not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
•Amounts owed to reinsurers totaled $643.3 million of which $214.6 million is estimated to be paid in 2022.
•Pensions and OPEB which includes commitments related to our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for our employees, including our non-qualified pension plan, totaled $510.8 million, of which $19.1 million is estimated to be paid in 2022. Pension plan obligations, other than the non-qualified plan, represent our contributions to the pension plans and are projected based on the expected future minimum contributions as required under current U.S. and U.K. legislative funding requirements. Non-qualified pension plan and other postretirement benefit obligations represent the expected benefit payments related to these plans which we expect to pay, as incurred, from our general assets.
•Payables for general operating expenses and deferred compensation liabilities totaled $412.9 million of which $297.7 million is estimated to be paid in 2022.
•Obligations to return advances received from the FHLB and to return unrestricted cash collateral to our securities lending and derivative counterparties totaled $287.7 million of which $184.5 million is estimated to be repaid in 2022.
•Commissions due totaled $124.5 million all of which is estimated to be paid in 2022.
•We also have obligations with outside parties for computer data processing services, software maintenance agreements, and consulting services of $100.6 million, of which $53.9 million is estimated to be paid in 2022.
•Operating lease payments representing the amount of undiscounted minimum lease payments due totaled $96.1 million of which $22.6 million is estimated to be paid in 2022.
See "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained herein in this Item 7 and Notes 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, and 15 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our various commitments and obligations.
Transfers of Financial Assets
Our investment policy permits us to lend fixed maturity securities to unaffiliated financial institutions in short-term securities lending agreements, which increases our investment income with minimal risk. We account for all of our securities lending agreements and repurchase agreements as secured borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, we held $94.8 million of cash collateral from securities lending agreements. The average balance for securities lending agreements which were collateralized by cash during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $76.9 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $108.5 million. In addition, at December 31, 2021, we had $198.6 million of off-balance sheet securities lending agreements which were collateralized by securities that we were neither permitted to sell nor control. The average balance of
these off-balance sheet transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $171.4 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $211.9 million.
To manage our cash position more efficiently, we may enter into repurchase agreements with unaffiliated financial institutions. We generally use repurchase agreements as a means to finance the purchase of invested assets or for short-term general business purposes until projected cash flows become available from our operations or existing investments. We had no repurchase agreements outstanding at December 31, 2021, nor did we utilize any repurchase agreements during 2021. Our use of repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements can fluctuate during any given period and will depend on our liquidity position, the availability of long-term investments that meet our purchasing criteria, and our general business needs.
Certain of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries are members of regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB). As of December 31, 2021, we owned $22.1 million of FHLB common stock and had outstanding advances of $160.9 million from the regional FHLBs.
See Note 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information.
Consolidated Cash Flows
Operating Cash Flows
Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on policy renewals and growth of existing business, renewal price increases, and persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting our insurance reserves and capital and on the earned yield. The level of commissions and operating expenses is attributable to the level of sales and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business as well as the maintenance of existing business. The level of paid claims is affected partially by the growth and aging of the block of business and also by the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment.
Included in the change in insurance reserves and liabilities and net investment (gain) loss to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities as reported in our consolidated statements of cash flows for 2021 and 2020 were the impacts of the two phases of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction that occurred during the first quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020. Additionally, the operating cash flows for 2021 and 2020 included $456.8 million and $1,087.2 million, respectively, of cash paid to the reinsurer related to the two phases of the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction. Also included in the change in insurance reserves and liabilities for 2021 and 2020 were the net reserve changes related to the reserve assumption updates that occurred during the third quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020. See "Executive Summary" contained herein in this Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on the Closed Block individual disability reinsurance transaction and the reserve assumption updates.
Investing Cash Flows
Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Our investment strategy is to match the cash flows and durations of our assets with the cash flows and durations of our liabilities to meet the funding requirements of our business. When market opportunities arise, we may sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the yield and credit quality of our portfolio. We may at times also sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the duration matching of our assets and liabilities and/or re-balance our portfolio. As a result, sales before maturity may vary from period to period. The sale and purchase of short-term investments is influenced by proceeds received from FHLB funding advances, issuance of debt, our securities lending program, and by the amount of cash which is at times held in short-term investments to facilitate the availability of cash to fund the purchase of appropriate long-term investments, repay maturing debt, and/or to fund our capital deployment program.
See Note 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information.
Financing Cash Flows
Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, repurchase of common stock, dividends paid to stockholders, and policyholder account deposits and withdrawals related to our universal life products.
During 2021, we issued $600.0 million of 4.125% senior notes due 2051 and received total proceeds of $588.1 million.
Also during 2021, we purchased and retired $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 4.500% senior notes due 2025, for which we paid an additional $62.8 million in cash associated with the early retirement of this debt. We had issued the $500.0 million 4.500% senior notes in 2020 and had received total proceeds of $494.1 million.
During 2020, our $400.0 million 5.625% senior unsecured notes matured and we repaid the remaining $80.0 million of principal on our senior secured non-recourse notes issued by Northwind Holdings. During 2019, we purchased and retired $433.1 million aggregate liquidation/principal amount of our outstanding capital and debt securities, including debt repurchase costs of $25.9 million for a total cash outflow of $459.0 million. Also during 2019, we made principal payments of $60.0 million on the Northwind notes.
During 2019, we issued $450.0 million of 4.500% senior notes due 2049 and $400.0 million of 4.000% senior notes due 2029 and received total proceeds of $841.9 million.
Cash used to repurchase shares of Unum Group's common stock during 2021 and 2019 was $50.0 million and $400.3 million, respectively. There were no share repurchases made during 2020. During 2021, 2020, and 2019 we paid dividends of $239.4 million, $231.9 million, and $229.2 million, respectively, to holders of Unum Group's common stock.
Included in financing cash flows during 2021 and 2020 was $40.4 million and $62.1 million, respectively, of cash received related to the ALR cohort volatility agreement with Commonwealth.
See "Debt, Credit Facilities and Other Sources of Liquidity" contained herein in this Item 7, and Notes 8, 10, and 12 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information.
Ratings
AM Best, Fitch, Moody's, and S&P are among the third parties that assign issuer credit ratings to Unum Group and financial strength ratings to our insurance subsidiaries. We compete based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of our financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect us and could potentially, among other things, adversely affect our relationships with distributors of our products and services and retention of our sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect our ability to compete. A downgrade in the issuer credit rating assigned to Unum Group can be expected to adversely affect our cost of capital or our ability to raise additional capital.
The table below reflects the outlook as well as the issuer credit ratings for Unum Group and the financial strength ratings for each of our traditional insurance subsidiaries as of the date of this filing.
NR = not rated
We maintain an ongoing dialogue with the four rating agencies that evaluate us in order to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans as well as other pertinent issues. A significant component of our communications involves our annual review meeting with each of the four agencies. We hold other meetings throughout the year regarding our business, including, but not limited to, quarterly updates.
On April 8, 2021, Fitch affirmed its financial strength ratings for our domestic insurance subsidiaries and its issuer credit ratings on our senior debt obligations. In addition, Fitch revised its outlook to stable from negative, citing a favorable outlook compared to original COVID-19 expectations, earnings and capital metrics stability, and manageable credit losses.
On June 10, 2021, AM Best upgraded its financial strength rating on Starmount Life Insurance Company from A- to A, reflecting the strategic importance of dental and vision products for Unum Group, and also affirmed its financial strength rating for our other domestic insurance subsidiaries as well as its issuer credit ratings on our senior debt obligations. In addition, AM Best revised its outlook to stable from negative, citing an easing of balance sheet pressure due to improving COVID-19 related economic conditions, and favorable profitability trends that are expected to continue.
On November 8, 2021, Moody’s affirmed the financial strength rating of our rated insurance subsidiaries and its issuer credit rating on our senior debt obligations. In addition, Moody’s revised its outlook to stable from negative, citing good earnings and capital generation resulting from higher sales, growing premium income, positive performance in the Closed Block, and improving macro-economic conditions.
There have been no other changes in the rating agencies' outlooks or ratings during 2021 or in 2022 prior to the date of this filing.
Agency ratings are not directed toward the holders of our securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be regarded as an independent assessment, not conditional on any other rating. Given the dynamic nature of the ratings process, changes by these or other rating agencies may or may not occur in the near-term. We have ongoing dialogue with the rating agencies concerning our insurance risk profile, our financial flexibility, our operating performance, and the quality of our investment portfolios. The rating agencies provide specific criteria and, depending on our performance relative to the criteria, will determine future negative or positive rating agency actions.
See "Ratings" contained herein in Item 1 and "Risk Factors" contained herein in Item 1A for further discussion.