Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a global logistics and freight forwarding company. We operated via our wholly owned subsidiaries, Unique Logistics Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“UL HI”), Unique Logistics International (BOS) Inc, a Massachusetts corporation (“UL BOS”) and Unique Logistics International (NYC) LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“UL NYC”).
The Company provides a range of international logistics services that enable its customers to outsource to the Company sections of their supply chain process. The services provided by the Company are seamlessly managed by its network of trained employees and integrated information systems. We enable our customers to share data regarding their international vendors and purchase orders with us, execute the flow of goods and information under their operating instructions, provide visibility to the flow of goods from factory to distribution center or store and when required, update their inventory records.
Our range of services can be categorized as follows:
● Air Freight services
● Ocean Freight services
● Customs Brokerage and Compliance services
● Warehousing and Distribution services
● Order Management
Market Trends
Demand for space by ocean freight and air freight from United States importers surged in the period June 2021 through December 2021 as retailers increased inventory in anticipation of the post covid resurgence. This surge coupled with the impact of Covid related factory lockdowns in Vietnam resulted in logistics disruptions and ultimately unprecedented congestion in United States ports and airports. Air cargo charters, including passenger aircrafts converted to cargo charter flights were heavily in demand in the second half of 2021 and pricing of all shipping methods increased to unprecedented levels. The demand for shipping started slowing down in early 2022 and price of shipping has been on a declining trend since then. Many United States retailers found themselves with excessive inventory by the middle of 2022 and temporary corrections resulted in a softer logistics market from May 2022, with recovery expected in the later part of the year.
Business Trends
In response to the Market Trends reported, the Company stepped up its procurement of ocean freight and air freight capacity to meet the requirements of its customer base in the second half of 2021. The Company arranged ad hoc air cargo charter flights to the United States from Vietnam, India, Bangladesh, Singapore and Indonesia to meet customer demand for capacity.
The Company experienced not just a surge in volume but due to the elevated cost of shipping, revenues increased tremendously, while net revenue as a percentage declined.
The Company ceased the operation of ad hoc air cargo charter flights by March 2022 as regular capacity returned.
Significant Development
The Company has now initiated an internal process to develop its environmental, social and corporate governance (“ESG”) framework. An external consultant has been engaged to guide the Company in its initial steps. The Board of Directors and Management are fully committed towards ensuring that the Company is on a path to the systematic adoption of policies to identify, assess and manage sustainability-related risks and opportunities in respect to all organizational stakeholders (including but not limited to customers, suppliers and employees) and the environment.
Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company’s recorded total revenue from operations for the year ended May 31, 2022, and for the year ended May 31, 2021, in the amounts of approximately $1.0 billion and $371.9 million, respectively. Revenue by product line was reported as follows:
The year over year 173% revenue increase represents management’s success in combining the acquired entities, achievement of synergies, as well as significant increase in the number of customers, shipping volumes and the impact of market prices, for both Air Freight and Ocean Freight during the year. With its strategy in place, the Company is in a strong position to ensure growth both organically and through acquisitions in strategic geographic areas of our business.
Gross Profits
Product costs were $971.6 million for the year ended May 31, 2022, compared with $345.4 million for the year ended May 31, 2021. This increase in cost corresponded with increase in revenue. Gross Profit decreased from 7.1% to 4.2% for the years ended May 31, 2021 and 2022, respectively, due to a very challenging year in terms of increase in customer demand, capacity congestion, record high shipping costs and logistics industry challenges with both Air Freight and Ocean Freight. The Company’s management is anticipating growing revenue by adding strategic corporate accounts and margin normalization during the next fiscal year.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased overall to $26.4 million from $23.0 million for years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Personnel costs increased primarily due to increase in a number of full-time employees of the Company. Selling and promotions expenses increased due to higher selling costs, bad debt expense increased due to increase in allowance for uncollectable accounts, with other expenses increasing due to opening of several new offices in the US to accommodate customer growth.
Other Expenses
Other expenses comprised of interest expense, gain on forgiveness of promissory notes, amortization of debt discount and loss on extinguishment of convertible debt and change in fair value of derivative liabilities.
On December 10, 2021, the Company exchanged $3.9 million of convertible notes into Series C and D Preferred Stock on December 10, 2022, the Company recognized net loss on the extinguishment of convertible notes payable and warrants in Other Income (Expenses) and recognized approximately $4.6 million as deemed dividends as reflected in Income (loss) available to common shareholders line item of the statement of operations,
The Company also recorded $4.0 million net loss on the mark to market of the derivative liability associated with the Series A, C and D Preferred Stocks in Other Income (Expenses) in the statement of operations.
During the year ended May 31, 2022, interest expense and bank fees totaled approximately $5.6 million. The Company recorded approximately $0.8 million amortization of debt discount related to the convertible notes. In addition, during the year ended May 31, 2022, the Company was granted forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loans under the CARES Act, (the “PPP Loan”) and recorded a gain on forgiveness of approximately $0.4 million. At the same time, the Company recorded $0.6 million in non-operating loss during the third quarter related to the exchange of convertible notes and warrants into convertible preferred shares.
For the year ended May 31, 2021, Other income (expense) is comprised of interest expense, gain on forgiveness of promissory notes and loss on extinguishment of convertible debt. During the year ended May 31, 2021, interest expense totaled approximately $1.8 million and was comprised of $121,000 for bank interest charges, $310,000 for loan interest and approximately $1.4 million for accretion of debt discount related to the Company’s convertible notes. The Company recorded loss on extinguishment of convertible note payable of approximately $1.1 million, In addition, during the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company was granted forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loans under the CARES Act, (the “PPP Loan”) and recorded a gain on forgiveness of approximately $1.6 million.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income before deemed dividend was $3.5 million for the year ended May 31, 2022, compared to a net income of $1.7 million for the ended May 31, 2021. After recording a deemed dividend of $4.6 million in relation to the derivative liability discussed above in the company reported a net loss of $1.0 million attributable to common shareholders.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA to be earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, factoring fees, other income, net, stock-based compensation and expenses, merger and acquisition costs, restructuring, transition and acquisitions expense, net, goodwill impairment and certain other items.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the year ended May 31, 2022 increased by approximately $8.6 million compared to the period ended May 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We present adjusted EBITDA because we believe that adjusted EBITDA is a useful supplement to net income from operations as an indicator of operating performance. We use adjusted EBITDA as a financial metric to measure the financial performance of the business because management believes it provides additional information with respect to the performance of its fundamental business activities. For this reason, we believe adjusted EBITDA will also be useful to others, including our stockholders, as a valuable financial metric.
We believe that adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure and not a liquidity measure, and therefore a reconciliation between net income from continuing operations and adjusted EBITDA has been provided in the financial results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to income from operations or net income from operations as an indicator of performance or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as an indicator of cash flows, in each case as determined in accordance with GAAP, or as a measure of liquidity. In addition, adjusted EBITDA does not take into account changes in certain assets and liabilities as well as interest and income taxes that can affect cash flows. We do not intend the presentation of these non-GAAP measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for results prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Following is the reconciliation of our consolidated net income to adjusted EBITDA:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis. Substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern exists when conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, indicate that it is probable that the entity will be unable to meet its obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
As of May 31, 2022, the Company reported working capital of approximately $4.2 million compared with negative $3.5 million working capital as of May 31, 2021.
The Company took the following steps to improve liquidity year over year:
● Strong operational performance resulted in increase in EBITDA from $8.9 million during the year ended May 31, 2021 to $17.3 million during the year ended May 31, 2022
● The Company entered into Fourth Amendment to the TBK Loan Agreement to increase its credit facility from $47.5.0 million to $57.5 million until October 2022 with an option to extend beyond that date.
● The Company exchanged all of its Convertible Notes and associated Warrants into shares of Convertible Preferred Shares Series C and D
Since its inception, the Company has experienced significant business growth. To fund such growth operating capital was initially provided by third party investors through Convertible Notes and on December 10, 2021 exchanged into Convertible Preferred Shares Series A, C and D with fixed ownership percentage of the company. Preferred shares are more beneficial to the company because they don’t require cash repayments. Due to the antidilution provision imbedded in the Convertible Preferred Shares, these provisions resulted in an embedded derivative and the company recorded a current liability during the quarter ended on February 28, 2022 in the amount of $12.7 million (See Derivative Liability note below). Prior to quarter ended February 28, 2022, this liability was not material. This liability is recorded as a long-term liability due to its future settlement in common stocks on the balance sheet and is being adjusted to market on each of the subsequent reporting period.
The Company is also in process of potentially raising additional capital through the planned underwritten offering of securities that would provide funds for planned acquisitions and operating capital. While we continue to execute our strategic plan, we will be tightly managing our cash and monitoring our liquidity position. We have implemented a number of initiatives to conserve our liquidity position including activities such as raising additional capital, increasing credit facilities, reducing cost of debt, controlling general and administrative expenditures and improving collection processes. Many of the aspects of the plan involve management’s judgments and estimates that include factors that could be beyond our control and actual results could differ from our estimates. These and other factors could cause the strategic plan to be unsuccessful which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, and liquidity. Use of operating cash is an indicator that there could be a going concern issue, but based on our evaluation of the Company’s projected cash flows and business performance subsequent to the balance sheet date, management has concluded that the Company’s current cash and cash availability under the line of credit as of May 31, 2022, would be sufficient to alleviate a going concern issue for at least one year from the date these consolidated financial statements are issued.
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital at May 31, 2022 compared to May 31, 2021:
The change in working capital deficit is primarily attributable to an increase in accounts payable - trade of $10.0 million, an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $3.3 million, an increase in line of credit of $38.1 million and an increase in derivative liability of $12.4 million. This was offset by increase in trade accounts receivable of $54.4 million, an increase of contract assets of $7.5 million.
Operating activities used cash of $34.0 million for the year ended May 31, 2022 compared to net cash used by operations of $161,906 for the year ended May 31, 2021. Primary reason for cash used for the year ended May 31, 2022, was a significant increase in accounts receivables, reflecting repurchase of trade receivables using new revolving credit facility and significant increase in business during the year ended May 31, 2022. This increase in receivables was completely offset by increase in financing activities below.
Investing activities used cash of $72,001 for the year ended May 31, 2022 compared to $51,489 for the year ended May 31, 2021. During the year ended May 31, 2022, investing activities consisted of purchasing office equipment.
Financing activities provided cash of $35.3 million for the year ended May 31, 2022 and was the result of receiving aggregate gross proceeds of $38 million from line of credit and $2.0 million of proceeds from notes payable. These increases were offset by repayments of notes payable and related party debt of $4.9 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - “Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”. This ASU amends the guidance on convertible instruments and the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity, and also improves and amends the related EPS guidance for both Subtopics. ASU 2020-06 is effective for public business entities, other than smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC starting January 1, 2022. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the consolidated financial statements prepared by management and are based upon management’s current judgments. These judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience regarding past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect our consolidated financial statements, the areas that are particularly significant include revenue recognition; the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities; fair value of contingent consideration; the assessment of the recoverability of long-lived assets, goodwill and intangible assets; and leases.
We perform an impairment test of goodwill for each year unless events or circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred before that time. We assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount. After assessing qualitative factors, if further testing is necessary, we would determine the fair value of each reporting unit and compare the fair value to the reporting unit’s carrying amount.
Intangible assets consist of customer relationships, trade names and trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from our acquisitions. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over 12 to 15 years. Tradenames, trademarks and non-compete agreements, are amortized on a straight-line basis over 3 to 10 years.
We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. If the sum of the undiscounted expected future cash flows over the remaining useful life of a long-lived asset is less than its carrying amount, the asset is considered to be impaired. Impairment losses are measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. When fair values are not available, we estimate fair value using the expected future cash flows discounted at a rate commensurate with the risks associated with the recovery of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
For the year ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, the Company conducted its annual review of impairment of goodwill and intangible assets and no impairment was identified.
The Company has identified derivative instruments arising from an anti-dilution provision in the Company’s preferred stock. Each reporting period, the embedded derivative liability, if material, would be adjusted to reflect fair value at each period end with changes in fair value recorded in the “Change in fair value of embedded derivative liability” financial statement line item of the company’s statements of operations.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements.