ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K beginning on page. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Investors should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and actual results could differ materially from those discussed herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to the differences are discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those predicted in these forward-looking statements, and the events anticipated in the forward-looking statements may not actually occur. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to conform these statements to actual results or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, unless required by applicable laws or regulations.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues- For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenues from continuing operations of approximately $47.67 million, compared to approximately $6.16 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $41.51 million. The year-over-year increase was driven by increase in existing dispensary revenue of $3.15 million, acquired dispensary revenue of $15.99 million and acquired distribution revenue of $23.05 million offset by the reclassification of Nuleaf revenues to discontinued operations. The existing dispensary revenue achieved a 36.8% increase over 2020 as we rebound from the initial impact of COVID-19 and civil unrest.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin- Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $11.97 million, compared to a gross profit of approximately, $2.64 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $9.32 million. Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 25.1% compared with the gross margin of 42.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year over year margin decrease was due to the inclusion of the lower margin distribution operation into the portfolio in 2021. In 2020, the operation was exclusively retail.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses- Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $48.26 million, compared to approximately $19.32 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $28.94 million. In general the increase was due to costs associated with the acquisitions brought on-board in 2021 that resulted in a significantly larger company. We ended 2021 with six retail operations compared with two in 2020; as well as three distribution centers compared to none in 2020; and we ended 2021 with 334 employees compared to 52 employees at the end of 2020. As a result of operating a larger organization, we saw increases in the following areas: (i) a $4.38 million increase in salaries / payroll taxes (excluding severance), (ii) a $3.13 million increase in amortization and depreciation expenses, (iii) a $2.45 million increase in allowance for doubtful accounts, (iv) a $1.93 million increase in business and city taxes, (v) a $1.90 million increase in stock compensation expense, (vi) a $1.71 million increase in consulting and professional fees, (vii) a $1.39 million increase in insurance expense, (viii) a $1.10 million increase in advertising and promotion expense, (ix) a $1.09 million increase in security expense, and (x) a $0.87 million increase in rent expense. Another significant driver of expense increase in 2021 was a $9.10 million severance expense for the departure of the company's founders. This was an increase of $9.05 million over the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Operating Gain/Expense - Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $3.04 million, compared to Other expenses of $19.91 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $16.87 million. The 2021 activity had $6.18 million of goodwill impairment charges compared to $19.91 million of like charges in 2020. In 2021 we also had $3.13 million gain on sale of assets.
Other Income / (Expense) - Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $2.85 million compared to Other income of $28.58 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $31.43 million. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to 2020 income driven by the mark-to-market of the company’s investment in Hydrofarm Holdings, a $29.04 million unrealized gain. 2021 saw an additional gain of $5.34 million when we sold the Hydrofarm Holdings investment, however that was offset by $5.98 million of extinguishment of debt costs.
Management will continue its efforts to lower operating expenses and increase revenue. We will continue to invest in further expanding our operations and a comprehensive marketing campaign with the goal of accelerating the education of potential clients and promoting our name and our products. Given that most of the operating expenses are fixed or have a quasi-fixed character, management expects that, as revenue increases, those expenses, as a percentage of revenue, will significantly decrease. Nevertheless, there can be no assurance that we will be able to increase our revenues in succeeding quarters.
Going Concern
We have incurred significant losses in prior periods. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $31.27 million and, as of that date, we had an accumulated deficit of $250.02 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $30.12 million and, as of that date, we had an accumulated deficit of $219.80 million. At December 31, 2021, we had a cash balance of approximately $6.89 million, compared to a cash balance of approximately $0.89 million at December 31, 2020. We have not been able to generate sufficient cash from operating activities to fund our ongoing operations. Since our inception, we have raised capital through private sales of common stock, and debt securities. Our future success is dependent upon our ability to achieve profitable operations and generate cash from operating activities. Management feels that our past and current efforts to trim cost and our recent marketing and promotional efforts to boost sales will lead to cash sustainability, however there is no guarantee that we will be able to generate enough revenue and/or raise capital to support our operations.
We anticipate receiving approximately $15 million over the next three months as compensation for asset sales. We anticipate these cash in-flows and acquisitions of complementary businesses to allow for our operations to grow to cash sustainability.
Given the risks and uncertainties regarding the future of our business due to COVID-19 and regulatory uncertainty, as well as our historical lack of profitability, there is substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance of these financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. For additional information, see Item 1A - “Risk Factors”in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $17.75 million, compared to approximately $14.84 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $2.91 million increase in cash used was due to operating more stores, more distribution centers, and more cultivation sites in 2021 compared to 2020.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash provided in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $20.79 million, compared to $11.80 million provided in investing activities for the year ended 2020, an increase of $8.99 million. This increase was driven by the $39.38 million in proceeds from sales of the Hydrofarm investment partially offset by $24.40 million paid for the People's and Silverstreak acquisitions.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $4.50 million, compared to $2.70 million for the prior year. This is an increase of $1.80 million year-over-year. The cash provided by financing activities in 2021 had less cash provided by issuance of notes payable and more cash provided by issuance of common stock than 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We disclose those accounting policies that we consider to be significant in determining the amounts to be utilized for communicating our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows in Note 2 - “Summary of
Significant Accounting Policies”to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results are likely to differ from these estimates, but management does not believe such differences will materially affect our financial position or results of operations.
See Note 2 -“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Financial Statements for further information on accounting policies that we believe to be critical, including our policies on:
Business Combinations
Revenue Recognition
Stock-Based Compensation
Notes Receivable
Goodwill
Long-Lived and Intangible Assets
Valuation of Inventory
Deferred Income Taxes
Fair Value Estimates
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Financial Statements for information regarding accounting standards adopted in 2021 and other new accounting standards that were issued but not effective as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements. A critical accounting estimate is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. Based on a critical assessment of our accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that our financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and present a meaningful presentation of our financial condition and results of operations.
Our critical accounting estimates include:
•Valuation of long-lived assets, including intangible assets and goodwill
•Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets. (See notes 2 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements)
Below, we discuss this policy further, as well as the estimates and judgments involved. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, Including Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We carry a variety of long-lived assets on our balance sheet including property, plant and equipment, goodwill, and other intangibles. Impairment is the condition that exists when the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value, and any impairment charge that we record reduces our operating income. Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net of the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We conduct impairment tests on goodwill annually as of September 30, or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. We conduct impairment tests on long-lived assets, other than goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, held and used by the Company are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. The Company evaluates recoverability of assets to be held and used and if the carrying value is not recoverable, management estimates the fair value of the asset and compares it to the carrying value. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. Management determines the asset’s fair value utilizing estimates such as management’s short-term and long-term forecast of operating performance, the remaining useful life and service potential of the asset.
We perform our annual trade name impairment assessment by comparing the estimated fair value of the trade name to the carrying value. We utilize the Relief from Royalty method, which utilizes estimates and assumptions that include management’s revenue forecast, royalty rates avoided, and a discount rate based on the Company’s estimated cost of equity. In selecting appropriate royalty and discount rates, comparable public companies and royalty transactions are examined. Selection of appropriate comparable companies and royalty transactions involves a significant amount of judgement.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment assessment for the Black Oak Gallery reporting unit by comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value. We utilized the Guideline Public Company valuation method, which evaluates the prices paid for publicly traded company equities as the basis to determine the fair value of the subject company. The analysis involves significant assumptions regarding the selection of comparable public companies, revenue multiple, and control premium. When performing tests for impairment in between annual tests, management may at times use alternative approaches to estimating the fair value of the Black Oak Gallery reporting unit. These approaches consider trends in the Company’s overall market capitalization and operating results.