Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Please read this discussion of our financial condition and results of operations with the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Item 8 of this report.
Introduction
We operate, manage, and analyze our results of operations through our three principal business segments:
•Oil and Natural Gas - carried out by our subsidiary Unit Petroleum Company. This segment explores, develops, acquires, and produces oil and natural gas properties for our own account.
•Contract Drilling - carried out by our subsidiary Unit Drilling Company. This segment contracts to drill onshore oil and natural gas wells for others and for our own account.
•Mid-Stream - carried out by our subsidiary Superior Pipeline Company, L.L.C. and its subsidiaries. This segment buys, sells, gathers, processes, and treats natural gas for third parties and for our own account. We own 50% of this subsidiary.
In our oil and natural gas segment, we are optimizing production and converting non-producing reserves to producing, with selective drilling activities in core areas. The company initiated an asset divestiture program at the beginning of 2021 to sell certain non-core oil and gas properties and reserves (the “Divestiture Program”). On October 4, 2021, the company announced that it is expanding the Divestiture Program to now include the potential sale of additional properties, including up to all of UPC’s oil and gas properties and reserves. On January 20, 2022, the company announced that it has retained a financial advisor and launched the process.
In our contract drilling segment, management reduced the number of drilling rigs available for use from 58 at December 31, 2020 to 21 during the second quarter of 2021 in order to focus on utilization of our BOSS drilling rigs and certain SCR rigs that are either currently under contract or candidates for future upgrades. Of the 21 rigs available for use, 14 are currently working, 3 are actively being marketed, and the remaining 4 will be considered for upgrade and marketing as future conditions warrant. We also plan to continue seeking opportunities to divest non-core, idle drilling equipment.
In our mid-stream segment, we are focused on continuing to generate predictable free cash flows with limited exposure to commodity prices. We also plan to continue seeking business development opportunities in our core areas utilizing the Superior credit agreement (which Unit is not a party to and does not guarantee) or other financing sources that are available to it.
Upon our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases on September 3, 2020, we adopted fresh start accounting as required by US GAAP. As a result of the application of fresh start accounting, as well as the effects of the implementation of the Plan, our consolidated financial statements after August 31, 2020 are not comparable with our consolidated financial statements prior to that date.
Recent Developments
Commodity Price Environment and COVID-19 Pandemic
Our success depends, among other things, on prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production, the demand for oil, natural gas, and NGLs, and the demand for our drilling rigs which influences the amounts we can charge for those drilling rigs. While our operations are all within the United States, events outside the United States affect us and our industry, including political and economic uncertainty and geopolitical activity.
We are continuously monitoring the current and potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including any new variants, on our business. This includes how it has and may continue to impact our operations, financial results, liquidity, customers, employees, and vendors as new COVID-19 variants may have undetermined impacts to our business. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented various measures to ensure we are conducting our business in a safe and secure manner.
During the last two years commodity prices have been volatile, and the outlook for future oil and gas prices remains uncertain and subject to many factors. The following chart reflects the significant fluctuations in the historical prices for oil and natural gas:
The following chart reflects the significant fluctuations in the prices for NGLs(1):
_________________________
1.NGLs prices reflect a weighted-average, based on production, of Mont Belvieu and Conway prices.
Stock Repurchase Activity
In June 2021, we repurchased an aggregate of 600,000 shares of our common stock from the Lenders (as defined in Note 10 - Long-Term Debt And Other Long-Term Liabilities) which received these shares as an exit fee during our reorganization. The Lenders were paid $15.00 per share for their respective shares, for an aggregate cash purchase price of $9.0 million.
In June 2021, our board of directors (the Board) authorized repurchasing up to $25.0 million of our outstanding common stock. In October 2021, the Board authorized an increase from $25.0 million of authorized repurchases to $50.0 million. The repurchases will be made through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, or other available means. We have no obligation to repurchase any shares under the repurchase program and may suspend or discontinue it at any time without prior notice.
As of December 31, 2021, we had repurchased a total of 1,271,963 shares at an average share price of $32.57 for an aggregate purchase price of $41.4 million under the repurchase program.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we also repurchased 78,000 shares in a privately negotiated transaction at a share price of $19.07 which were not part of the repurchase program.
The cumulative number of shares repurchased as of December 31, 2021 totaled 1,949,963, resulting in outstanding shares of 10,050,037.
Warrants
Each holder of the Old Common Stock outstanding before the Effective Date that did not opt out of the release under the Plan, is entitled to receive 0.03460447 warrants for every share of Old Common Stock owned. Each warrant will initially be exercisable for one share of New Common Stock, subject to adjustment as provided in the Warrant Agreement. The exercise price of the Warrants will be determined, and the Warrants will become exercisable, once the Debtors have completed the claims reconciliation process and resolved any objections to disputed claims under the Bankruptcy Petitions. The initial exercise price per share for the Warrants will be set at an amount that implies a recovery by holders of the Subordinated Notes of the $650 million principal amount of the Subordinated Notes plus interest thereon to the May 15, 2021 maturity date of the Notes. The Warrants expire on the earliest of (i) September 3, 2027, (ii) consummation of a Cash Sale (as defined in the Warrant Agreement) or (iii) the consummation of a liquidation, dissolutions or winding up of the company (such earliest date, the Expiration Date). Each Warrant that is not exercised on or before the Expiration Date will expire, and all rights under that Warrant and the Warrant Agreement will cease on the Expiration Date.
The warrants issued to holders of the company’s Old Common Stock that did not opt-out of the releases under the Plan and that owned their shares of old common stock through Direct Registration are outlined below:
The company expects to issue approximately 21,117 more Warrants to the holders of the Old Common Stock that did not opt-out of the releases under the Plan and owned their shares through Direct Registration.
Superior MSA and LLC amendments
Effective March 1, 2022, the employees of the Operator were transferred to Superior and the MSA was amended and restated to remove the operating services the Operator was providing to Superior. There was no change to the monthly service fee for shared services. The power to direct the activities that most significantly affect Superior's operating performance is now shared by the equity holders (Unit Corporation and SP Investor) rather than held by the Operator. Superior no longer qualifies as a VIE subsequent to these amendments and we will no longer consolidate the financial position, operating results, and cash flows of Superior as of March 1, 2022. We will subsequently account for our investment in Superior as an equity method investment under the HLBV method.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Summary
In this section, we identify those critical accounting policies we follow in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. Many policies require us to make difficult, subjective, and complex judgments while making estimates of matters inherently imprecise. Some accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported under different conditions, or had different assumptions been used. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions regularly. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which support making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our financial statements.
Significant Estimates and Assumptions
Full Cost Method of Accounting for Oil, NGLs, and Natural Gas Properties. Determining our oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves is a subjective process. It entails estimating underground accumulations of oil, NGLs, and natural gas that cannot be measured in an exact manner. Accuracy of these estimates depends on several factors, including, the quality and availability of geological and engineering data, the precision of the interpretations of that data, and individual judgments. Each year, we hire an independent petroleum engineering firm to audit our internal evaluation of our reserves. That audit as of December 31, 2021 covered those reserves we projected to comprise 85% of the total proved developed future net income discounted at 10% (based on the SEC's unescalated pricing policy). Included in Part I, Item 1 of this report are the qualifications of our independent petroleum engineering firm and our employees responsible for preparing our reserve reports.
The accuracy of estimating oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves varies with the reserve classification and the related accumulation of available data, as shown in this table:
Assumptions of future oil, NGLs, and natural gas prices and operating and capital costs also play a significant role in estimating these reserves and the estimated present value of the cash flows to be received from the future production of those reserves. Volumes of recoverable reserves are influenced by the assumed prices and costs due to the economic limit (that point when the projected costs and expenses of producing recoverable oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves are greater than the projected revenues from the oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves). But more significantly, the estimated present value of the future cash flows from our oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves is sensitive to prices and costs and may vary materially based on different assumptions. We use full cost accounting which factors in the unweighted arithmetic average of the commodity prices existing on the first day of each of the twelve months before the end of the reporting period to calculate discounted future revenues, unless prices were otherwise determined under contractual arrangements.
We compute DD&A on a units-of-production method. Each quarter, we use these formulas to compute the provision for DD&A for our producing properties:
•DD&A Rate = Unamortized Cost / End of Period Reserves Adjusted for Current Period Production
•Provision for DD&A = DD&A Rate x Current Period Production
Unamortized cost includes all capitalized costs, estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing proved reserves and estimated dismantlement and abandonment costs, net of estimated salvage values less accumulated amortization, unproved properties, and equipment not placed in service.
Oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserve estimates have a significant impact on our DD&A rate. If future reserve estimates for a property or group of properties are revised downward, the DD&A rate will increase because of the revision. If reserve estimates are revised upward, the DD&A rate will decrease.
The DD&A expense on our oil and natural gas properties is calculated each quarter using period end reserve quantities adjusted for period production.
We account for our oil and natural gas exploration and development activities using the full cost method of accounting. Under this method, we capitalize all costs incurred in the acquisition, exploration, and development of oil and natural gas properties. At the end of each quarter, the net capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties are limited to that amount which is the lower of unamortized costs or a ceiling. The ceiling is defined as the sum of the present value (using a 10% discount rate) of the estimated future net revenues from our proved reserves (based on the unescalated 12-month average price on our oil, NGLs, and natural gas adjusted for any cash flow hedges), plus the cost of properties not being amortized, plus the lower of the cost or estimated fair value of unproved properties included in the costs being amortized, less related income taxes. If the net capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties exceed the ceiling, we are required to write-down the excess amount. A ceiling test write-down is a non-cash charge reducing earnings and shareholders’ equity in the period of occurrence, resulting in lower DD&A expense in future periods. A write-down cannot be reversed once incurred.
The risk that we will be required to write-down the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties increases when the prices for oil, NGLs, and natural gas are depressed or if we have large downward revisions in our estimated proved oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves. Application of these rules during periods of relatively low prices, even if temporary, increases the chance of a ceiling test write-down. At December 31, 2021, our reserves were calculated based on applying 12-month 2021 average unescalated prices of $66.56 per barrel of oil, $44.22 per barrel of NGLs, and $3.60 per Mcf of natural gas (then adjusted for price differentials) over the estimated life of each of our oil and natural gas properties.
Impairment of Other Property and Equipment. We review the carrying amounts of long-lived assets for potential impairment when events occur or changes in circumstances suggest these carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Changes that could prompt an assessment include equipment obsolescence, changes in the market demand for a specific asset, changes in commodity prices, periods of relatively low drilling rig utilization, declining revenue per day, declining cash margin per day, or overall changes in general market conditions. Assets are determined to be impaired if a forecast of undiscounted estimated future net operating cash flows directly related to the asset, including disposal value if any, is less than the carrying amount of the asset. If any asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying asset exceeds its fair value. The estimate of fair value is based on the best information available, including prices for similar assets. Changes in these estimates could cause us to reduce the carrying value of property and equipment. Asset impairment evaluations are, by nature, highly subjective. They involve expectations about future cash flows generated by our assets and reflect our assumptions and judgments regarding future industry conditions and their effect on future utilization levels, dayrates, and costs. Using different estimates and assumptions could result in materially different carrying values of our assets.
Asset Retirement Obligations. We are required to record the estimated fair value of the liabilities relating to the future retirement of our long-lived assets. Our oil and natural gas wells are plugged and abandoned when the oil and natural gas reserves in those wells are depleted or the wells are no longer able to produce. The estimated liabilities related to these future costs are recorded at the time the wells are drilled or acquired. We use historical experience to determine the estimated plugging costs considering the well's type, depth, physical location, and ultimate productive life. A risk-adjusted discount rate and an inflation factor are applied to estimate the present value of these obligations. We depreciate the capitalized asset retirement cost and accrete the obligation over time. Revisions to the obligations and assets are recognized at the appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate with a corresponding adjustment made to the full cost pool. Our mid-stream segment has property and equipment at locations leased or under right of way agreements which may require asset removal or site restoration, however, we are not able to reasonably measure the fair value of the obligations as the potential settlement dates are indeterminable.
Warrant Liability. We recognize the fair value of the warrants as a derivative liability on our consolidated balance sheets with changes in the liability reported as loss on change in fair value of warrants in our consolidated statements of operations. The liability will continue to be adjusted to fair value at each reporting period until the warrants meet the definition of an equity instrument, at which time they will be reported as shareholders' equity and no longer subject to future fair value adjustments.
Bankruptcy Reorganization. We have applied Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 852, Reorganizations (ASC 852) in preparing our consolidated financial statements. ASC 852 requires that the financial statements, for periods subsequent to the Chapter 11 Cases, distinguish transactions and events that are directly associated with the reorganization from the ongoing operations of the business. Accordingly, certain expenses, realized gains and losses and provisions for losses that are realized or incurred in the bankruptcy proceedings, are recorded in reorganization items, net on our accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Fresh Start. The company qualified for and adopted fresh start accounting under the provisions of ASC 852. When applying ASC 852, an entity determines its reorganization value and enterprise value. Reorganization value, as determined under ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, represents the fair value of the entity's total assets before the consideration of liabilities and is intended to approximate the amount a willing buyer would pay for the assets immediately after a restructuring. The entity's enterprise value represents the estimated fair value of an entity’s long-term debt and equity. The assumptions used in estimating these values are inherently uncertain and require significant judgment.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848)-Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. The FASB issued ASU 2020-04 and ASU 2021-01 which provide and clarify optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contract modifications, subject to meeting certain criteria, that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. The amendments within these ASUs will be in effect for a limited time beginning March 12, 2020, and an entity may elect to apply the amendments prospectively through December 31, 2022. We have not yet elected to use the optional guidance and continue to evaluate the options provided by ASU 2020-04 and ASU 2021-01.
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The FASB issued ASU 2020-06 which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by removing certain accounting models which separate the embedded conversion features from the host contract for convertible instruments. The ASU further removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We will adopt ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2022. The adoption of this ASU is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Income Taxes (Topic 740)-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The FASB issued ASU 2019-12 to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. The amendment is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements.
Financial Condition and Liquidity
Summary
Our financial condition and liquidity primarily depend on the cash flow from our operations and borrowings under our credit agreements. The principal factors determining our cash flow are:
•the amount of natural gas, oil, and NGLs we produce;
•the prices we receive for our natural gas, oil, and NGLs production;
•the use of our drilling rigs and the dayrates we receive for those drilling rigs; and
•the fees and margins we obtain from our natural gas gathering and processing contracts.
We currently expect that cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and available funds under the Exit credit agreement and the Superior credit agreement are adequate to cover our liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Below is a summary of certain financial information for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our operating cash flow is primarily influenced by the prices we receive for our oil, NGLs, and natural gas production, the oil, NGL, and natural gas we produce, settlements of derivative contracts, third-party use for our drilling rigs and mid-stream services, and the rates we can charge for those services. Our cash flows from operating activities are also affected by changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $101.2 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increased operating profit in all three segments partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities related to the timing of cash receipts and disbursements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We have historically dedicated a substantial portion of our capital budgets to our exploration for and production of oil, NGLs, and natural gas. These expenditures are necessary to off-set the inherent production declines typically experienced in oil and gas wells. Although we have curtailed our spending throughout 2020 and into 2021, we expect the majority of future capital budgets to be focused on low cost capital projects to enhance production and reserves in this favorable price environment.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities increased by $58.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to proceeds received from the disposition of our corporate headquarters building and land, an increase in proceeds received from the disposition of other non-core assets, and a decrease in capital expenditures resulting from a decrease in the number of wells drilled and oil and gas property acquisitions, partially offset by the Superior gathering system acquisition.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities decreased by $120.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher payments on our credit agreements, the repurchase of common stock, lower borrowings under our credit agreements, distributions made to non-controlling interests, and lower bank overdrafts.
As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents totaling $64.1 million, which includes $17.2 million of cash and cash equivalents held by Superior, and $19.2 million of outstanding borrowings, all of which was borrowed under the Superior credit agreement. Unit had no outstanding borrowings under the Exit credit agreement.
Below, we summarize certain financial information as of December 31:
Working Capital
Typically, our working capital balance fluctuates, in part, because of the timing of our trade accounts receivable and accounts payable and the fluctuation in current assets and liabilities associated with the mark to market value of our derivative activity. We had positive working capital of $5.8 million at December 31, 2021 compared to positive working capital of $2.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily due to higher cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable, partially offset by higher current derivative liabilities, warrant liability, and accounts payable. Both the Superior credit agreement and the Exit credit agreement may be used for working capital. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Exit credit agreement and $19.2 million of outstanding borrowings under the Superior credit agreement. The effect of our derivatives decreased working capital by $40.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and decreased working capital by $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Credit Agreements
Exit Credit Agreement. On the Effective Date, under the terms of the Plan, the company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the Exit credit agreement), providing for a $140.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (RBL Facility) and a $40.0 million senior secured term loan facility, among (i) the company, UDC, and UPC (together, the Borrowers), (ii) the guarantors party thereto, including the company and all of its subsidiaries existing as of the Effective Date (other than Superior Pipeline Company, L.L.C. and its subsidiaries), (iii) the lenders party thereto from time to time (Lenders), and (iv) BOKF, NA dba Bank of Oklahoma as administrative agent and collateral agent (in such capacity, the Administrative Agent). The maturity date of borrowings under this Exit credit agreement is March 1, 2024.
Our Exit credit agreement is primarily used for working capital purposes as it limits the amount that can be borrowed for capital expenditures. These limitations restrict future capital projects using the Exit credit agreement. The Exit credit agreement also requires that proceeds from the disposition of certain assets be used to repay amounts outstanding.
On April 6, 2021, the company finalized the first amendment to the Exit credit agreement. Under the first amendment, the company reaffirmed its borrowing base of $140.0 million of the RBL, amended certain financial covenants, and received less restrictive terms as it relates to the disposition of assets and the use of proceeds from those dispositions.
On July 27, 2021, the company finalized the second amendment to the Exit credit agreement. Under the second amendment, the company obtained confirmation that the Term Loan had been paid in full prior to the amendment date and received one-time waivers related to the disposition of assets.
On October 19, 2021, the company finalized the third amendment to the Exit credit agreement. Under the third amendment, the company requested, and was granted, a reduction in the RBL borrowing base from $140.0 million to $80.0 million in addition to less restrictive terms as it relates to capital expenditures, required hedges, and the use of proceeds from the disposition of certain assets, while also amending certain financial covenants.
On March 30, 2022, the RBL Facility borrowing base of $80.0 million was reaffirmed.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the company repaid $145.1 million of borrowings under the Exit credit agreement with cash generated from operations as well as from proceeds from divestitures of non-core assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding long-term borrowings under the Exit credit agreement.
Superior Credit Agreement. On May 10, 2018, Superior signed a five-year, $200.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility with an option to increase the credit amount up to $250.0 million, subject to certain conditions (Superior credit agreement). The maturity date of borrowings under the Superior credit agreement is March 10, 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we had $19.2 million of borrowings and $0.5 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Superior credit agreement.
Capital Requirements
Oil and Natural Gas Segment Dispositions, Acquisitions, and Capital Expenditures. Most of our capital expenditures for this segment are discretionary and directed toward growth. Our decisions to increase our oil, NGLs, and natural gas reserves through acquisitions or through drilling depends on the prevailing or expected market conditions, potential return on investment, future drilling potential, and opportunities to obtain financing, which provide us flexibility in deciding when and if to incur these costs.
Capital expenditures for oil and gas properties on the full cost method for the year ended December 31, 2021 by this segment, excluding a $0.5 million increase in the ARO liability, totaled $17.3 million. Capital expenditures for the four months ended December 31, 2020, excluding a $1.7 million reduction in the ARO liability, totaled $4.0 million while capital expenditures for the eight months ended August 31, 2020, excluding a $29.2 million reduction in the ARO liability and $0.4 million for acquisitions (including associated ARO), totaled $5.4 million. We participated in the completion of 12 gross wells (1.75 net wells) drilled by other operators during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 3 gross wells (0.30 net wells) drilled by other operators in which we participated during the four months ended December 31, 2020 and 16 gross wells (0.35 net wells) drilled by other operators in which we participated during the eight months ended August 31, 2020.
On June 25, 2021, the company entered into a purchase and sale agreement to which we agreed to sell substantially all of our wells and the leases related thereto located near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma for $19.5 million, subject to customary closing and post-closing adjustments. The divestiture closed on August 16, 2021, with an effective date of May 1, 2021. The sale of these assets did not result in a significant alteration of the full cost pool, and therefore no gain or loss was recognized.
On March 30, 2021, the company entered into a purchase and sale agreement to which we agreed to sell substantially all of our wells and the leases related thereto located in Reno and Stafford Counties, Kansas for $7.1 million, subject to customary closing and post-closing adjustments. This divestiture closed on May 6, 2021, with an effective date of February 1, 2021. The sale of these assets did not result in a significant alteration of the full cost pool and therefore, no gain or loss was recognized.
We also sold $5.0 million of other non-core oil and natural gas assets, net of related expenses, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million during the four months ended December 31, 2020, and $1.2 million during the eight months ended August 31, 2020. No gain or loss was recognized as the sale of these assets did not result in a significant alteration of the full cost pool.
Contract Drilling Segment Dispositions, Acquisitions, and Capital Expenditures. Capital expenditures for 2021 were primarily related to maintenance capital on operating drilling rigs. We also pursued the disposal or sale of our non-core, idle drilling rig fleet. We incurred $2.9 million in capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.6 million and $2.4 million during the four months ended December 31, 2020 and eight months ended August 31, 2020, respectively.
We sold non-core contract drilling assets for proceeds of $12.7 million, net of related expenses, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.3 million during the four months ended December 31, 2020, and $4.8 million during the eight months ended August 31, 2020. These proceeds resulted in net gains of $10.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.5 million during the four months ended December 31, 2020, and $1.4 million during the eight months ended August 31, 2020.
Mid-Stream Dispositions, Acquisitions, and Capital Expenditures. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our mid-stream segment incurred $24.5 million in capital expenditures (including the $13.0 million acquisition of a gathering and processing system in southern Kansas) compared to $1.3 million and $9.3 million during the four months ended December 31, 2020 and eight months ended August 31, 2020, respectively.
Contractual Commitments
We had the following contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021:
_________________________
1.Represents outstanding borrowings as of December 31, 2021 under the Superior credit agreement with a maturity date of May 10, 2023. Unit's Exit credit agreement has a maturity date of March 1, 2024, but no outstanding balance as of December 31, 2021.
2.Represents payments related to the noncancellable terms of certain leases for office space, land, and equipment, including pipeline equipment and office equipment capitalized on the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021.
3.Represent firm transportation commitments to transport our natural gas from various systems.
Derivative Activities
Commodity Derivatives. Our commodity derivatives are intended to reduce our exposure to price volatility and manage price risks. Those contracts limit the risk of downward price movements for commodities subject to derivative contracts, but they also limit increases in future revenues that would otherwise result from price movements above the contracted prices. Our decision on the type and quantity of our production and the price(s) of our derivative(s) is based, in part, on our view of current and future market conditions. As of December 31, 2021, based on our fourth quarter 2021 average daily production, the approximated percentages of our production under derivative contracts are as follows:
Using derivative instruments involves the risk that the counterparties cannot meet the financial terms of the transactions. We considered this non-performance risk regarding our counterparties and our own non-performance risk in our derivative valuation at December 31, 2021 and determined there was no material risk at that time. The fair value of the net liabilities we had with Bank of Oklahoma, our only commodity derivative counterparty, was $58.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
Warrants
We recognize the fair value of the warrants as a derivative liability on our consolidated balance sheets with changes in the liability reported as loss on change in fair value of warrants in our consolidated statements of operations. The liability will continue to be adjusted to fair value at each reporting period until the warrants meet the definition of an equity instrument, at which time they will be reported as shareholders' equity and no longer subject to future fair value adjustments.
Below is the effect of derivative instruments on the consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated:
If a legal right of set-off exists, we net the value of the derivative arrangements we have with the same counterparty on our consolidated balance sheets. The fair value of our commodity derivatives on our consolidated balance sheets were current derivative liabilities of $40.9 million and long-term derivative liabilities of $17.9 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to current derivative liabilities of $1.0 million and non-current derivative liabilities of $4.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation
We granted 315,529 restricted stock units (RSU) with an aggregate grant date fair value of $8.4 million and 361,418 stock options with an aggregate grant date fair value of $4.1 million. Director RSU grants will 25% vest on each of the following dates: May 27, 2022, September 3, 2022, September 3, 2023, and September 3, 2024 while employee RSU grants will one-third vest on each of the following dates: November 21, 2022, October 1, 2023, and October 1, 2024. The stock option grants will one-third vest on each of the following dates: October 1, 2022, October 1, 2023, and October 1, 2024. We recognized compensation expense of $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not capitalize any compensation cost to oil and natural gas properties due to the absence of significant drilling.
We did not grant any new awards during the four months ended December 31, 2020 or the eight months ended August 31, 2020. On the Effective Date, all equity-based awards that were outstanding immediately before the Effective Date were cancelled. The cancellation of the awards resulted in an acceleration of unrecorded stock compensation expense during the eight months ended August 31, 2020. We recognized compensation expense of $6.1 million for all our prior restricted stock awards including the acceleration of the unrecorded stock compensation expense. We did not capitalize any compensation cost to oil and natural gas properties due to the absence of significant drilling.
Insurance
We are self-insured for certain losses relating to workers’ compensation, general liability, control of well, and employee medical benefits. Insured policies for other coverage contain deductibles or retentions per occurrence that range from zero to $1.0 million. We have purchased stop-loss coverage to limit, to the extent feasible, per occurrence and aggregate exposure to certain types of claims. There is no assurance that the insurance coverage we have will protect us against liability from all potential consequences. If insurance coverage becomes more expensive, we may choose to self-insure, decrease our limits, raise our deductibles, or any combination of these rather than pay higher premiums.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 versus Year Ended December 31, 2020
Provided below is a comparison of selected operating and financial data (in thousands unless otherwise specified):
1.NM - A percentage calculation is not meaningful due to a zero-value denominator or a percentage change greater than 200.
Oil and Natural Gas
Oil and natural gas revenues increased $111.2 million or 69% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher commodity prices partially offset by lower production volumes. The decrease in volumes was due to normal well production declines and divestitures of producing properties which have not been offset by new drilling or acquisitions.
Oil and natural gas operating costs decreased $62.6 million or 43% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the absence of gains recognized on the settlement of Predecessor Period liabilities subject to compromise under the Plan offset by increased production tax expenses due to increased revenues.
Impairment of oil and natural gas properties decreased $419.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the absence of the ceiling test write-downs and salt water disposal asset impairment recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation, depletion, and amortization of oil and natural gas properties decreased $59.0 million or 71% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a lower depreciable base subsequent to fresh start accounting and lower average production.
Contract Drilling
Contract drilling revenues decreased $16.8 million or 18% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower rig termination and standby fees of $0.1 million in 2021 compared to $18.5 million in 2020. Additionally, there was an 8% increase in the average number of drilling rigs in use and a 4% decrease in the average dayrate. Average drilling rig utilization increased from 10.1 drilling rigs in the year ended December 31, 2020 to 10.9 drilling rigs in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Contract drilling operating costs decreased 4.7 million or 7% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the reduced number of drilling rigs operating.
Impairment of contract drilling equipment decreased $410.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the absence of impairments of SCR drilling rigs and other equipment recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Depreciation of contract drilling equipment decreased $11.3 million or 64% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to fewer rigs available for use and a lower depreciable base subsequent to fresh start accounting, partially offset by higher average drilling rig utilization.
Mid-Stream
Mid-Stream revenues increased $158.8 million or 87% during the year ended December 31 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher prices, partially offset by lower volumes. Gas processed volumes per day decreased 14% between the comparative periods primarily due to declining volumes and fewer new wells connected to our processing systems. Gas gathered volumes per day decreased 13% between the comparative periods also due to declining volumes and fewer new wells connected to our gathering systems. We also experienced overall lower volumes due to the February 2021 winter storm.
Operating costs increased $152.4 million or 114% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher gas, NGLs, and condensate prices, partially offset by lower purchase volumes.
Impairment of mid-stream assets decreased $53.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the absence of $64.0 million of impairment of certain assets in southern Kansas and central Oklahoma recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by $10.7 million of impairment to a gathering system in Pennsylvania during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Depreciation of mid-stream assets decreased $7.5 million or 19% primarily due to a lower depreciable base subsequent to fresh start accounting.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased $28.1 million or 57% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower headcount, the absence of separation benefits recognized during 2020 as well as lower legal spend.
Interest, net
Interest expense decreased $21.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a reduction in average long-term debt outstanding, partially offset by a higher average interest rate. Our average long-term debt outstanding decreased $345.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the Notes being settled in conjunction with the Plan as well as subsequent payments made under the Exit credit agreement while our average interest rate increased from 5.6% during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 6.4% during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Write-off of Debt Issuance Costs
Unamortized debt issuance costs of $2.4 million were written off during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the termination of the remaining commitments of the Predecessor Period Unit credit agreement.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items, net represent any of the expenses, gains, and losses incurred subsequent to and as a direct result of the Chapter 11 proceedings.
Loss on Derivatives
Loss on derivatives increased by $85.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in commodity market pricing.
Loss on Change in Fair Value of Warrants
Loss on change in fair value of warrants increased by $18.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in Unit's share price as well as higher volatility assumptions, partially offset by lower duration to exercise given the passage of time.
Income Tax
Income tax expense was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an income tax benefit of $14.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the absence of the losses generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax asset.
Effects of Inflation
The effect of inflation in the oil and natural gas industry is primarily driven by the prices for oil, NGLs, and natural gas. Increases in these prices increase the demand for our contract drilling rigs and services. This increase in demand affects the dayrates we can obtain for our contract drilling services. During periods of higher demand for our drilling rigs we have experienced increases in labor costs and the costs of services to support our drilling rigs. Historically, during this same period, when oil, NGLs, and natural gas prices declined, labor rates did not come back down to the levels existing before the increases. If commodity prices increase substantially for a long period, shortages in support equipment (like drill pipe, third party services, and qualified labor) can cause additional increases in our material and labor costs. Increases in dayrates for drilling rigs also increase the cost of drilling our oil and natural gas properties. How inflation will affect us in the future will depend on increases, if any, realized in our drilling rig rates, the prices we receive for our oil, NGLs, and natural gas, and the rates we receive for gathering and processing natural gas.