ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is based on financial data derived from the financial statements prepared in accordance with US GAAP and certain other financial data that is prepared using non-GAAP measures. For a reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to its most comparable GAAP measure, see the “Analysis of Segment Results” and “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” sections within this Item. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” within this Item for more information about our use of Non-GAAP financial measures.
Our MD&A is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition and cash flow. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K discusses year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. For discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, please refer to “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
Overview
Univar Solutions Inc. is a leading global commodity and specialty chemical and ingredient distributor and provider of value-added services to customers across a wide range of diverse industries. We purchase chemicals and ingredients from thousands of producers worldwide and safely warehouse, repackage, blend, dilute, transport and sell those products to more than 100,000 customer locations across approximately 115 countries.
Our operations are structured into four reportable segments that represent the geographic areas under which we operate and manage our business. As previously defined within Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our segments are USA, Canada, EMEA and LATAM, which includes developing businesses in Latin America and the Asia-Pacific region.
Comparability of Results
Acquisitions and Divestitures
In December 2021, we acquired Sweetmix, a food ingredients and CASE specialty chemical distribution company in Brazil.
In December 2020, we acquired a business of Techi Chem, a leading distributor of specialty silicone solutions used primarily for the CASE market within the China marketplace.
In April 2021, we sold the Distrupol business within our EMEA segment. The sale of the business did not meet the criteria to be classified as a discontinued operations in the Company's financial statements.
At the beginning of the fourth quarter of 2020, we decided to wind down our Canadian Agriculture wholesale distribution business, which was operationally completed by December 31, 2020.
In November 2020, we sold our Canadian Agriculture services business and in September 2020, we sold our industrial spill and emergency response businesses. The sale of these businesses did not meet the criteria to be classified as discontinued operations in the Company's financial statements.
Constant Currency
We believe providing non-GAAP constant currency provides valuable supplemental information regarding our results of operations, consistent with how we evaluate our performance. Currency impacts on consolidated and segment results have been derived by translating current period financial results in local currency using the average exchange rate for the prior period to which the financial information is being compared.
Market Conditions and Outlook
We sell commodity and specialty chemicals and ingredients that are used in manufacturing processes and as components in other products. Our sales are correlated with and affected by seasonal fluctuations and cycles in the levels of industrial production, manufacturing output and general economic activity.
The current business environment in the markets in which we operate consists of unusual dynamics. The combination of the severe winter and tropical storms in the US Gulf region in 2021, supplier shut-downs, port congestion and acute pandemic recovery demand, has resulted in sustained supply chain constraints, product shortages and chemical price inflation that is atypical in magnitude and unknown in duration.
Shortages across a range of chemicals and ingredients have generally led to fluctuations in chemical prices globally, with corresponding impacts to sales and interim profits. These market factors have also impacted the transportation market and, coupled with rising fuel prices, driver shortages and inflation overall, have resulted in higher operating costs. Investments in working capital to bridge supply disruption and account for higher chemical prices may impact our ability to achieve forecasted cash flows in the short-term.
We believe our value as a distributor is heightened in challenging times such as these when we work to orderly meet demand requirements through our extensive network, installed asset base, transportation and digital assets, and supplier partnerships.
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our global business. The continuing and future effects of the pandemic will depend on infection rates, the emergence of new virus variants, effectiveness of vaccination programs, regulatory changes and the scope of government restrictions. Continuing on efforts initiated in 2020, our global, cross-functional response team closely monitors the impact to our people and organization, with the goal of ensuring the well-being of Univar Solutions’ employees, customers and suppliers, while minimizing disruptions and providing for the safe and reliable supply of our chemicals and ingredients.
We continue to take steps to promote employee safety in our distribution centers and other worksites and strongly encourage employee vaccination, where available. For office-based employees, we continue to work under a hybrid working arrangement, designed to strike an appropriate balance between the need to have certain personnel working from a Company office and employees’ desires to have the flexibility to work from a remote location.
Governments across the globe are considering tax legislation to help fund the cost of the COVID-19 pandemic response. We continue to monitor these plans and assess the impact on the Company.
In such a dynamic environment, remaining connected with our customers to understand demand and supply impacts on their operations including temporary changes due to weather events, the ongoing pandemic and supply constraints is critical to our success. A summary of our end market performance as of December 31, 2021 and impacts from current economic events are as follows (percentages represent 2021 Consolidated Net Sales by End Market):
Industrial Solutions (34%) - Robust growth in CASE, coupled with renewed demand in our household cleaner business and strong results in our lubricants and metalworking business, delivered revenue growth for Industrial Solutions throughout 2021.
Consumer Solutions (20%) - All submarkets experienced strong growth, led by personal care and food. Personal care saw especially strong revenue growth in perfumes and extracts as we continue to grow our portfolio. Our new supplier partnerships in food strengthened our value proposition with customers, along with strong demand as the economy reopened.
General Industrial (29%) - Chemical manufacturing showed strong revenue growth, due in part to our supply chain capabilities that allow us to meet the needs of these critical manufacturers.
Services & Other Markets (9%) - Our services business pulled back given ongoing supply constraints in the automotive sector, negatively affecting our waste business.
Refining & Chemical Processing (8%) - We experienced strong growth in our upstream and downstream businesses, as higher oil prices accelerated reinvestment within the industry. Upstream is particularly benefited as producers look to extract more value from existing wells until capital is approved for new projects.
See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our Business and Economic risks.
Executive Summary
Driven by agile commercial execution, chemical price inflation and growing customer demand, Univar Solutions delivered strong year-over-year growth despite constrained inventory and supply and transportation challenges. With a focus on growth, we are continuing to realize the benefits of the Nexeo acquisition and Streamline 2022 program. With the acquisition and system migration completed, we look to continue to leverage our digital investments to drive organic growth through market share capture and margin gains through leverage of our cost structure.
Management is focused on the following financial objectives:
•Organic growth in both the Chemicals and Services channel and the Ingredients and Specialty Chemicals channel;
•Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA growth and corresponding Adjusted EBITDA margin expansion;
•Improvement in net free cash flow conversion;
•Lower leverage ratio; and
•Capital return to shareholders.
Achievement of these objectives are expected through the following operational initiatives:
•Application of a consistent global strategy, while driving local execution;
•Leverage of our global transportation and digital asset footprint;
•Solutions to support suppliers' and customers' ESG objectives;
•Delivery of an effortless experience for customers that drives preference and retention, resulting in market growth;
•Focus on technical and application development offerings;
•Unlocking our global Solutions Centers' value for suppliers and customers; and
•Leverage and expansion of our key supplier relationships, leading to enhanced service to global key customers.
Results of Operations
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2020, the fair value adjustment for warrants was reclassified to other income (expense), net, from other operating expenses, net, to conform to the current year presentation. Refer to “Note 2: Significant accounting policies” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Net sales
Net sales increased $1,270.5 million, or 15.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, net sales increased by $1,152.5 million or 13.9%. The increase is primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains, partially offset by the impacts of the Canadian Agriculture wholesale distribution exit and the Distrupol and Canadian Agriculture services divestitures. Refer to the “Analysis of Segment Results” for additional information.
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation)
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $391.0 million, or 19.5%, to $2,393.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $362.2 million or 18.1%. The increase in gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) was primarily attributable to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains, partially offset by the effect of the Canadian Agriculture services and Distrupol divestitures. Gross margin increased from 24.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to the “Analysis of Segment Results” for additional information.
Operating Expenses
Outbound freight and handling
Outbound freight and handling expenses increased $59.3 million, or 17.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, outbound freight and handling expenses increased $54.5 million, or 15.8%. The increase was primarily due to higher costs to deliver caused by supply chain constraints. Refer to the “Analysis of Segment Results” for additional information.
Warehousing, selling and administrative
Warehousing, selling and administrative expenses ("WS&A") increased $169.5 million, or 16.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, WS&A increased $157.5 million or 15.4%. The increase is primarily attributable to higher variable compensation and other operating costs, partially offset by Nexeo net synergies. Refer to the “Analysis of Segment Results” for additional information.
Other operating expenses, net
Other operating expenses, net increased $18.1 million, or 20.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the withdrawal liability related to operating sites exiting the Central States multi-employer pension plan and higher stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by lower restructuring charges. Refer to “Note 6: Other operating expenses, net” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation expense decreased $12.0 million, or 7.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to certain assets reaching the end of their depreciable lives.
Amortization expense decreased $7.5 million, or 12.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to certain intangibles reaching the end of their amortizable lives.
Impairment charges
Impairment charges of $3.0 million were recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021 related to property, plant and equipment in connection with the announced closure of certain operating facilities within the USA and Canada segments. Impairment charges of $40.2 million were recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to property, plant and equipment in connection with our decision to cease further investment in, and seek to exit a contract related to, certain technology assets within the Other segment as well as intangibles and property, plant and equipment in connection with the sale of the industrial spill and emergency response businesses within the USA segment and the announced closure of certain production facilities. Refer to “Note 16: Impairment charges” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Other (expense) income
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $13.0 million, or 11.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to lower average outstanding borrowings, as well as lower interest rates. Refer to “Note 18: Debt” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Gain (loss) on sale of business
A gain of $88.2 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the sale of the Distrupol business. A loss of $50.6 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the sale of the industrial spill and emergency response businesses, as well as the Canadian Agriculture services business. The loss also related to a working capital adjustment on the sale of the Environmental Sciences business, which was completed on December 31, 2019. Refer to “Note 4: Discontinued operations and dispositions” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by the June 2021 debt refinancing and repayment activity and partial prepayment of the Canadian ABL Term Loan. Loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by the partial repayment of the Term B-3 Loan due 2024. Refer to “Note 18: Debt” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net changed $171.9 million, from an expense of $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to an income of $112.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change was primarily related to pension mark to market gains in the current year compared to losses in the prior year and the fair value adjustment on warrants. Refer to “Note 8: Other income (expense), net” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $124.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in an effective income tax rate of 21.3%. Our effective income tax rate was higher than the US federal statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to higher rates on foreign earnings, US tax on foreign earnings, US state income taxes and non-deductible employee costs offset by the favorable impact of the Distrupol divestiture.
Income tax expense was $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an effective income tax rate of 10.3%. Our effective income tax rate was lower than the US federal statutory rate primarily due to 2019 return to provision adjustments and the release of valuation allowances on previously non-deductible interest impacted by the CARES Act, offset by US income tax on foreign earnings.
Results of Reportable Business Segments
Our operations are structured into four reportable segments that represent the geographic areas under which we operate and manage our business. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure of operating performance, which is used as the primary basis for the chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance of each of our reportable segments.
We believe certain other financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with US GAAP provide relevant and meaningful information concerning our ongoing operating results. These financial measures include gross profit (exclusive of depreciation), adjusted gross profit (exclusive of depreciation), gross margin and adjusted gross margin. Such non-GAAP financial measures are used from time to time herein but should not be viewed as a substitute for GAAP measures of performance. See “Note 23: Segments” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and “Analysis of Segment Results” within this Item for additional information.
Analysis of Segment Results
USA
External sales increased $1,017.8 million, or 20.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains.
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $279.2 million, or 22.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains. Gross margin increased from 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 25.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to chemical price inflation partially offset by input cost inflation.
Outbound freight and handling expenses increased $51.7 million, or 21.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to higher costs to deliver caused by supply chain constraints.
WS&A increased $122.5 million, or 19.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to higher variable compensation and other operating costs, partially offset by Nexeo net synergies. WS&A as a percentage of external sales decreased from 12.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 12.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $105.0 million, or 26.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to higher gross profit (exclusive of depreciation), partially offset by increased WS&A and costs to deliver. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased from 7.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 8.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from higher gross margin.
EMEA
External sales increased $274.0 million, or 16.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, external sales increased $233.7 million, or 13.8%, primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains, partially offset by the impact of the Distrupol divestiture.
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $61.0 million, or 14.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $49.5 million, or 11.6% primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution and market share gains, partially offset by the impact of the Distrupol divestiture. Gross margin decreased from 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 24.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily from unfavorable changes in pricing from certain essential end markets as compared to the prior year and input cost inflation that led to gross margin compression.
Outbound freight and handling expenses increased $7.5 million, or 13.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, outbound freight and handling expenses increased $5.5 million, or 9.7%, primarily due to higher costs to deliver caused by supply chain constraints.
WS&A increased $25.6 million, or 11.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, WS&A increased $20.9 million, or 9.2%, primarily due to higher variable compensation and other operating costs, partially offset by the impact of the Distrupol divestiture. WS&A as a percentage of external sales decreased from 13.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 12.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $27.9 million, or 19.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $23.1 million, or 16.2%, due to higher gross profit (exclusive of depreciation), partially offset by increased WS&A and costs to deliver. Adjusted EBITDA margin increased from 8.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 8.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from leverage on WS&A.
Canada
External sales decreased $180.7 million, or 16.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, external sales decreased $241.2 million, or 21.7%, primarily because of the Canadian Agriculture wholesale distribution exit and the Canadian Agriculture services divestiture, partially offset by increases due to chemical price inflation and operational execution.
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $18.0 million, or 8.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $2.8 million, or 1.3%, primarily due to chemical price inflation and operational execution, partially offset by the impact of the Canadian Agricultural services divestiture. Gross margin increased from 19.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the effects of the Canadian Agricultural wholesale distribution exit and favorable changes in product mix, partially offset by input cost inflation.
Outbound freight and handling expenses decreased $2.7 million, or 6.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, outbound freight and handling expenses decreased $5.1 million, or 13.1%, primarily due to lower sales volumes from the effects of the Canadian Agriculture wholesale distribution exit and the Canadian Agriculture services divestiture.
WS&A increased $6.2 million, or 7.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, WS&A increased $0.2 million, or 0.2%. WS&A as a percentage of external sales increased from 7.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 10.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $14.5 million, or 16.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $7.7 million, or 8.6%, primarily from lower costs to deliver and higher gross profit (exclusive of depreciation). Adjusted EBITDA margin increased from 8.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 11.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from higher gross margin.
LATAM
(1)In 2020, net sales and gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) includes a $0.4 million Brazil VAT charge. The charge of $0.3 million, net of associated fees, is excluded from Adjusted EBITDA in 2020.
External sales increased $159.4 million, or 35.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, external sales increased $142.2 million, or 31.5%, primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution, market share gains and higher industrial end market demand.
Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $32.8 million, or 31.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) increased $30.8 million, or 29.9%, primarily due to chemical price inflation, operational execution, market share gains and higher industrial end market demand. Gross margin decreased from 22.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 22.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from unfavorable changes in pricing from certain essential end markets as compared to the prior year and input cost inflation.
Outbound freight and handling expenses increased $2.8 million, or 28.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, outbound freight and handling expenses increased $2.4 million, or 24.7%, primarily due to higher sales volumes.
WS&A increased $15.8 million, or 31.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On constant currency basis, WS&A increased $14.6 million, or 28.9%, primarily due to higher operating costs. As a percentage of external sales, WS&A decreased from 11.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 10.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $13.9 million, or 32.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. On a constant currency basis, Adjusted EBITDA increased $13.5 million, or 31.4%, primarily due to higher gross profit (exclusive of depreciation), partially offset by higher WS&A. Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased from 9.5% to 9.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to December 31, 2021, primarily from lower gross margin and increased WS&A.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's primary source of liquidity is cash generated from operations and borrowings under our committed North American and European credit facilities (“facilities”). As of December 31, 2021, liquidity for the Company was $1,021.2 million, comprised of $251.5 million of cash and cash equivalents and $769.7 million available under our credit facilities. These facilities are guaranteed by certain significant subsidiaries and secured by such parties’ eligible trade receivables and inventory with the maximum borrowing capacity under these credit facilities of $1.5 billion and €200 million. Significant reductions in the Company’s trade receivables and inventory would reduce our availability to access liquidity under these facilities. The Company has no active financial maintenance covenants in its credit agreements, however, there is a springing fixed charge coverage ratio (“FCCR”) under the revolving credit facilities of 1.0x, applicable only if availability is less than or equal to 10% of the borrowing capacity. If the FCCR was applicable, the calculation would have been 6.1x as of December 31, 2021.
Our primary liquidity and capital resource needs are to service debt and to finance operating expenses, working capital, capital expenditures, other liabilities including environmental remediation, possible business acquisitions, costs of integration, share repurchases and general corporate purposes. The majority of the Company’s debt obligations mature in 2026 and beyond. Management continues to balance its focus on sales and earnings growth with continuing efforts in cost control and working capital management.
Total debt as of December 31, 2021 was $2,265.0 million, consisting of senior term loans, senior unsecured notes, asset backed loans, finance lease obligations and short-term financing. Access to debt capital markets has historically provided the Company with sources of liquidity beyond normal operating cash flows. We do not anticipate having difficulty in obtaining financing from those markets in the future with our history of favorable results in the debt capital markets and strong relationships with global financial institutions. However, our ability to continue to access the debt capital markets with favorable interest rates and other terms will depend, to a significant degree, on maintaining our current ratings assigned by the credit rating agencies.
We may from time to time refinance or take steps to reduce debt or interest cost. The amount of debt, if any, that may be reduced or refinanced will depend on market conditions, trading levels of our debt, our cash position, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations. During 2021, we made a series of prepayments under the Canadian ABL Term Loan and fully extinguished the loan in October using the proceeds from the sale of the Canadian Agriculture services business and cash on hand. On June 3, 2021, the Company entered into the Sixth Amendment to its Credit Agreement, which provided a new Term B-6 Loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1.0 billion. The proceeds from the new Term B-6 Loan facility and an incremental borrowing under our existing North American ABL facility were used to repay in full the outstanding Term B-3 Loan facility and satisfy related lending and refinancing fees.
Our defined benefit pension plans had an underfunded status of $122.3 million and $228.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Based on current projections of minimum funding requirements, we expect to make cash contributions of $17.0 million to our defined benefit pension plans in 2022. The timing for any such requirement in future years is uncertain given the implicit uncertainty regarding the future developments of the “Risk Factors” described in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect our 2022 capital expenditures for maintenance, safety and cost improvements and investments in our digital capabilities to be approximately $130 million to $140 million. Interest payments for 2022 are expected to be $85 million to $95 million. We expect to fund our capital expenditures and our interest payments with cash from operations or cash on hand.
We believe funds provided by our primary sources of liquidity will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs, debt repayment obligations, and capital resource and share repurchase expectations for at least the next 12 months under current operating conditions.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow activity:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased $63.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher net income, exclusive of non-cash items, and changes in other, net, partially offset by changes in trade working capital.
The change in net income, exclusive of non-cash items, increased $109.9 million from $390.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $500.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash provided by other, net, increased $254.1 million as compared to the prior year, largely impacted by increased accrued compensation and multi-employer pension plan withdrawal liabilities in 2021, as well as timing differences in other assets and liabilities.
Cash used by trade working capital, which includes trade accounts receivable, net, inventories and trade accounts payable, increased $264.4 million as compared to the prior year. The year-over-year increase in cash used by trade working capital is primarily due to higher trade accounts receivable from increased sales.
Cash Provided (Used) by Investing Activities
Investing cash flows in 2021 included the proceeds of $136.7 million from the sale of Distrupol business, proceeds of $29.0 million from the sale of property, plant and equipment, cash paid of $28.7 million (net of cash acquired of $1.2 million) for the Sweetmix acquisition and capital expenditures of $110.9 million. Investing cash flows in 2020 included proceeds of $39.3 million from the sale of the Canadian Agriculture services business, proceeds of $46.5 million from the sale of property, plant and equipment and capital expenditures of $111.3 million.
Cash Used by Financing Activities
Financing cash flows in 2021 included long term debt issuances of $995.0 million, long-term debt repayments of $1,440.5 million, share repurchases of $50.0 million, net proceeds under revolving credit facilities of $32.4 million and proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $27.1 million. Financing cash flows in 2020 included long-term debt repayments of $205.3 million and net proceeds under revolving credit facilities of $65.5 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
(1)See “Note 22: Leasing” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(2)See “Note 18: Debt” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(3)Interest payments on debt are calculated for future periods using interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2021 and obligations on that date. Projected interest payments include the related effects of interest rate swap agreements and cross currency swaps. Certain of these projected interest payments may differ in the future based on changes in floating interest rates, foreign currency fluctuations or other factors or events.
(4)Commitments related to purchase commitments, multi-employer plan withdrawal obligations and acquisitions.
(5)This table excludes our pension and postretirement medical benefit obligations. Based on current projections of minimum funding requirements, we expect to make cash contributions of $17.0 million to our defined benefit pension plans in the year ended December 31, 2022. The timing for any such requirement in future years is uncertain given the implicit uncertainty regarding the future developments of factors described in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and “Note 11: Employee benefit plans” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expect that we will be able to fund our obligations and commitments with cash flows from operations. To the extent we are unable to fund these obligations and commitments with cash flows from operations, we intend to fund them with proceeds from available borrowing capacity under our ABL Facilities or under future financings.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
With the exception of letters of credit, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in “Note 2: Significant accounting policies” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if that estimate requires that we make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time we make that estimate and if different estimates that we could reasonably have used or changes in accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur could materially affect our consolidated financial statements. Our critical accounting estimates are as follows:
Goodwill
Total goodwill as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2,310.4 million and $2,270.4 million, respectively. We perform an annual impairment assessment of goodwill at the reporting unit level each year as of October 1, or more frequently if potential impairment indicators exist. The analysis may include both qualitative and quantitative factors to assess the likelihood of an impairment. The reporting unit’s carrying value used in an impairment test represents the assignment of various assets and
liabilities, including corporate allocations, based on the enterprise approach. See "Note 15: Goodwill and intangible assets" in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Qualitative factors include industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting units. Additionally, as part of this assessment, we may perform a quantitative analysis to support the qualitative factors above by applying sensitivities to assumptions and inputs used in measuring a reporting unit’s fair value.
Our quantitative impairment test considers both the income approach and the market approach to estimate a reporting unit’s fair value. Significant estimates include forecasted EBITDA, market segment growth rates, estimated costs, and discount rates based on a reporting unit's weighted average cost of capital. The use of different assumptions, estimates or judgments could significantly impact the estimated fair value of a reporting unit, and therefore impact a reporting unit's fair value in excess of carrying value assessment.
We test the reasonableness of the inputs and outcomes of our discounted cash flow analysis against available market data. In the current year, a quantitative assessment was performed on the Canada reporting unit due to the limited headroom of fair value above carrying value noted during the 2020 review. For the 2021 review, the calculated fair value of the Canada reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by a significant margin.
Through qualitative assessments performed on the USA, EMEA, Latin America, and Asia-Pacific reporting units, we concluded that it was more likely than not that each reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value. As such, quantitative assessments were not performed for these reporting units.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price paid for assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with our acquisitions based on their estimated fair values at the time of acquisition. This allocation involves a number of assumptions, estimates and judgments in determining the fair value, as of the acquisition date, of the following:
•intangible assets, including the valuation methodology, estimations of future cash flows, discount rates, recurring revenues attributed to customer relationships, and our assumed market segment share, as well as the estimated useful life of intangible assets;
•deferred tax assets and liabilities, uncertain tax positions, and tax-related valuation allowances;
•inventory; property, plant and equipment; pre-existing liabilities or legal claims; and
•goodwill as measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
Our assumptions and estimates are based upon comparable market data and information obtained from our management and the management of the acquired companies. We allocate goodwill to the reporting units that are expected to benefit from the business combination.
Environmental Liabilities
We recognize environmental liabilities for probable and reasonably estimable losses associated with environmental remediation. The estimated environmental liability includes incremental direct costs of investigations, remediation efforts and post-remediation monitoring. The total environmental reserve at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $88.1 million and $79.6 million, respectively. See “Note 21: Commitments and contingencies” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our environmental reserves are subject to numerous uncertainties that affect our ability to estimate our costs, or our share of costs if multiple parties are responsible. These uncertainties involve the legal, regulatory and enforcement parameters governing environmental assessment and remediation, the nature and extent of contamination at these sites, the extent and cost of assessment and remediation efforts required, our insurance coverage for these sites and, in the case of sites with multiple responsible parties, the number and financial strength of those parties. In addition, our determination as to whether a loss is probable may change, particularly as new facts emerge as to the causes of contamination. We evaluate each environmental site as new information and facts become available and make adjustments to reserves based upon our assessment of these factors, using technical experts, legal counsel and other specialists.
Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Obligations
We sponsor defined benefit pension plans in the US and other countries. The valuation for these plans depends on assumptions made by management, which are used by actuaries we engage to calculate the projected and accumulated benefit obligations and the annual expense recognized for these plans. These assumptions include discount rates, expected return on assets, mortality and retirement rates, and for certain plans, rates for compensation increases. Actual experience different from those estimated assumptions can result in the recognition of gains and losses in earnings, as our accounting policy is to recognize changes in the fair value of plan assets and projected benefit obligation in the fourth quarter of each year (the “mark to market” adjustment), unless an earlier remeasurement is required. We recorded a mark to market gain of $75.9 million for the year
ended December 31, 2021 and a mark to market loss of $52.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See “Note 11: Employee benefit plans” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Due to the phasing out of benefits under our postretirement plans, changes in assumptions have an immaterial effect on the obligation.
A change in the assumed discount rate and return on plan assets rate would have the following effects:
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the jurisdictions in which it sells products and earns revenues. We record income taxes under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying values of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or paid. A reduction of the carrying values of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance is required if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In evaluating our ability to realize deferred tax assets, in full or in part, we considered all available positive and negative evidence, including past operating results, forecasted and appropriate character of future taxable income, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, our experience with operating loss and tax credit carryforwards not expiring unused and feasible tax strategies. We have a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets, primarily related to foreign tax credits and net operating loss carry forwards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2: Significant accounting policies” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We monitor the results of our reportable segments separately for the purposes of making decisions about resource allocation and performance assessment, and evaluate performance using Adjusted EBITDA. Additionally, the Company uses Adjusted EBITDA in setting performance incentive targets to align management compensation measurement with operational performance.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as the sum of consolidated net income (loss), net income from discontinued operations, net interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation, amortization, impairment charges, (gain) loss on sale of business, loss on extinguishment of debt, other operating expenses, net, and other income (expense), net (see “Note 6: Other operating expenses, net” and “Note 8: Other income (expense), net” in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information). Adjusted EBITDA also includes an adjustment to remove a Brazil VAT charge for 2020 and in 2019, inventory step-up adjustment and Brazil VAT recovery. For a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to its most comparable GAAP measure, see below and “Analysis of Segment Results” within this Item.
We believe that other financial measures, as defined below, that do not comply with US GAAP provide relevant and meaningful information concerning the ongoing and future operating results of the Company.
•Adjusted EBITDA margin: Adjusted EBITDA divided by external sales on a segment level and by net sales on a consolidated level;
•Gross profit (exclusive of depreciation): net sales less cost of goods sold (exclusive of depreciation);
•Adjusted gross profit (exclusive of depreciation): net sales less cost of goods sold (exclusive of depreciation) plus inventory step-up adjustment and Brazil VAT charge (recovery), as applicable;
•Gross margin: gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) divided by external sales on a segment level and by net sales on a consolidated level;
•Adjusted gross margin: adjusted gross profit (exclusive of depreciation) divided by external sales on a segment level and by net sales on a consolidated level;
•Net free cash flow conversion: net cash provided by operating activities, less capital expenditures divided by Adjusted EBITDA;
•Leverage Ratio: total net debt divided by last twelve months (“LTM”) Adjusted EBITDA; and
•Net Debt: total short-term and long-term debt plus short-term financing less cash and cash equivalents.
The Company evaluates its results of operations on both an as reported and a constant currency basis. The constant currency presentation is a non-GAAP financial measure, which excludes the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. The Company believes providing information on a constant currency basis provides valuable supplemental information regarding its results of operations, consistent with how it evaluates its performance. The Company calculates constant currency percentages and other information by converting its financial results in local currency for a period using the average exchange rate for the prior period to which it is comparing.
The non-GAAP financial measures noted above are not calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for net income or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. They are included as a complement to results provided in accordance with GAAP because management believes these non-GAAP financial measures help investors’ ability to analyze underlying trends in the Company’s business, evaluate its performance relative to other companies in its industry and provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of the Company’s core operating results. Additionally, other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following is a quantitative reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP financial performance measure, which is net income (loss):
(1)Refer to "Note 6: Other operating expenses, net" in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
(2)Refer to "Note 8: Other income (expense), net" in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
The following is a quantitative reconciliation of gross profit (exclusive of depreciation):