ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements for many reasons including the risks faced by us described in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Please refer to our Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements above. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section to “we,” “us,” “our,” and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Wheels Up and its consolidated subsidiaries.
This section generally discusses the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” included in the final prospectus dated August 25, 2021.
Overview of Our Business
Wheels Up strives to disrupt private aviation by delivering innovative, accessible, travel through simple-to-use proprietary technology and mobile applications. We have become a recognized market leader and are redefining private flying by leveraging our unique technology-enabled marketplace platform. We connect flyers to private aircraft, and to one another, creating memorable lifestyle experiences.
We have a diversified and evolving business model generating revenue through flights, membership fees, management of aircraft and other services. Our chief operating decision maker, our chief executive officer, reviews our financial information presented on a consolidated basis, and accordingly, we operate under one reportable segment, which is private aviation services.
Flight revenue includes both retail and wholesale charter. Wheels Up has one of the largest and most diverse mix of available aircraft in the industry. As of December 31, 2021, we have over 180 aircraft in our owned and leased fleet that includes Turboprops, Light, Midsize, Super-Midsize and Large-Cabin jets, more than half of which are Wheels Up branded aircraft. As of December 31, 2021, we also have a managed fleet across all private aircraft cabin classes of approximately 150 aircraft and an extensive network of third-party operators available in our program fleet from whom we can access over 1,200 additional safety vetted and verified partner aircraft.
Members pay a fixed quoted amount for flights plus certain incidental or additional costs, if applicable. The quoted amount can be based on a contractual capped hourly rate or dynamically priced based on a number of variables at time of booking. Wholesale customers, such as charter flight brokers and third-party operators, primarily pay a fixed rate for flights. Members are also able to purchase Prepaid Blocks, which are dollar-denominated credits that can be applied to future costs incurred by members, including annual dues, flight services and other incidental costs such as catering and ground transportation. Prepaid Block sales allow us to have a certain amount of revenue visibility into future flight and travel demand. Members who elect not to purchase a Prepaid Block “pay as they fly” by paying for their flights at the time of booking or after their flights.
Membership revenue is generated from initiation and annual renewal fees across three different annual subscription tiers - Connect, Core and Business - each of which is designed to provide the varying services required across a range of existing and potential private flyers. Core membership is ideal for the more frequent individual private flyer who wants guaranteed availability and pricing, high-touch account management, capped rates and values ultimate convenience and flexibility. The Business membership is best suited for companies of any size that want a broader group of individuals in their organization to be able to book and fly, while also requiring maximum flexibility to meet their business needs. Our Business customers include companies that fully outsource their private travel solution to Wheels Up, including but not necessarily managing their privately owned aircraft, and those that use Wheels Up to serve or supplement their in-house flight desks. We have offered Core and Business memberships with guaranteed aircraft availability and fixed rate pricing since our inception. During 2019, we
launched Connect, our introductory membership tier. The Connect membership offers variable rate pricing on a per trip basis and is designed for the consumer with less frequent flight needs or who has more flexibility in their schedule or does not seek capped rate pricing. All membership options provide access through the Wheels Up mobile app to on-demand charter flights, dynamic pricing, a variety of Shared Flights, empty-leg Hot Flights, Shuttles, and The Community, an online platform of members-only forums to facilitate flight sharing, enabling members to reduce their cost of flying private. In addition, customers can qualify for Delta miles in the Delta SkyMiles Program as part of their membership.
During 2020, we added a non-membership offering to tap into a larger addressable market and expand flyer participation in our marketplace. Non-member customers now have access to a full-scale marketplace of private aircraft through the Wheels Up mobile app, available on iOS and Android where they can view the real-time dynamic pricing for available aircraft classes, making it possible to instantaneously search, book and fly. These flyers are not required to purchase a membership but may pay additional transaction fees not applicable to members and do not receive membership benefits. In addition, non-member flyers do not have aircraft availability guarantees as members do and flights are priced dynamically at rates that are not capped.
We also manage aircraft for owners in exchange for a recurring contractual fee. Under the terms of many of our management agreements, in addition to owners utilizing their own aircraft, the managed aircraft may be used by us to fulfill member and non-member flights on a revenue sharing arrangement with the owner. Revenue associated with the management of aircraft also includes the recovery of owner incurred expenses as well as recharging of certain incurred aircraft operating costs.
In addition, we earn other revenue from FBO and MRO ground services, flight management software subscriptions, sponsorship and partnership fees, special missions and whole aircraft acquisitions and sales where we act as the broker.
Recent Developments
Completion of the Business Combination
On July 13, 2021, we completed the Business Combination. We received approximately $656.3 million in gross proceeds in connection with the transaction.
Payoff of Credit Facilities and Promissory Notes
Shortly following the Closing Date, we repaid substantially all of the outstanding principal of the credit facilities and promissory notes, together with all accrued and unpaid interest in the amount of approximately $175.5 million
Acquisitions
Mountain Aviation, LLC
On January 5, 2021, we acquired all the outstanding equity of Mountain Aviation. Mountain Aviation adds to our Super-Midsize jet fleet and operations, provides full-service in-house maintenance capabilities, expands our presence in the Western U.S. and enhances our on-demand transcontinental charter flight capabilities.
For further information regarding our acquisitions, see Note 6, Acquisitions, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Business Impact of COVID-19
During the first half of 2020, in order to minimize the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operating costs and cash flows we took a number of temporary actions, including a voluntary employee leave of absence program, reduced work schedules, departmental hiring freezes, reduced salaries for certain executives, a cutback in capital expenditures, removing some of our aircraft from service and implementation of stringent, essential-only expense management policies.
For the foreseeable future, we plan to continue the Wheels Up Safe Passage™ program introduced in response to the outbreak of COVID-19. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $1.2 million of costs for COVID-19 health and safety response initiatives and have forecasted a similar level of expense on a go-forward basis to continue COVID-19 management and containment efforts for our customers. We have not had and do not expect any material COVID-19 related contingencies, impairments, concessions, credit losses or other expenses in future periods.
As a result of the increased rate of COVID-19 spread during a portion of the fourth quarter of 2021 and into the first quarter of 2022, flight volumes were negatively impacted, primarily due to a combination of customer cancellations, access to third-party supply and reduced crew availability resulting from COVID-19 exposure.
Moving forward, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a shift in consumer prioritization of wellness and safety, with private aviation viewed increasingly by those in the addressable market as a health-conscious decision rather than a discretionary luxury. We believe this will translate into an increase in flight demand over time.
Air Carrier Payroll Support Program
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act is a relief package intended to assist many aspects of the American economy. The CARES Act provided aid in the form of loans, grants, tax credits and other forms of government assistance. Specifically, the CARES Act provided the airline industry with up to $25.0 billion in grants with assurances the support is to be used exclusively for employee salaries, wages and benefits. The CARES Act also provided for up to $25.0 billion in secured loans to the airline industry.
Wheels Up applied to the Treasury for assistance under the Payroll Support Program as established by the CARES Act. We were awarded $74.2 million to support ongoing operations, which was fully received by September 30, 2020. Subsequent to this award, we were granted an additional $2.2 million in accordance with a notification that, based on funding availability, recipients that were currently in compliance with signed payroll support program agreements would receive an approximate 3% increase in their award amount. This additional amount was received in October 2020. We utilized all of these proceeds to offset payroll expenses incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In December 2020, Congress authorized an additional $15.0 billion in financial assistance for the aviation industry as part of a $900.0 billion COVID-19 relief stimulus package included within the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021. Given the recovery in our business in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 compared to the initial quarters following the onset of COVID-19, we did not apply for a second round of funding.
The CARES Act support payments were conditioned on our agreement to refrain from conducting involuntary employee layoffs or furloughs through September 30, 2020. Other conditions include continuing essential air service as directed by DOT, a prohibition on conducting any stock repurchase or paying any dividends through September 30, 2021, certain restrictions on executive and other employee compensation through March 24, 2022 and certain ongoing reporting obligations through March 24, 2022. Based on the amount received, we were not required to provide financial protection, such as issuing a warrant, other equity interest or debt instrument, to the Treasury in conjunction with the payroll support obtained.
The CARES Act also provided for deferred payment of the employer portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% of the deferred amount due December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% due December 31, 2022. This provided us with approximately $6.8 million of additional liquidity prior to the deferred payment dates.
Our recently acquired Mountain Aviation subsidiary also applied for and received a grant under the CARES Act Payroll Support Program, which was received prior to our acquisition of the company in January 2021. The terms and conditions applicable to such grant were identical to the terms and condition of the Wheels Up grant. Mountain Aviation also received a loan on April 14, 2020 in the amount of $3.2 million from Vectra under the SBA’s PPP enacted as part of the CARES Act. In connection with this acquisition, a portion of the purchase price otherwise payable by us to Mountain Aviation’s former equity owner in an amount equal to the principal and interest then outstanding on this loan was placed in an escrow account at Vectra, to be paid to Vectra if and to the extent the PPP Loan were not to be forgiven by the SBA under the PPP. Mountain Aviation’s former equity owner agreed to pay
any amounts owing under the PPP Loan in excess of the amount in escrow and agreed to indemnify us for any obligations we incurred under the PPP Loan to the extent not satisfied from the escrow account. The PPP Loan was forgiven by the SBA on June 9, 2021 and the amount of sales proceeds held in escrow were released to the seller.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations
We believe that the following factors have affected our financial condition and results of operations and are expected to continue to have a significant effect:
Market Competition
We compete for market share in the private aviation industry, which consists of a highly fragmented group of companies providing varying types of services. The industry is customer driven and highly competitive. Our ability to retain members is a key factor in our ability to generate revenue. We are impacted by current trends in both how technology is used to book charter trips and how new business models are expanding the types and variety of flight services offered. Options include a mix of whole aircraft ownership, fractional ownership, jet card ownership, membership models and other forms of access. We believe our business model differentiates us within the industry by striving to reduce the upfront cost of flying private while also providing more flexibility and availability compared to traditional competitive private aviation programs.
Costs and Expense Management
Our operating results are impacted by our ability to manage costs and expenses and achieving a balance between investing in appropriate resources to grow revenue with a focus on driving decreased losses and eventual profitability. We are working to find opportunities to enhance margins and operate more efficiently, including bringing routine airframe, engine maintenance and periodic inspections in-house and away from third-party vendors to help reduce costs. We believe this will increase the availability of our aircraft and lower the cost of providing our services. As we experience inflationary pressures, including wage and medical costs, or supply chain disruptions for parts and supplies our margins are negatively impacted.
In addition, we are investing significant time and resources into developing sophisticated pricing and scheduling algorithms and data optimization engines to help optimize the utility and efficiency of our fleet. Our operations, data science and revenue management teams collectively use data and technology to focus on pricing accuracy, as well as to manage our flight costs to help drive our financial results.
Economic Conditions
The private aviation industry is volatile and affected by economic cycles and trends. On-demand flying is typically discretionary for members and customers and may be affected by negative trends in the economy. Consumer confidence, fluctuations in fuel prices, inflation, changes in governmental regulations, safety concerns and other factors all could negatively impact our business. Typically, the larger cabin classes of aircraft are more sensitive to and affected by economic cycles.
Pilot Availability and Attrition
In recent years, we have experienced increased competition for qualified pilots that are eligible for hire due to our more stringent pilot qualifications and flight training standards. If the supply of qualified pilots is reduced or our actual pilot attrition rates are materially different than our projections, our operations and financial results could be adversely affected.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results of operations below, we report certain key financial measures that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP.
These non-GAAP financial measures are an addition, and not a substitute for or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to any
performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures of financial results provide useful supplemental information to investors, about Wheels Up. However, there are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures and their nearest GAAP equivalents, including that they exclude significant expenses that are required by GAAP to be recorded in Wheels Up’s financial measures. In addition, other companies may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to calculate their financial performance, and therefore, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted for (i) interest income (expense), (ii) income tax expense, (iii) depreciation and amortization, (iv) equity-based compensation expense, (v) acquisition and integration related expenses, (vi) public company readiness related expenses, (vii) change in fair value of warrant liability, (viii) losses on the extinguishment of debt and (ix) other items not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, including the CARES Act grant and COVID-19 response initiatives for 2020. We include Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure for assessing operating performance and for the following:
•Used in conjunction with bonus program target achievement determinations, strategic internal planning, annual budgeting, allocating resources and making operating decisions; and,
•Provides useful information for historical period-to-period comparisons of our business, as it removes the effect of certain non-cash expenses and variable amounts.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
__________________
(1)Includes costs primarily associated with compliance, updated systems and consulting in advance of transitioning to a public company.
(2)Consists mainly of system conversions, merging of operating certificates, re-branding costs and fees paid to external advisors in connection with strategic transactions.
(3)Includes expenses for the development of enhanced cleaning and operation protocols for our Safe Passage™ program due to COVID-19 in 2020. We incurred COVID-19 related expenses in 2021 but did not include an adjustment as the costs were part of ongoing operations.
(4)Represents expenditures related to the build out and move to our new corporate headquarters in New York.
Adjusted Contribution and Adjusted Contribution Margin
We calculate Adjusted Contribution as gross profit (loss) excluding depreciation and amortization and adjusted further for (i) equity-based compensation included in cost of revenue, (ii) acquisition and integration expense included in cost of revenue and (iii) other items included in cost of revenue that are not indicative of our ongoing operating performance, including COVID-19 response initiatives for 2020. Adjusted Contribution Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted Contribution by total revenue. We include Adjusted Contribution and Adjusted Contribution Margin as supplemental measures for assessing operating performance and for the following:
•Used to understand our ability to achieve profitability over time through scale and leveraging costs; and,
•Provides useful information for historical period-to-period comparisons of our business and to identify trends.
The following table reconciles Adjusted Contribution to gross profit, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands, except percentages):
Key Operating Metrics
In addition to financial measures, we regularly review certain key operating metrics to evaluate our business, determine the allocation of resources and make decisions regarding business strategies. We believe that these metrics can be useful for understanding the underlying trends in our business.
The following table summarizes our key operating metrics:
Active Members
We define Active Members as the number of Connect, Core and Business membership accounts that generated membership revenue in a given period and are active as of the end of the reporting period. We use Active Members to assess the adoption of our premium offerings which is a key factor in our penetration of the market in which we operate and a key driver of membership and flight revenue.
Active Users
We define Active Users as Active Members and legacy WUPJ jet card holders as of the reporting date plus unique non-member consumers who completed a revenue generating flight at least once in a given period and excluding wholesale flight activity. While a unique consumer can complete multiple revenue generating flights on our platform in a given period, that unique user is counted as only one Active User. We use Active Users to assess the adoption of our platform and frequency of transactions, which are key factors in our penetration of the market in which we operate and our growth in revenue.
Live Flight Legs
We define Live Flight Legs as the number of completed one-way revenue generating flight legs in a given period. The metric excludes empty repositioning legs and owner legs related to aircraft under management. We believe Live Flight Legs are a useful metric to measure the scale and usage of our platform, and our growth in flight revenue.
Component of Results of Our Operations
The key components of our results of operations include:
Revenue
Revenue is derived from flight, membership, aircraft management and other services.
Flight revenue consists of retail and wholesale flights. Members can either pay as they fly or prepay for flights when they purchase a Prepaid Block.
Membership revenue is comprised of a one-time initiation fee paid at the commencement of a membership and recurring annual dues. In the first year of membership, a portion of the initiation fee is applied to annual dues. The remainder of the initiation fee, less any flight credits, is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated duration of the customer relationship period, which is currently estimated to be three years. Members are charged recurring annual dues to maintain their membership. Revenue related to the annual dues are deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual period. If a member qualifies to earn Delta miles in the Delta SkyMiles Program as part of their membership, then a portion of the membership fee is allocated at contract inception.
Aircraft management revenue consists of contractual monthly management fees charged to aircraft owners, recovery of owner incurred expenses including maintenance coordination, cabin crew and pilots, and recharging of certain incurred aircraft operating costs such as maintenance, fuel, landing fees and parking. We pass recovery and recharge amounts back to owners at either cost or at a predetermined margin.
Other revenue primarily consists of (i) ground services derived from aircraft customers that use our FBO and MRO facilities and (ii) flight-related services. In addition, other revenue includes subscription fees from third-party operators for access to UP FMS, fees we may receive from third-party sponsorships and partnerships, whole aircraft acquisitions and sales where we act as the broker, and special missions including government, defense, emergency and medical transport.
Costs and Expenses
Costs and expenses consist of the following components:
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of direct expenses incurred to provide flight services and facilitate operations, including aircraft lease costs, fuel, crew travel, maintenance and third-party flight costs. Cost of revenue also consists of compensation expenses, including equity-based compensation and related benefits for employees that directly facilitate flight operations. In addition, cost of revenue includes aircraft owner expenses incurred such as maintenance coordination, cabin crew and pilots, and certain aircraft operating costs such as maintenance, fuel, landing fees and parking.
Other Operating Expenses
Technology and Development
Technology and development expense primarily consists of compensation expenses for engineering, product development and design employees, including equity-based compensation, expenses associated with ongoing improvements to, and maintenance of, our platform offerings and other technology. Technology and development expense also includes software expenses and technology consulting fees.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of compensation expenses in support of sales and marketing such as commissions, salaries, equity-based compensation and related benefits. Sales and marketing expense also includes expenses associated with advertising, promotions of our services, member experience, account management and brand-building.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense primarily consists of compensation expenses, including equity-based compensation and related benefits for our executive, finance, human resources, legal and other personnel performing administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes corporate office rent expense, third-party professional fees, acquisition and integration related expenses, public company readiness expenses and any other cost or expense incurred not deemed to be related to cost of revenue, sales and marketing expense or technology and development expense.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense primarily consists of depreciation of capitalized aircraft. Depreciation and amortization expense also includes amortization of capitalized software development costs and acquired finite-lived intangible assets. We allocate overhead such as facility costs and telecommunications charges, based on department headcount, as we believe this to be the most accurate measure. As a result, a portion of general overhead expenses are reflected in each operating expense category.
CARES Act Grant
Consists of government assistance received from the Treasury under the Payroll Support Program as directed by the CARES Act.
Gain on Sale of Aircraft Held for Sale
Consists of the gain on aircraft sold where we did not act as a broker. When these aircraft were acquired, it was our intent to sell and not to hold them long-term.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability consists of unrealized gain (loss) on Warrants assumed as part of the Business Combination, including Private Warrants and Public Warrants.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt consists of the write off of unamortized debt discounts and deferred financing costs associated with the early repayment of our outstanding credit facilities and promissory notes.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on cash equivalents from deposits in money market funds and investments in commercial paper.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of the interest paid or payable and the amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs on our outstanding credit facilities and promissory notes.
Income Tax Expense
Income taxes are recorded using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of existing assets and liabilities. These differences are measured using the enacted tax rates that are expected to be in effect when these differences are anticipated to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management believes it is not more likely than not to be realized.
Results of Our Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue
Revenue increased by $499.3 million, or 72%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the following changes in flight revenue, membership revenue, aircraft management revenue and other revenue (in thousands, except percentages):
Flight revenue growth was primarily driven by a 65% increase in Live Flight Legs, which resulted in $321.7 million of growth, and a 7% increase in flight revenue per Live Flight Leg, which drove $56.6 million of year-over-year improvement. The increase in Live Flight Legs was primarily attributable to an increase in the number of Active Members, as well as an increase in flying by Active Members, and recovery from the adverse impact of COVID-19 on 2020 results.
Growth in membership revenue was driven entirely by a 31% increase in Active Members but was impacted by an increased mix of members added at promotional rates or lower priced memberships.
The increase in aircraft management revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in our recovery of owner and rechargeable costs related to operating aircraft under management, both of which stem from increased flight activity.
The increase in other revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in MRO and FBO related revenue. In addition, whole aircraft sales where we acted as the broker, as well as ground and catering services, both increased year-over-year.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $482.9 million, or 76%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue is primarily attributable to an increase in Live Flight Legs and the increase in aircraft management revenue.
Adjusted Contribution Margin decreased 210 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to cost pressures and supply constraints impacting us and the industry. Additionally, pilot availability, increased fuel costs, maintenance challenges and wage inflation also contributed to the decline in Adjusted Contribution Margin. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above for a definition of Adjusted Contribution Margin, information regarding our use of Adjusted Contribution Margin and a reconciliation of gross margin to Adjusted Contribution Margin.
Other Operating Expenses
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses increased by $12.6 million, or 60%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in technology and development expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $7.4 million in employee compensation and allocable costs, which was partially offset by an increase in capitalized internal costs related to the development of internal use software of $0.3 million. Third-party consultant fees also increased $5.2 million, which was offset by a $4.7 million increase in capitalized costs related to internal use software. Additionally, equipment and enterprise software expense increased by $2.6 million and $2.4 million, respectively.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $24.9 million, or 45%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing was primarily attributable to increases in headcount and related compensation and allocable costs of $12.8 million. In addition, sales commissions increased $6.6 million from growth in memberships and flight revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we took certain cost saving measures to reduce headcount and related compensation costs, consistent with applicable CARES Act limitations, which returned to normal levels for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, advertising and marketing related expense increased $4.7 million as we had reduced advertising and marketing spending during the year ended December 31, 2020 as part of cost cutting measures to offset the impact of COVID-19. Lastly, professional fees related to sales consulting increased $0.8 million year-over-year.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $48.4 million, or 75%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to a $37.1 million increase in equity-based compensation due to accelerated vesting of all awards that vested in connection with the Business Combination. In addition, personnel expenses increased by $7.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we took certain cost saving measures to reduce headcount and related compensation costs, consistent with applicable CARES Act limitations, which returned to normal levels for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2021, public company readiness related costs increased $3.1 million, and we incurred $0.9 million of public company related costs. Professional service related fees, travel and entertainment expenses, office expenses and other costs increased by approximately $4.8 million. The overall increase was partially offset by a full reserve recorded on a $5.4 million employee loan receivable during 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $4.3 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily attributable to a $8.3 million decrease in depreciation expense for our owned aircraft as certain aircraft became fully depreciable subsequent to December 31, 2020. Additionally, depreciation expense related to leasehold improvements decreased $0.7 million. The decrease was partially offset by increases in amortization of software development costs and intangible assets of $2.1 million and $2.3 million, respectively, as well as an increase in depreciation related to furniture and fixtures of $0.3 million.
CARES Act Grant
During the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the negative impact of COVID-19, we utilized grant proceeds from the Treasury of $76.4 million to offset payroll expenses.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $13.5 million, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily attributable to our repayment of substantially all of the outstanding principal of our long-term debt on July 21, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal sources of liquidity have historically consisted of financing activities, including proceeds from the Business Combination, and operating activities, primarily from the increase in deferred revenue associated with the sale of Prepaid Blocks. As of December 31, 2021, we had $784.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, which were primarily invested in money market funds and $2.1 million of restricted cash. We believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, will be sufficient to meet our projected working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 (in thousands):
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $126.5 million. In 2021, the cash inflow from operating activities consisted of our net loss, net of non-cash items of $92.2 million and an increase in net operating liabilities offset by an increase in operating assets, primarily as a result of a $278.8 million increase in deferred revenue attributable to a significant increase in Prepaid Block purchases. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold $896.7 million of Prepaid Blocks compared to $532.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Prepaid Block purchases was primarily attributable to the growth of Active Members and flying activity by those Active Members.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $38.7 million. In 2021, the cash outflow from investing activities was primarily attributable to $28.4 million for capital expenditures, including $13.2 million of software development costs. In addition, the cash outflow included $31.7 million for the purchases of aircraft held for sale. The cash outflow was partially offset by $13.6 million from sale of aircraft held for sale and $7.8 million from the acquisition of Mountain Aviation, net of cash acquired.
We anticipate capital spending for 2022 to be approximately $125.0 million. This amount includes what we consider traditional capital spending of $60.0 million for purchased aircraft, capitalized software, etc., as well as $65.0 million to exercise our purchase option with Textron Financial Corporation on 32 aircraft in the first quarter of 2022, which we view primarily as a financing decision on previously leased and operated aircraft.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $374.0 million. In 2021, the cash inflow from financing activities was primarily attributable to gross proceeds of $656.3 million received in the Business Combination, net of $70.4 million of transaction related costs. The cash inflow was partially offset by $214.1 million in repayments of our credit facilities and promissory notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we were not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of contractual cash obligations under our operating leases for certain controlled aircraft, corporate headquarters, and operational facilities, including aircraft hangars. For further information on our leases see Note 12, Leases of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations is based on our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Certain amounts included in or affecting the consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report and related disclosure must be estimated, requiring management to make assumptions with respect to values or conditions which cannot be known with certainty at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. Management believes that the accounting policies set forth below comprise the most important “critical accounting policies” for Wheels Up. A “critical accounting policy” is one which is both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and that involves difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management evaluates such policies on an ongoing basis, based upon historical results and experience, consultation with experts and other methods that management considers reasonable in the particular circumstances under which the judgments and estimates are made, as well as management’s forecasts as to the manner in which such circumstances may change in the future.
Revenue Recognition
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct service to the customer and is the basis of revenue recognition. There are contracts which could have more than one performance obligation. For contracts that include additional performance obligations, we account for individual performance obligations if they are distinct. If there is a group of performance obligations bundled in a contract, the transaction price is required to be allocated based upon the relative standalone selling prices of the promised services underlying each performance obligation. We generally determine the standalone selling price based on the prices charged to customers. If there are services included in the transaction price for which the standalone selling price is not directly observable, then we would first apply the standalone selling price for those services that are known, such as the flight hourly rate, and then allocate the total consideration proportionately to the other performance obligations in the contract.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised service is transferred to our member or the customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Our revenue is reported net of discounts and incentives. We generally do not issue refunds for flights unless there is a failure to meet our service obligations. Refunded amounts for initiation fees and annual dues are granted to some customers that no longer wish to remain members following their first flight. We generally do not have contracts that include variable terms.
We utilize registered independent third-party air carriers in the performance of a portion of our flights. We evaluate whether there is a promise to transfer services to the customer, as the principal, or to arrange for services to be provided by another party, as the agent, using a control model. The nature of the flight services we provide to members is similar regardless of which third-party air carrier is involved. Wheels Up directs third-party air carriers to provide an aircraft to a member or customer. Based on evaluation of the control model, it was determined that Wheels Up acts as the principal rather than the agent within all revenue arrangements, other than when acting as an intermediary ticketing agent for travel on Delta, as an advisor for whole aircraft acquisitions and sales and when managed aircraft owners charter their own aircraft, as we have the authority to direct the key components of the
service on behalf of the member or customer regardless of which third-party is used. If Wheels Up has primary responsibility to fulfill the obligation, then the revenue and the associated costs are reported on a gross basis in the consolidated statements of operations.
Business Combinations and Asset Acquisitions
We account for business combinations and asset acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires allocation of the purchase price to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. For acquisitions meeting the definition of a business combination in ASC 805, Business Combinations, the excess of the purchase price over the amounts recognized for assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. For acquisitions meeting the definition of an asset acquisition, the fair value of the consideration transferred, including transaction costs, is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their relative fair values. No goodwill is recognized in an asset acquisition.
The acquisition method of accounting requires us to exercise judgment and make estimates and assumptions regarding fair values using the information available as of the date of acquisition. We may also refine these estimates over a one-year measurement period, to reflect any new information obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date that, if known, would have affected the measurement of the amounts recognized as of that date. If we are required to retroactively adjust provisional amounts that we have recorded for the fair value of assets and liabilities in connection with an acquisition, these adjustments could materially impact our financial position and results of operations. Assumptions that we make in estimating the fair value of acquired developed technology, trade names, customer relationships and other identifiable intangible assets include future cash flows that we expect to generate from the acquired assets. If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these values, we could record impairment charges.
Goodwill and Intangibles
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations. The carrying value of goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis or on an interim basis if events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have occurred (i.e., a triggering event). Our annual goodwill impairment testing date is October 1st. We are required to test goodwill on a reporting unit basis. We determined private aviation services is our one reporting unit to which the entire amount of goodwill is allocated.
Goodwill impairment is the amount by which our reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of goodwill. We use both qualitative and quantitative approaches when testing goodwill for impairment. Our qualitative approach evaluates various events including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, changes in the business environment in which we operate, a sustained decrease in our share price and other specific facts and circumstances. If, after assessing qualitative factors, we determine that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of our reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, then performing a quantitative impairment assessment is unnecessary and our goodwill is not considered to be impaired. However, if based on the qualitative assessment we conclude that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, or if we elect to skip the optional qualitative assessment approach, we proceed with performing the quantitative impairment assessment, to quantify the amount of impairment, if any.
When a quantitative impairment assessment is performed, we primarily determine the fair value of our reporting unit using a discounted cash flow model, or income approach, and supplement this with observable valuation multiples for comparable companies, as appropriate. The completion of the discounted cash flow model requires that we make a number of significant estimates and assumptions, which include projections of future revenue, costs and expenses, capital expenditures and working capital changes, as well as assumptions about the estimated weighted
average cost of capital and other relevant variables. We base our estimates and assumptions on our recent performance, our expectations of future performance, economic or market conditions and other assumptions we believe to be reasonable. Actual future results may differ from those estimates.
Intangible assets, other than goodwill, acquired in a business combination are recognized at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. We periodically reassess the useful lives of our definite-lived intangible assets when events or circumstances indicate that useful lives have significantly changed from the previous estimate.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets include aircraft, property and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets and operating lease right-of-use assets. We review the carrying value of long-lived assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. The circumstances that would indicate potential impairment may include, but are not limited to, a significant change in the manner in which an asset is being used or losses associated with the use of an asset. We review long-lived assets for impairment at the individual asset or the asset group level for which the lowest level of independent cash flows can be identified and measured. If the carrying amount of a long-lived asset or asset group is determined not to be recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized and a write-down to fair value is recorded.
Equity-Based Compensation
Prior to the Business Combination, we issued equity-based compensation awards to employees and consultants, including stock options, profits interests and restricted interests, under the WUP stock option plan and WUP management incentive plan. In connection with the Business Combination, we adopted and have issued equity under the 2021 LTIP, which provides for grants of various types of awards including stock options, restricted stock units and other stock-based awards.
Equity-based compensation awards are measured at the date of grant based on the estimated fair value of the respective award and the resulting compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period of the respective award. WUP restricted interests contained a performance condition that provides for accelerated vesting upon the occurrence of a change in control or an initial public offering including consummation of a transaction with a special-purpose acquisition company. For performance-based awards, the grant date fair value of the award is expensed over the vesting period when the performance condition is considered probable of being achieved. Earnout Shares issued in connection with the Business Combination contain market conditions for vesting. Compensation expense related to an award with a market condition is recognized on a tranche-by-tranche basis (accelerated attribution method) over the requisite service period and is not reversed if the market condition is not satisfied. We account for forfeitures of awards as they occur.
Fair value of our historical and outstanding equity-based compensation awards, including stock options, WUP profits interests and WUP restricted interests, were estimated using the Black Scholes option-pricing model and a Monte Carlo simulation model was used to determine the fair value of grants with market conditions. Both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model requires management to include key inputs and assumptions, including the fair value of an underlying common interest in WUP or our current Class A common stock quoted market price, the expected trading volatility over the term of the award, the expected term of the award, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yield. We evaluate the inputs and assumptions used to value our share-based awards on each grant date.
•Expected Volatility. Since Wheels Up was not actively traded on the NYSE until July 2021, we used the average volatility of a mix of several unrelated publicly traded companies within the airline industry and certain travel technology companies, which we consider to be comparable to our business, over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards. As our common stock accumulates more trading history, we will incorporate more of our own historical volatility and continue to use benchmark volatility with respect to periods beyond our common stock’s trading history.
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our equity-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We determine the expected term using the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the award due to us having insufficient historical exercise data.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available for zero-coupon Treasury notes at the time of grant with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
•Expected Dividend Yield. The dividend rate used is zero as we have never paid any cash dividends on our common interests and do not currently anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
Prior to the Business Combination, in the absence of a public trading market, the grant date fair value of our WUP common interests was determined by the WUP Board of Directors, with input from management and the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist. The WUP Board of Directors intended for all WUP stock options granted to have an exercise price per share not less than the per share fair value of WUP common interests on the date of grant. The valuations of WUP common interests were determined in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Audit and Accounting Practice Series, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
The assumptions we use in the valuation models were based on future expectations combined with management judgment, and considering a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of WUP common interests as of the date of each WUP stock option grant, including the following:
•the nature and history of our business;
•the economic outlook in general and the outlook of our industry;
•our stage of development and the competitive environment;
•our historical and forecasted operating results;
•our overall financial position;
•the rights and preferences of WUP preferred interests relative to WUP common interests;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale based on current conditions;
•any adjustment necessary to recognize a discount for lack of marketability; and,
•the market performance of comparable publicly-traded companies.
In valuing our equity-based awards, we determined the total equity value of our business considering various valuation approaches including the income approach and market approach. Based on our facts and circumstances, we primarily used a discounted cash flow method, or the income approach, to approximate the fair value of our total equity on the grant date of a respective award.
As described above, the income approach involves applying appropriate discount rates to estimated cash flows that are based on forecasts of revenue, costs and capital expenditures, which are then discounted back to the present value using a rate of return derived from companies of similar type and risk profile. The discount rate reflects the risks inherent in the cash flows and the market rates of return available from alternative investments of similar type and quality as of the valuation date. Our assumptions underlying the estimates were consistent with the plans and estimates that we use to manage the business. The risks associated with achieving our forecasts were assessed in selecting the appropriate discount rates. As there have not been enough transactions with available market data involving similar companies, we considered but did not apply the market approach.
We then used the option pricing method to allocate the equity value and determine the estimated fair value of WUP common interests. The option pricing method allocates values to each equity class based on the liquidation preferences, participation rights and exercise prices of the equity class. We also include a discount to recognize the
risk associated with the lack of marketability and liquidity of our equity. The discount adjustment is applied to account for the fact holders of private company interests do not have access to trading markets similar to those enjoyed by stockholders of public companies.
Application of these approaches involves the development of significant estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, costs and expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and weighting the probability of certain future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the fair value we recorded for WUP common interests and ultimately how much equity-based compensation expense is recognized.
The grant date fair value calculated using the methodology discussed above is also utilized with respect to WUP profit interests and restricted interests. WUP restricted interests had a performance condition, as well as a service condition to vest. As a result, no compensation expense is recognized until the performance condition has been satisfied. Subsequent to satisfaction of the performance condition, compensation expense is recognized to the extent the requisite service period has been completed and compensation expense thereafter is recognized on a straight-line basis over the remaining requisite service period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.