Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following management’s discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report. Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this section to “we,” “our,” “us,” “UpHealth,” the “Company,” and other similar terms refer to UpHealth, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Formation
UpHealth Services, Inc. was formed on November 5, 2019, and effectively began operations on January 1, 2020. It was formed for the purpose of effecting a combination of various companies engaged in digital health, and commenced negotiations with a number of companies, including those that are discussed below as having been acquired. UpHealth Holdings, Inc. (“UpHealth Holdings”) became the sole shareholder of with UpHealth Services, Inc. through a reorganization with UpHealth Services, Inc.’s original shareholders when UpHealth Holdings was formed on October 26, 2020 as a Delaware corporation. UpHealth Holdings then entered into a series of transactions to develop its business across three segments: (a) Integrated Care Management-through its subsidiary Thrasys, Inc. (“Thrasys”); (b)Virtual Care Infrastructure-through its subsidiary Glocal Healthcare Systems Private Limited (“Glocal”); and (c) Services-through its subsidiaries Innovations Group, Inc. (“Innovations Group”), Behavioral Health Services, LLC (“BHS”), and TTC Healthcare, Inc. (“TTC”). On June 9, 2021, UpHealth (fka GigCapital2) acquired UpHealth Holdings and its subsidiaries, which added Cloudbreak Health, LLC (“Cloudbreak”) to the Virtual Care Infrastructure segment.
Completed Business Combinations
On November 20, 2020, UpHealth Holdings acquired BHS, pursuant to the terms of an Agreement and Plan of Merger between UpHealth Holdings and BHS, in exchange for consideration in the form of a promissory note in the amount of $1.2 million and shares of UpHealth Holdings. The operating results for BHS for the year ended December 31, 2021 are included in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report.
On November 20, 2020, UpHealth Holdings acquired Thrasys pursuant to the terms of an Amended and Restated Plan of Merger between the parties, in exchange for consideration in the form of a promissory note in the amount of $20.0 million and shares of UpHealth Holdings common stock. The operating results for Thrasys for the year ended December 31, 2021 are included in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report.
On January 25, 2021, UpHealth Holdings acquired TTC, which became a wholly-owned subsidiary, pursuant to the terms of an Agreement and Plan of Merger between UpHealth Holdings and TTC, in exchange for consideration in the form of a promissory note in the amount of $12.1 million and shares of UpHealth Holdings common stock. Beginning January 25, 2021, the results of operations of TTC are consolidated with those of UpHealth Holdings in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report. The information set forth below includes only the results of operations and liquidity and capital resources of TTC from January 25, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
Glocal is now a controlled (but not wholly-owned) subsidiary of UpHealth Holdings. The acquisition of Glocal by UpHealth Holdings was structured to occur in multiple steps. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of a Share Purchase Agreement between UpHealth Holdings, Glocal, and certain Glocal shareholders, the first step concluded on November 20, 2020, when UpHealth Holdings acquired approximately 43.46% of the outstanding equity share capital of Glocal and delivered shares of UpHealth Holdings common stock and a $8.7 million note, which was paid in June 2021. As part of the second step, on March 26, 2021, UpHealth Holdings acquired additional equity share capital of Glocal, increasing its ownership to approximately 89.4% of the outstanding equity of Glocal, by way of capital investment into Glocal, with $3.0 million paid in March 2021. On May 14, 2021, UpHealth Holdings acquired additional equity share capital of Glocal, increasing its ownership to approximately 90.4% of the outstanding equity of Glocal, and delivered shares of UpHealth Holdings common stock. The third step concluded on June 21, 2021, when UpHealth Holdings acquired additional equity share capital of Glocal, increasing its ownership to approximately 92.2% of the outstanding equity of Glocal, and delivered $9.2 million in cash to the selling shareholders. The fourth step concluded on August 27, 2021, when UpHealth Holdings acquired additional equity share capital of Glocal, increasing its ownership to approximately 94.81% of the outstanding equity of Glocal, and delivered $20.0 million in cash to the selling shareholders. UpHealth Holdings, as the majority shareholder, will, in conjunction with the remaining Glocal shareholders, increase UpHealth Holdings’ ownership in Glocal through the acquisition of remaining shares, and/or any other manner acceptable to UpHealth Holdings and permitted under India law.
UpHealth Holdings accounted for its ownership in Glocal using the equity method from November 20, 2020 through March 25, 2021. Beginning March 26, 2021, the results of operations of Glocal are consolidated with those of UpHealth Holdings in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report. The information set forth below includes only the results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources of Glocal from March 26, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
On April 27, 2021, UpHealth Holdings acquired Innovations Group, which became a wholly-owned subsidiary, pursuant to the terms of an Agreement and Plan of Merger between UpHealth Holdings and Innovations Group, in exchange for consideration in the form of a promissory note in the amount of $30.0 million and shares of UpHealth Holdings common stock. Beginning April 27, 2021, the results of operations of Innovations Group are consolidated with those of UpHealth Holdings in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report. The information set forth below includes only the results of operations and liquidity and capital resources of Innovations Group from April 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
On June 9, 2021, UpHealth acquired Cloudbreak, which became a wholly-owned subsidiary, pursuant to the terms of a Business Combination Agreement between UpHealth and Cloudbreak, in exchange for consideration in the form of a promissory note in the amount of $36.6 million and shares of UpHealth common stock. Beginning June 9, 2021, the results of operations of Cloudbreak are consolidated with those of UpHealth in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report. The information set forth below includes only the results of operations and liquidity and capital resources of Cloudbreak from June 9, 2021 through December, 2021.
On June 9, 2021, UpHealth acquired UpHealth Holdings and its subsidiaries, which became a wholly-owned subsidiary, in an exchange of cash, notes, and shares of common stock for all the shares of UpHealth Holdings’ capital stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the acquisition. The acquisition was accounted for as a reverse
recapitalization, which is the equivalent of UpHealth Holdings issuing stock for the net assets of UpHealth, accompanied by a recapitalization, with UpHealth treated as the accounting acquiree. The determination of UpHealth as the accounting acquiree was primarily based on the fact that subsequent to the acquisition, UpHealth Holdings owned a majority of the voting power of the combined company, UpHealth Holdings comprised 75% of the ongoing operations of the combined entity, UpHealth Holdings controlled a majority of the governing body of the combined company, and UpHealth Holdings’ senior management comprised most of the senior management of the combined company. Subsequent to June 9, 2021, the results of operations of UpHealth are consolidated with those of UpHealth Holdings in the UpHealth, Inc. consolidated financial statements provided with this Annual Report. The information set forth below includes only the results of operations and liquidity and capital resources of UpHealth from June 9, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Results
COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has affected and will continue to affect economies and business around the world. To date, various governmental authorities and private enterprises have implemented numerous measures to contain the pandemic, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and shutdowns, which have led to severe disruptions to the global economies that may continue for a prolonged duration and trigger a recession or a period of economic slowdown. The magnitude and duration of the resulting decline in business activity and operations cannot be measured with any degree of certainty. At this stage, the extent and duration of the pandemic, and its foreseeable unfolding following the worldwide vaccine campaigns, is still uncertain and difficult to predict, also considering the severity of the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic currently hitting the Indian regions. UpHealth is actively monitoring and managing its response and assessing actual and potential impacts to its operating results and financial condition, which could also impact trends and expectations.
UpHealth, Inc. Business Overview
Integrated Care Management Segment - Thrasys
Thrasys Overview
Thrasys provides its customers with an advanced, comprehensive, and extensible technology platform, marketed under the umbrella “SyntraNetTM,” to manage health, quality of care, and costs, especially for individuals with complex medical, behavioral health, and social needs. Thrasys focuses on both the United States and international markets. SyntraNetTM is offered as a software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) platform. Information, analytics, and applications are delivered to care team members on desktops, tablets, and phones, as needed. An advanced protected health information (“PHI”) framework controls access to information based on roles, rights, policies, and scope of consent. The platform includes innovations in a number of areas: application and information models for connected care communities (an extension of multi-tenant architectures), integration and normalization of heterogeneous data sources, configurable software services and open application programming interfaces (“APIs”), advanced analytics and intelligence, scalable workflows and rules, protected health information management, and user interfaces ready for the proliferation of device types and interaction modes.
Thrasys Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Thrasys derives revenue broadly from the sales of (a) products-with associated license, subscription, and hosting fees and (b) services- largely to implement, configure, and extend the technology, and train and on-board users on the use of the platform and applications.
Licenses and Subscriptions Revenue. License revenues are typically associated with rights granted to customers to deploy the platform to a certain number of care communities of a certain size, usually measured as the total population of patients that can be included within a care community. License revenues are recognized based on the nature of the license provided, either fully on the date license rights are granted to the customer if there are no further performance obligations or ratably over the license term beginning on the effective date of each contract, the date the customer takes possession of the license rights.
Subscription fees are recurring fees charged for access to the platform and applications. Subscription fees are typically pegged to a measure of use, such as population size, number of providers, members enrolled in programs, or number of members
managed by applications. Subscription fees can grow as customers subscribe to additional application features or launch additional programs. Revenues from subscription fees are recognized ratably over the subscription term.
Services. The majority of Thrasys’ contracts to provide professional services are priced on a time and materials basis, whereby revenues are recognized as the services are rendered. In some cases, Thrasys enters into professional services contracts where professional services fees are defined for specific milestones, whereby revenues are recognized upon achievement of the milestones.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services for Thrasys include: costs related to hosting SyntraNetTM in a HIPAA-compliant cloud environment; costs of third-party product licenses embedded with SyntraNetTM; costs of a core professional services team; and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs. Added compliance requirements for security infrastructure is likely to add some additional costs for hosting services. Thrasys also anticipates added costs for third-party licenses that will be added as the scope and footprint of the technology platform expands.
Hosting Infrastructure. Thrasys’ technology and solutions are designed to be agnostic to any particular cloud services provider. Currently, customer environments are hosted through contracts with two cloud service providers. Thrasys anticipates capabilities of cloud service providers to grow, and costs to become increasingly competitive, and will continue to evaluate offerings in the marketplace to determine the optimum mix of security, reliability, scalability, and performance to meet customer needs. Hosting infrastructure costs for Thrasys are related to the number and size of environments deployed for customers and also on the service level agreements (“SLAs”) negotiated with customers. As the average size of customers continues to grow, hosting infrastructure costs are expected to grow as a percentage of revenue.
Third-Party Product Licenses. SyntraNetTM embeds certain third-party technology components to support some of its technology capabilities. There are multiple vendors for these components, and Thrasys is not dependent on any specific vendor.
Professional Services Team. Thrasys’ professional services team works closely with the product team and is best understood as an “A-team” created to lead showcase implementations. The goal is to keep the professional services team small in order to focus it on deploying reference customers and facilitating the on-boarding and coaching of systems integration partners.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing (“S&M”) Expenses. S&M expenses include an internal sales and marketing team and contracts with business development consultants to generate and qualify leads, and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
Research and Development (“R&D”) Expenses. Thrasys continues to invest in R&D. The core R&D team consists of a small team of very experienced software developers. Beginning in 2019, Thrasys added considerable capacity via a consulting group with whom it has been working for over ten years. The team, based in Chicago, functioned much like the Thrasys internal team, until they were brought in-house in June 2021. R&D expenses also includes an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
General and Administrative (“G&A”) Expenses. G&A expenses include compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services, S&M expenses, and R&D expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of computer equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, and office equipment, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Thrasys.
Virtual Care Infrastructure Segment - Glocal and Cloudbreak
Glocal Overview
Glocal is a technology and process-based healthcare platform providing its customer comprehensive primary care and specialty consultations for a fraction of the cost of traditional healthcare delivery systems, through telemedicine, digital dispensaries, and
technology-based hospital centers. Glocal has been awarded by the United Nation’s (“UN”) Innovation Exchange with the Public Appreciation Award 2020 as a cutting-edge technology to meet the sustainable development goals of the UN.
Glocal pioneered the development of a semantic algorithm and AI-based clinical decision support system called LitmusDX, which helps deliver healthcare through telemedicine in its HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries and HelloLyf HX digital hospital, utilizing a telemedicine terminal called LitmusMX and an automated medicine dispenser called LitmusRX.
LitmusMX is used for recording the vitals of the patient, consultations with a doctor over video conferencing from miles away, and routine card-based point-of-care tests, and also contains a fully automatic biochemistry analyzer. The software may also suggest further investigations. If the doctor agrees, they can order further rapid tests, such as for dengue or malaria, for which kits are available. When the doctor selects a prescription, LitmusMX talks to the LitmusRX automated medicine dispensing unit, which delivers the required dosages of the medicines. Theoretically, the algorithm can be fine-tuned to arrive at a final diagnosis and prescription on its own. In addition to these solutions is one of the world’s top end-to-end Clinical Decision Support System (“CDSS”), named LitmusDX, along with a web interface, named HelloLyf, which integrates practice management with diagnostic algorithms, investigation interpretation, treatment protocols, drug safety checks, and electronic medical records.
Glocal’s HelloLyf CX digital dispensary was selected by United Nations AID as a cutting-edge technology solution to reach the UN’s sustainable development goals. Unlike other telemedicine centers seen today, Glocal’s HelloLyf CX digital dispensary is an innovative, hybrid, brick-and-mortar center, which provides complete primary and emergency healthcare solutions, such as consultation, confirmatory tests, and medicines, from a single point through the use of LitmusMX and LitmusRX. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Glocal’s innovative HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries successfully used ultraviolet C light disinfection, acrylic separation, and positive air pressure to create the first line for defense of health workers and patients against all forms of infectious and contagious diseases, including COVID-19.
In September 2021, Glocal delivered its first digital hospital in the Indian state of Nagaland, providing 88 e-ICU beds with connected ventilators and injection syringe pump. This digital hospital utilizes Glocal’s HelloLyf patient management, digital health, and decision support software to provide and coordinate outpatient care, emergency care, radiology and imaging, intensive care, high-dependency care, inpatient care, and dialysis.
While Glocal’s customers are located in regions in India and Southeast Asia, Glocal generates the majority of its revenue in India. Glocal’s telemedicine/HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries have been functional in India mainly through the government and are primarily housed in government facilities, which provide services that are free to the beneficiaries. After successful implementation of projects in the Indian states of Rajasthan, Odisha, and West Bengal, Glocal won a contract to set-up 550+ HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries in the Indian State of Madhya Pradesh, resulting in a total of 750+ government-placed nodes across India.
Glocal has begun focusing on a business-to-business (“B2B”) model where the HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries are sold to B2B partners/customers, who operate them with a revenue-share to Glocal. This results in lower revenues but higher margins.
Glocal also owns nine hospitals, four of which it operates and five of which it has contracted with third parties to operate with Glocal receiving a revenue-share.
Factors Affecting the Industry and Comparability of Results
COVID-19
Glocal’s revenues dipped during COVID-19, particularly during the April to June 2020 quarter, due to a reduction in physical touch points resulting from the lockdowns; however, those stabilized during the July to September 2020 quarter. In addition, between April and December 2020, four of Glocal’s hospitals were requisitioned temporarily by the respective state government for Covid-19 response. All of the requisitioned hospitals were released by September 2021. The relevant governments are required to compensate Glocal for this period and the impact to revenues, costs and expenses has not been material. Currently, Glocal does not anticipate these or any future requisitions will have a material impact. For the HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries, there has been a delay in shipping orders due to a logistics slowdown. While the contracts are covered by force majeure clauses, the risk of cancellation of contracts has not risen, but revenue growth has been delayed. Glocal’s order book has seen a significant increase which Glocal believes will continue; however, the impact of COVID-19 remains fluid and order fulfillment for HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries may be impacted by continued logistics bottlenecks.
Glocal Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Services. Services revenue is generated primarily from operating hospitals and clinics, including pharmacy and medicine sales, and transaction fees per telemedicine consultation.
Products. Products revenue is generated primarily from the sale of HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries and the construction of HelloLyf HX digital hospitals.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services consist primarily of costs of building and operating hospitals, including costs for the purchase of medicines, professional/doctor fees, the cost to build HelloLyf CX digital dispensaries and HelloLyf HX digital hospitals, and an allocation of information technology and depreciation costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses. S&M expenses are comprised of compensation and benefits related to Glocal’s sales personnel, travel expenses, and expenses related to advertising, marketing programs, and events, and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses include compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services and S&M expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Glocal’s operations are capital intensive. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of buildings, computer equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, and office equipment, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Glocal.
Cloudbreak Overview
Cloudbreak is a leading provider of unified telemedicine solutions and digital health tools aimed at increasing access to healthcare and resolving health disparities across the care continuum, at each stage of healthcare acuity. Cloudbreak powers its client’s healthcare digital transformation initiatives and provides digital health infrastructure enabling its partners to address healthcare disparities and implement unique, private-label, telehealth strategies customized to their specific needs and markets.
Cloudbreak’s core offering, known as Martti™ (My Accessible Real-Time Trusted Interpreter), is a video remote interpreting solution that puts qualified and certified medical interpreters at the fingertips of clinical care teams nationwide through Cloudbreak’s proprietary software platform. Having one of the largest installed bases of video endpoints in the nation, Cloudbreak has expanded its operations to include other telemedicine use cases as well, including tele-stroke, tele-psychiatry, tele-urology, and tele-quarantine, among others, all over the same infrastructure. Cloudbreak has also recently launched a home health virtual visit platform enabling its healthcare system partners to see their patients remotely on any device, at anytime, anywhere the patient may be, and in any language they may speak. Cloudbreak’s client base spans the entire healthcare continuum including hospitals and health systems, Federally Qualified Healthcare Clinics, urgent care centers, stand alone clinics and medical practices, employers, and schools.
Cloudbreak’s Telemedicine-as-a-Service (“TaaS”) business model aligns interests between Cloudbreak and its clients, creating a partnership targeted towards forming long-term agreements with sustainable and mutually beneficial growth models for all stakeholders. Cloudbreak has specifically structured itself to not have a captive medical group as it believes that creates a conflict of interest with its client base, as local health systems do not want to suffer patient leakage to a technology partner or be forced to use a provider network. As a result, Cloudbreak has the freedom to match its partners with centers of excellence on its network, who can satisfy their specific needs and strategy without fear of competing for the patient’s attention, and thereby avoid the employment and maintenance of a medical group, which is a lower margin and a more labor intensive activity.
Cloudbreak Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Services. Services revenue is generated primarily from the sale of subscription-based fixed monthly minute and variable rate per unit of service medical language interpretation services. Cloudbreak also records ancillary revenue from the rental of Martti™ devices and from the provision of information technology services that include connectivity and ongoing support of the Martti™ software platform. Generally, Cloudbreak’s medical language interpretation and information technology services are invoiced monthly. Fixed monthly minute medical language interpretation subscription and information technology services fees are invoiced in advance in the period preceding the service. Variable rate per unit medical language interpretation and information technology services fees (including overage fees related to minutes used by the customer in excess of the fixed monthly minute subscription) are invoiced monthly in arrears. Martti™ device leases are invoiced monthly in advance in the period preceding the usage. Invoiced amounts are typically due within 30 days of the invoice date.
Products. Products revenue consists of the sale of Martti™ devices to its customers. Sale of Martti™ devices are generally invoiced at contract execution (50%) and upon the delivery of the devices to the customer (50%). Invoiced amounts are typically due within 30 days of the invoice date.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services primarily consist of costs related to supporting and hosting Cloudbreak’s product offerings and delivering services, and include the cost of maintaining Cloudbreak’s data centers, customer support team, and Cloudbreak’s professional services staff, in addition to third-party service provider costs such as data center and networking expenses, amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs, the cost of purchased equipment inventory sold to customers, and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses. S&M expenses consist of costs related to advertising, marketing programs, and events including related wages, commissions and travel expenses, and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses consist of compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services and S&M.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of computer equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, and office equipment, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Cloudbreak.
Services Segment - Innovations, TTC and BHS
Innovations Overview
Innovations is the parent company of the following wholly-owned operating subsidiaries: MedQuest Pharmacy, Inc. (“MedQuest Pharmacy”), WorldLink Medical, Inc (“WorldLink Medical”), Medical Horizons, Inc. (“Medical Horizons”), and Pinnacle Labs, Inc. (doing business as MedQuest Testing Services (“MTS”).
MedQuest Pharmacy is a full-service retail and compounding pharmacy licensed in 50 states and the District of Columbia that has relationships with both prescribers and patients, dispenses patient-specific medications, and ships directly to patients. The business model is driven by cash-pay and prescription volume-based revenue generated by physician electronic prescription order entry, as well as traditional prescriber-patient-pharmacist interactions, mailed, verbal, and faxed orders. It delivers both compounded and legend (also referred to as manufactured) drugs and is capable of serving as a retail or national fulfillment center, as a personalized medication administration partner with prescribers, and as a lifestyle wellness direct-to-consumer offering. Its proprietary software and operating system, eMedplus, is Electronic Prescribing of Controlled Substances Certified (“EPCS”) by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (“DEA”) and provides prescribers with a full-service prescription management system. In January 2020, eMedplus became SureScripts certified (SureScript’s process is to validate that the software meets certain industry standards related to sending and receiving electronic messages and that it is providing open choice for medication selection and dispensing location), allowing any user of the SureScripts platform to prescribe medications dispensed by MedQuest Pharmacy.
MedQuest Pharmacy is accredited and recognized by the Accreditation Commission for Health Care and its Pharmacy Compounding Accreditation Board, among other high-quality providers and suppliers. MedQuest Pharmacy has achieved this elite level of quality by exceeding standards set by national accreditation bodies and quality-centered organizations.
MedQuest Pharmacy is currently working on expanding its prescriber base, through both current prescribers and new prescribers, through the SureScripts platform and testing services with new and existing lab companies and relationships. Medical Horizons is also expanding their sales of supplements through the new NutraScriptives-Direct program allowing physicians and others to use the NutraScriptives-Direct program to service their patients’ needs and thus expand their services and provide growth opportunities for their practices.
Also under the Innovations suite of services is WorldLink Medical, Medical Horizons, and MedQuest Testing Services. WorldLink Medical is the educational services arm of Innovations, providing Continuing Medical Education (“CME”) educational courses accredited as a joint provider through the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (“ACCME”). Medical Horizons specializes in customized formulations and contract dietary supplement and nutraceuticals manufacturing as an own label distributor with its brand NUTRAscriptivesTM, as well as other brands. Its turnkey solutions include label design, printing, and application; custom packaging; daily packs; a selection of capsule sizes and colors; and convenient auto-reorder services. It features a staff of experts that is committed to excellence and outstanding customer service. MedQuest Testing Services focuses specifically on facilitating diagnostic testing between lab companies, such as LabCorp and Quest Diagnostics, patients, and providers.
Innovations Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Products. Products revenue is generated primarily from the sale of prescription medications directly to patients, as well as through the sale of supplemental products to providers. The majority of the customer revenue is billed and collected before the medications and products are shipped from the facility. MedQuest Pharmacy is Innovation’s largest subsidiary in terms of revenue and generates approximately 60% of its revenue from sales of compounded medications and approximately 40% of its revenue from sales of manufactured medications and supplements.
Services. Services revenue is generated primarily from CME educational courses provided by WorldLink Medical.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services primarily consist of costs of raw ingredients and materials to compound various drugs and supplements, the cost of manufactured product purchased directly from the distributors for resale, the cost of fulfillment and shipping services and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs. MedQuest Pharmacy purchases these items through a large industry distributor with many suppliers and also sources products and supplies directly with manufacturers. MedQuest Pharmacy is also able to leverage the size of its operations to purchase larger quantities of certain ingredients and materials at lower prices.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses. S&M expenses consist of costs related to advertising, marketing programs, and events including related wages, commissions and travel expenses, an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs.
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses include compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services and S&M expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of computer equipment, lab equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, office equipment, and leasehold improvements, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Innovations.
TTC Overview
TTC provides inpatient and outpatient mental health and substance abuse treatment services for individuals with behavioral health issues including post traumatic stress disorder and drug and alcohol addiction. TTC offers a complete continuum of care
from its detoxification services, residential care, partial hospitalization programs, (“PHP”), and intensive outpatient, (“IOP”), and outpatient programs, (“OP”). During the COVID-19 pandemic, outpatient programs were virtual for a majority of visits.
In March 2020, TTC formed Transformations Mending Fences, LLC to provide mental health and substance abuse disorder treatment, including equine therapy, to patients. TTC has an 80% controlling interest in the entity with the remaining 20% interest owned by an unrelated party. Operations began in December 2020, with the admission of the first patient occurring in January 2021.
In addition to inpatient and outpatient substance abuse treatment services, TTC performs screenings, urinalysis, and diagnostic laboratory services, and provides physician services to clients. TTC operates three treatment subsidiaries located in and around Delray Beach, Florida and one facility in Morriston, Florida. These facilities consist of inpatient substance abuse treatment facilities, standalone outpatient centers, and sober living facilities focused on delivering effective clinical care and treatment solutions.
TTC Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Services. Services revenue is generated primarily through services provided to clients in both inpatient and outpatient treatment settings. TTC bills third-party payors weekly for the services provided in the prior week. Client-related revenues, such as inpatient and outpatient programs, are generally recognized over time as the performance obligation is satisfied at the estimated net realizable value amount from clients, third-party payors, and others for services provided. TTC receives the majority of payments from commercial payors at out-of-network rates. Client service revenue is recorded at established billing rates, less adjustments to estimate net realizable value. Provisions for estimated third party payor reimbursements are provided in the period related services are rendered and adjusted in future periods when actual reimbursements are received. A significant or sustained decrease in reimbursement rates could have a material adverse effect on operating results.
TTC also provides diagnostic laboratory testing services for its clients, which are recognized over time as the performance obligation is satisfied at the estimated net realizable value amount from clients, third-party payors, and others for services provided. Diagnostic laboratory service revenue is recorded at established billing rates, less adjustments to estimate net realizable value. Provisions for estimated third party payor reimbursements are provided in the period related services are rendered and adjusted in future periods when actual reimbursements are received.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services consist primarily of the cost of operating the facilities, professional/medical fees, and an allocation of information technology and depreciation costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses. S&M expenses consist of cost related to compensation, advertising and marketing programs, and third party marketing firms, an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation cost.
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses include compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services and S&M expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of computer equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, office equipment, and leasehold improvements, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of TTC.
BHS Overview
BHS operates through Psych Care Consultants, LLC, BHS Pharmacy, LLC, and Reimbursement Solutions, LLC, wholly-owned subsidiaries of BHS. Psych Care Consultants, LLC is a medical group that has four medical offices located in the St. Louis Metropolitan area (Missouri) and provides psychiatric and mental health services. BHS Pharmacy, LLC provides retail pharmacy services specializing in behavioral health through services, such as medication management, screenings, online
portals, and delivery. Reimbursement Solutions, LLC provides billing services for Psych Care Consultants, LLC (which has allowed for more efficient payment for BHS clinicians) and third-party customers. Services include billings, collections, verification of benefits, authorization, and credentialing.
BHS provides its patients and providers with a reliable platform where a provider can address their patients’ needs efficiently with an infrastructure built to support the providers and address patient needs. This infrastructure consists of medical offices placed strategically for the convenience of providers and patients and trained staff to assist providers and patients in the delivery of quality health services that is timely and efficient, provide prescription dispensing for patients that is convenient to maintain compliance, and assist providers with billing and collection services through Reimbursement Solutions, LLC.
BHS providers work in collaboration with multiple area hospital systems (both in leadership and clinical positions) to provide and direct inpatient treatment. BHS’ business is generated by various referral sources developed over the years by BHS’ providers and their presence in the market for over twenty-five years. BHS offers in-office, virtual, and in-patient treatment. Common conditions treated by BHS practitioners include depression, bipolar disorder, attention disorders, schizophrenia, substance use disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders, and personality disorders.
BHS Key Business Metrics
Revenue
Services. Services revenue is generated primarily by providing psychiatric and mental health services and billing services. Although the underlying tasks will vary by service and by patient, medical professionals perform inquiries, obtain vital statistics, perform certain lab tests, administer therapy, and provide any additional goods and services as necessary depending on the information obtained.
Products. Products revenue is generated primarily by providing retail pharmacy services through BHS Pharmacy, LLC.
Cost of Goods and Services
Cost of goods and services consist primarily of provider compensation expenses, the cost of pharmaceutical medications sold to patients, and an allocation of facilities, information technology, and depreciation costs. Provider compensation expenses include consulting payments to BHS’ healthcare providers, including medical doctors in psychiatry, psychologists, nurse practitioners, and clinical social workers. BHS has adopted an incentive-based compensation plan with provider agreements that compensate the providers based upon a percentage of revenue generated and ultimately collected for services provided. BHS primarily purchases pharmaceutical medications through a large industry distributor with many suppliers, but also purchases some directly from other suppliers.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses include compensation and benefits expense, and other administrative costs, related to its executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services.
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense relates to the depreciation of computer equipment, purchased software, furniture and fixtures, and office equipment, net of amounts allocated to cost of goods and services. Amortization expense relates to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of BHS.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. These estimates and assumptions are based on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances to determine reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future consolidated results of comprehensive income (loss) may be affected.
Among our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the following accounting policies and specific estimates involve a greater degree of judgments and complexity:
•Business combinations;
•Goodwill and intangible assets;
•Revenue recognition; and
•Income taxes.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. The purchase price is attributed to the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Acquisition-related transaction costs incurred by us are not included as a component of consideration transferred but are accounted for as an operating expense in the period in which the costs are incurred. Identifiable assets and liabilities acquired or assumed are measured separately at their fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price of acquisition over the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the acquiree is recorded as goodwill. The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. When we issue stock-based or cash awards to an acquired company’s shareholders, we evaluate whether the awards are consideration or compensation for post-acquisition services. The evaluation includes, among other things, whether the vesting of the awards is contingent on the continued employment of the acquired company’s stockholders beyond the acquisition date. If continued employment is required for vesting, the awards are treated as compensation for post-acquisition services and recognized as expense over the requisite service period. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The estimates and assumptions used to determine the fair values and useful lives of identified intangible assets could change due to numerous factors, including market conditions, technological developments, economic conditions, and competition. In connection with determination of fair values, we may engage a third-party valuation specialist to assist with the valuation of intangible and certain tangible assets acquired and certain assumed obligations.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill
As of December 31, 2021, our balance of goodwill was $284.3 million. Goodwill represents the excess of the total purchase consideration over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually on October 1 or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not to be impaired. These events include: (i) severe adverse industry or economic trends; (ii) significant company-specific actions, including exiting an activity in conjunction with restructuring of operations; (iii) current, historical or projected deterioration of our financial performance; or (iv) a sustained decrease in our market capitalization, as indicated by the Company’s publicly quoted share price, below our net book value. We currently operate as six reporting units under the guidance in ASC 350, Intangibles- Goodwill and Other. When testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option of first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment, or if a qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that carrying value exceeds its fair value, we perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. Under the quantitative goodwill impairment test, if our reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, we will record an impairment charge based on that difference. To determine reporting unit fair value as part of the quantitative test, we use a weighting of fair values derived from the income approach and the market approach. Under the income approach, we project our future cash flows and discount these cash flows to reflect their relative risk. The cash flows used are consistent with those the Company uses in its internal planning, which reflects actual business trends experienced and our long-term business strategy. As such, key estimates and factors used in this method include, but are not limited to, revenue, margin, and operating expense growth rates, as well as a discount rate, and a terminal growth rate. Under the market approach, we use the guideline company method to develop valuation multiples and compare our reporting unit to similar publicly traded companies. In order to further validate the reasonableness of fair value as determined by the income and market approaches described above, a reconciliation to market capitalization is then performed by estimating a reasonable control premium and other market factors. Future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in the impairment testing for goodwill could result in significantly different estimates of fair value.
We performed a goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2021, which included both qualitative and quantitative assessments. Our assessment included a comparison of carrying value to an estimated fair value using a market approach based
on our market capitalization. Based on this assessment, we concluded the fair value of all three segments was below the carrying value primarily due to the recent change in our market valuation and financial performance and recorded a goodwill impairment in the amount of $297.9 million.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets include trade names, technology and intellectual property, and customer relationships resulting from business acquisitions. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate balance of these assets was $115.3 million. We amortize these definite-lived intangible assets over their estimated useful lives. We also review the useful lives on a periodic basis to determine if the period of economic benefit has changed. Potential changes in useful lives, whether due to strategic decisions involving our brands, competitive forces, or other factors could result in additional amortization expense taking effect prospectively in the period of the change and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. The estimated useful lives of trade names are 3-10 years, the estimated useful life of technology and intellectual property is 5-7 years, and the estimated useful life of customer relationships is 10 years. Definite-lived intangible assets are re-evaluated whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their estimated useful lives may require revision and/or the carrying value of the related asset group may not be recoverable by its projected undiscounted cash flows. If the carrying value of the asset group is determined to be unrecoverable, an impairment charge would be recognized in an amount equal to the amount by which the carrying value of the asset group exceeds its fair value. There were no events or changes in circumstances which indicated that the carrying value of the definite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC guidance on revenue from contracts with customers. Revenue is reported at the amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for providing goods and services.
We record a contract asset when revenue recognized on a contract exceeds the billings. Thrasys and Cloudbreak generally invoice customers monthly, quarterly, or in installments. BHS, TTC, Glocal, and Innovations generally invoice their customers upon providing services as the performance obligations are deemed complete. Contract assets are included in accounts receivable in the consolidated balance sheets.
We record deferred revenue when billed amounts have been invoiced and received in advance of revenue recognition. It is recognized as revenue when transfer of control to customers has occurred or services have been provided. The deferred revenue balance does not represent the remaining contract value of multi-year, non-cancelable subscription agreements. The deferred revenue balance is influenced by several factors, including seasonality, the compounding effects of renewals, invoice duration, invoice timing, dollar size, and new business linearity within the period.
From time to time, we may enter into contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, particularly with our SaaS internet hosting, licenses, subscriptions, and services, and our construction of clinics and sales of digital dispensaries. Judgement is required to identify the distinct performance obligations in the contract, allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on relative standalone selling prices or estimates of such prices, and determine when to recognize revenue once control of each individual product or service is transferred to the customer, in satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligations.
Construction of clinics are typically billed based on milestones and sales of digital dispensaries are typically billed upon contract signing and delivery of the digital dispensaries. Revenue for both is typically recognized over time based on the percentage of costs incurred to date relative to the estimated total costs for the contract, as this method best depicts how control of the product is being transferred. The recognition of revenue is influenced by several factors, such as our estimation of our costs to complete a contract and the timing of our delivery of the product.
The transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations represents contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized, which includes unbilled receivables and deferred revenue that will be recognized as revenue in future periods. The transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations is influenced by several factors, including seasonality, the timing of renewals, the timing of delivery of software licenses, average contract terms, and foreign currency exchange rates. Unbilled portions of the remaining performance obligations are subject to future economic risks including bankruptcies, regulatory changes, and other market factors.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method. Deferred income taxes are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, using enacted statutory tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
Since tax laws and financial accounting standards differ in their recognition and measurement of assets, liabilities, equity, revenues, expenses, gains and losses, differences arise between the amount of taxable income and pretax financial income for a year and between the tax bases of assets or liabilities and their reported amounts in our financial statements. Because we assume that the reported amounts of assets and liabilities will be recovered and settled, respectively, a difference between the tax basis of an asset or a liability and its reported amount in the balance sheet will result in a taxable or a deductible amount in some future years when the related liabilities are settled or the reported amounts of the assets are recovered, which gives rise to a deferred tax asset or liability. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and to the extent we believe that recovery does not meet the more likely than not criteria, we must establish a valuation allowance. Management judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes. This process involves estimating our actual current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences that may result in deferred tax assets or liabilities.
Assessing the realizability of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon several factors, including the likelihood and amount, if any, of future taxable income in relevant jurisdictions during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. We forecast taxable income by considering all available positive and negative evidence, including our history of operating income and losses and our financial plans and estimates that we use to manage the business. These assumptions require significant judgment about future taxable income. As a result, the amount of deferred tax assets considered realizable is subject to adjustment in future periods if estimates of future taxable income change.
Future changes in various factors, such as the amount of stock-based compensation we record during the period and the related tax benefit we realize upon the exercise of employee stock options and vesting of restricted stock units; potential limitations on the use of our federal and state net operating loss credit carry forwards; pending or future tax law changes including rate changes and the tax benefit from or limitations on our ability to utilize research and development credits; the amount of non-deductible acquisition, integration, and transformation costs; and changes in our valuation allowance and state and foreign taxes, would impact our estimates, and as a result, could affect our effective tax rate and the amount of income tax expense we record, and pay, in future periods.
UPHEALTH, INC. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Operating Results
As of December 31, 2021 and for the year then ended, UpHealth’s operating results consist of (1) the results of operations for UpHealth Holdings, Thrasys, and BHS; (2) the results of operations for TTC, Glocal, and Innovations subsequent to the acquisition of those companies in 2021, as described above; and (3) the results of operations for UpHealth (fka GigCapital2) and Cloudbreak subsequent to June 9, 2021, as described above. As of December 31, 2020 and for the year then ended, UpHealth’s operating results consisted of the results of operations for UpHealth Holdings, and for Thrasys and BHS subsequent to their acquisitions on November 20, 2020.
The following table sets forth the consolidated results of operations of UpHealth:
The following table sets forth the consolidated results of operations of UpHealth as a percentage of total revenue:
As UpHealth Holdings effectively began operations on January 1, 2020 and operations from UpHealth’s subsidiaries are included from their dates of acquisition, as described below, the numbers presented above are not directly comparable between periods.
Revenue
In the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue was $123.8 million, comprised of $70.2 million of services revenue, $25.5 million of licenses and subscriptions revenue, and $28.1 million of products revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue was $5.4 million, comprised of $1.7 million of services revenue, $3.3 million of licenses and subscriptions revenue, and $0.4 million of products revenue. The increase in revenue in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for BHS and Thrasys, which were acquired on November 20, 2020, as well as a partial year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
We expect revenue to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021. In addition, we expect revenue to increase
for the foreseeable future as we invest in advertising and marketing, as well as in the integration and development of our technology platforms across each of our segments. See above for Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
Cost of Goods and Services
In the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of goods and services was $80.2 million, comprised of $41.4 million of costs of services, $19.2 million of costs of licenses and subscriptions, and $19.7 million of costs of products. In the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of goods and services was $1.2 million. The increase in cost of goods and services in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for BHS and Thrasys, which were acquired on November 20, 2020, as well as a partial year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
We expect cost of goods and services to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021. In addition, we expect cost of goods and services to increase for the foreseeable future, commensurate with the growth in our revenue. Our cost of goods and services may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue (gross margin %) from period to period due to the changes in the percentage of revenue contributed by each of our segments.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. In the year ended December 31, 2021, S&M expenses, which primarily consisted of advertising, marketing programs, and events, including related wages, commissions and travel expenses, were $9.3 million, compared to none in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in S&M expenses in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for BHS and Thrasys, which were acquired on November 20, 2020, as well as a partial year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
We expect S&M expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021. In addition, we expect our S&M expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we invest in advertising and marketing. Our S&M expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent we promote our brands through a variety of marketing and public relations activities.
Research and Development. In the year ended December 31, 2021, R&D expenses, which primarily consisted of compensation and benefits expense and other administrative costs related to the Thrasys' software development teams, were $7.3 million, compared to $0.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in R&D expenses in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for Thrasys, which was acquired on November 20, 2020.
We expect our R&D expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022, and for the foreseeable future, as we continue to invest in the development and integration of our technology platforms across each of our segments. Our R&D expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of our technology and development expenses, including the ability to capitalize software development costs. Historically, the majority of our technology and development costs have been expensed, except those costs that have been capitalized as software development costs.
General and Administrative. In the year ended December 31, 2021, G&A expenses were $57.8 million, which primarily consisted of compensation and benefits expense and other administrative costs related to the executive, finance, human resources, legal, facilities, and information technology teams, net of allocations to cost of goods and services and S&M and R&D expenses. In the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses were $4.9 million, consisting of deferred compensation and benefits expense, as well as costs from the operations of BHS and Thrasys from their acquisitions on November 20, 2020. The increase in S&M expenses in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for BHS and Thrasys, as well as a partial year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
We expect G&A expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021, net of savings we expect to realize as we continue to integrate and centralize G&A functions across our segments. In addition, we expect our G&A expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to grow our business. Our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of our general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization. In the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation and amortization expenses were $13.0 million, primarily consisting of $12.4 million of amortization of intangible assets related to the acquisitions of Thrasys, BHS, TTC, Glocal, Innovations, and Cloudbreak, and $0.6 million of depreciation related to property, plant, and equipment, net of allocations to cost of goods and services. In December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expenses were $0.3 million. The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations and amortization of intangible assets for BHS and Thrasys, which were acquired on November 20, 2020, as well as a partial year of operations and amortization of intangible assets for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
We expect depreciation and amortization expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of amortization of intangibles assets and depreciation of property, plan, and equipment related to TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation. In the year ended December 31, 2021, stock-based compensation expenses were $1.0 million related to grants under equity plans. There were no stock-based compensation expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020.
We expect stock-based compensation expenses to increase in the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a full year of expense associated with RSUs granted and options assumed in the year ended December 31, 2021, as well as to future RSU grants to be made in the year ending December 31, 2022.
Lease Abandonment Expenses. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a lease abandonment accrual in the amount of $0.9 million related to office spaces we vacated in the three months ended September 30, 2021. There were no lease abandonment expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Goodwill Impairment. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a goodwill impairment in the amount of $297.9 million. We performed a goodwill impairment assessment as of December 31, 2021, which included both qualitative and quantitative assessments. Our assessment included a comparison of carrying value to an estimated fair value using a market approach based on our market capitalization. Based on this assessment, we concluded the fair value of all three segments was below the carrying value primarily due to the recent change in our market valuation and financial performance. There were no goodwill impairments in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Acquisition, Integration, and Transformation Costs. In the year ended December 31, 2021, acquisition, integration and transformation costs were $36.3 million, primarily consisting of one-time transaction expenses related to the acquisitions of Thrasys, BHS, TTC, Glocal, Innovations, and Cloudbreak and UpHealth Holding's merger with UpHealth, as well as consulting costs incurred to integrate and transform the businesses. There were no acquisition, integration and transformation costs in the year ended December 31, 2020. While we do not expect to incur additional acquisition costs in the year ending December 31, 2022, we will incur additional integration and transformation costs in the year ending December 31, 2022, and for the foreseeable future.
Other Income (Expense)
In the year ended December 31, 2021, other income was $37.2 million, primarily consisting of a $53.8 million gain on fair value of derivative liability; a $1.6 million gain on fair value of warrant liabilities; $0.5 million of other income, net, including interest income; a $0.6 million gain on consolidation of equity method investment; and a $0.2 million gain on extinguishment of debt, partially offset by $19.5 million of interest expense. In the year ended December 31, 2020, other expense was $0.1 million, primarily consisting of interest expense.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the income tax benefit was $2.4 million, primarily due to nondeductible acquisition, integration, and transformation costs and nondeductible goodwill impairment. In the year ended December 31, 2020, the income tax expense was $0.1 million.
Income tax expense (benefit) reflects management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. The objectives for accounting for income taxes, as prescribed by the relevant accounting guidance, are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the financial statements. See above for Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
Segment Information
We evaluate performance based on several factors, of which revenue and gross margin by operating segment are the primary financial measures.
Revenue
Our business is organized into three operating business segments and one non-operating business segment:
•Integrated Care Management - through our Thrasys subsidiary;
•Virtual Care Infrastructure - through our Glocal and Cloudbreak subsidiaries;
•Services - through our Innovations, BHS, and TTC subsidiaries; and
•Corporate - through UpHealth and our UpHealth Holdings subsidiary.
In the Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the six-months ended June 30, 2021 we reported our revenue, gross margin and total assets into four operating business segments and one non-operating business segment. As a result of the integration and alignment of the businesses, in the three months ended September 30, 2021, we began operating along three business segments and reported financial information for the following segments: Integrated Care Management, Virtual Care Infrastructure, and Services. The Services segment includes the Digital Pharmacy and Behavioral Health business units.
The reportable segments are consistent with how management views our services and products and the financial information reviewed by the chief operating decision makers. We manage our businesses as components of an enterprise for which separate information is available and is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision makers in deciding how to allocate resources and assess performance.
In the Integrated Care Management segment, we provide our customers with an advanced, comprehensive, and extensible technology platform, marketed under the umbrella “SyntraNetTM,” to manage health, quality of care, and costs, especially for individuals with complex medical, behavioral health, and social needs.
In the Virtual Care Infrastructure segment, we provide technology and process-based healthcare platforms providing our customers comprehensive primary care, specialty consultations, and translation services, through telemedicine, digital dispensaries, and technology-based hospital centers.
In the Services segment, we provide custom compounded medications for the unique needs of patients and prescribers. We are a full-service pharmacy filling prescriptions from our inventory of compounded medications, as well as drugs purchased from manufacturers. Additionally, we provide inpatient and outpatient substance abuse and mental health treatment services for individuals with drug and alcohol addiction and other behavioral health issues. We offer a complete continuum of care from detoxification services, residential care, partial hospitalization programs, and intensive outpatient and outpatient programs.
In the Corporate segment, we perform executive, administrative, finance, human resources, legal, and information technology services for UpHealth, Inc. and for its subsidiaries, managed in a corporate shared services environment. Since they are not the responsibility of segment operating management, they are not allocated to the operating segments and instead reported within Corporate.
Revenue by segment consisted of the following:
Year Ended December 31, 2021. Revenue from the integrated care management segment consisted of $6.4 million of services revenue and $25.5 million of licenses and subscriptions revenue. Revenue from the virtual care infrastructure segment consisted of $32.0 million of services revenue and $4.6 million of products revenue. Revenue from the services segment consisted of $23.5 million of products revenue and $31.9 million of services revenue.
Year Ended December 31, 2020. Revenue from the integrated care management segment consisted of $0.4 million of services revenue and $3.3 million of licenses and subscriptions revenue. Revenue from the services segment consisted of $0.4 million of products revenue and $1.3 million of services revenue.
The increase in revenue in 2021 was largely due to a full year of operations for BHS and Thrasys, which were acquired on November 20, 2020, as well as a partial year of operations for TTC, Glocal, Innovations Group, and Cloudbreak, which were acquired in the first half of 2021.
Gross margin by segment consisted of the following:
Year Ended December 31, 2021. Gross margin from the integrated care management segment consisted of $4.0 million of services gross margin and $6.3 million of licenses and subscriptions gross margin. Gross margin from the virtual care infrastructure segment consisted of $12.3 million of services gross margin and $1.9 million of products gross margin. Gross margin from the services segment consisted of $11.9 million of products gross margin and $7.2 million of services gross margin.
Total assets by segment consisted of the following:
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, UpHealth, Inc. had free cash on hand of $58.2 million and $1.8 million, respectively, and restricted cash of $18.6 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $18.1 million represented funds held in an escrow account, as agreed in our Forward Share Purchase Agreement (see Note 10, Capital Structure, for further information) and $0.5 million represented funds held at our Glocal business, and restricted cash of $0.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
We believe our current cash, restricted cash, and expected cash collections will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least twelve months after the filing date of this Annual Report.
Cash Flows
The following tables summarize cash flows for the periods indicated:
As UpHealth Holdings effectively began operations on January 1, 2020 and operations from UpHealth’s subsidiaries are included from their dates of acquisition, as described above, the numbers presented above are not directly comparable between periods.
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $62.8 million, primarily attributed to $285.9 million of non-cash items (Impairment loss, depreciation, intangible amortization, provision for bad debt expense and debt issuance cost amortization partially offset by gain on fair value of derivatives, gain on extinguishment of debt, gain on fair value of warrants, gain on consolidation of equity method investment and deferred tax adjustments), net loss of $340.9 million and the changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects of acquisitions, of $7.9 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects of acquisitions, was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $26.7 million due to billed and unbilled receivables primarily from one customer during the year that were not collected as of December 31, 2021, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $23.0 million due to delayed payments to vendors. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1.1 million, primarily consisting of a $2.2 million net loss, less $0.2 million of noncash items, and a decrease in assets of $2.4 million (primarily due to $2.0 million increase in AR); offset by an increase in liabilities of $3.7 million (primarily $3.3 million in accounts payable).
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $0.7 million, primarily consisting of purchases of property and equipment partially offset by net cash acquired in acquisition of businesses. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $3.5 million, primarily consisting of net cash acquired in the acquisitions of Thrasys and BHS.
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $135.9 million, primarily consisting of proceeds from convertible debt of $164.5 million, proceeds from the merger and recapitalization transaction of $83.9 million and net proceeds from an equity raise of $43.0 million, partially offset by repayments of the seller notes of $99.2 million and repayments of debt of $42.6 million. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by (used in) financing activities was none.
Long-Term Debt
See Note 8, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report for our long-term debt.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
See Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report for information about our operating lease obligations and our non-cancellable contractual service and licensing obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any additional special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report for the recently issued accounting standards that could have an effect on us.