ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with respect to identifying any business combination target. We intend to complete our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placement of the Private Shares, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We presently have no revenue, have had losses since inception from incurring formation and operating costs and have had no operations other than identifying and evaluating suitable acquisition transaction candidates. We have relied upon the sale of our securities and loans from the Sponsor to fund our operations.
On July 19, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 4,000,000 Units. Each Unit consists of one share of Common Stock, and one-half of one Warrant, each whole Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $40,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of 295,000 Private Shares including 505,500 shares to the Company’s founders, the Sponsor and Tradeup INC., among which, the Sponsor purchased 236,000 Private Shares and Tradeup INC. purchased 59,000 Private Shares at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Share, generating the Private Placement Proceeds to the Company of $2,950,000. The Private Shares are identical to the shares of Common Stock sold as part of the Units in the IPO, except that the Private Shares are not transferable, assignable or salable (except to our officers and directors and other persons or entities affiliated with or related to our founders, each of whom will be subject to the same transfer restrictions) until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination. The IPO Proceeds of $40,800,000 ($10.20 per Unit) were placed in the Trust Account established for the benefit of the Company’s public stockholders and the underwriters of the IPO with Wilmington Trust, National Association acting as trustee.
On July 19, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the Over-allotment Option, and July 21, 2021, the underwriters purchased 430,000 Option Units generating gross proceeds of $4,300,000, and net proceeds to the Company of approximately $4,214,000 in the aggregate after deducting the underwriter discount. Simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the Option Units, the Company completed the Private Placement sale of 17,200 Additional Private Shares, among which, the Sponsor purchased 13,760 Additional Private Shares and Tradeup INC. purchased 3,440 Additional Private Shares, generating Private Placement Proceeds $172,000. A total of $4,386,000 of the Over-allotment Proceeds were placed in the Trust Account. The IPO Proceeds and the Over-allotment Proceeds include $1,550,500 Business Combination Fee pursuant to the Business Combination Marketing Agreement.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally towards consummating a business combination.
Recent Developments
On September 3, 2021, we announced that holders of the Company’s Units may elect to separately trade the shares of Common Stock and Warrants included in its Units, commencing on or about September 7, 2021.
The Common Stock shares and Warrants started to trade on the Nasdaq under the symbols “UPTD” and “UPTDW”, respectively. Units not separated will continue to trade on Nasdaq under the symbol “UPTDU.”
As of the date of this report, we have not entered into any definitive agreements, for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, entering into contractual arrangements with, or engaging in any other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We currently have until January 19, 2023 to consummate our initial business combination.
Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements
In preparation of our financial statements as of and for the period ended September 30, 2021, we concluded that we should revise our financial statements to classify all common stock subject to possible redemption in temporary equity. In accordance with the SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (ASC 480), paragraph 10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified
outside of permanent equity. We had previously classified a portion of our common stock in permanent equity. Although we did not specify a maximum redemption threshold, our charter provides that currently, we will not redeem our public shares in an amount that would cause our net tangible assets to be less than $5,000,001. We considered that the threshold would not change the nature of the underlying shares as redeemable and thus would be required to be disclosed outside equity. As a result, we revised our previously filed financial statements to classify all common stock as temporary equity and to recognize accretion from the initial book value to redemption value at the time of our Initial Public Offering and in accordance with ASC 480. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit. Pursuant to ASC Topic 250, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections issued by the FASB and Staff Accounting Bulletin 99, “Materiality” (“SAB 99”) issued by the SEC, we determined the impact of the error was immaterial. We reflected the corrections described above in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 2021, filed with SEC on November 10, 2021. We do not expect the changes described above to have any impact on our cash position or the balance held in the trust account.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception up to date was related to the Company’s formation, the IPO and general and administrative activities. Since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of business combination candidates, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 6, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $247,718, consisting of $178,992 of operating costs, consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses, and $70,154 of frachise tax expenses, offset by $1,428 of interest income from investments in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the period from January 6, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $316,158. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the Trust Account of $478,868 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash is held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem the shares of Common Stock. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount on deposit in the Trust Account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Until consummation of the business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional funding that may be loaned to us by our Sponsor, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the business combination and will need to raise additional capital. In this event, our officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we consummate an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us upon consummation of the business combination, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,200,000 of such loans may be convertible into units of the post business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. The terms of such loans by our initial stockholders, officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our initial business combination. Following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arraignments
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
We are obligated to pay the Representatives the Business Combination Fee equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO and the the sale of over-allotment Option Units. The Business Combination Fee of $1,550,500 will become payable to the Representatives from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Investments held in Trust Account
At December 31, 2021, the assets held in the Trust Account were held in money market funds, which are invested in U.S. Treasury securities.
We classify its U.S. Treasury and equivalent securities as held-to-maturity in accordance with ASC Topic 320 “Investments - Debt and Equity Securities.” Held-to-maturity securities are those securities which we have the ability and intent to hold until maturity. Held-to-maturity treasury securities are recorded at amortized cost on the accompanying balance sheet and adjusted for the amortization or accretion of premiums or discounts.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, whether they meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own Common Stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of equity at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as liabilities at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Common Stock (including Common Stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Common Stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our public shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, shares of Common Stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value of $10.20 per share as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable Common Stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of shares of redeemable Common Stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital or accumulated deficit if additional paid in capital equals to zero.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of our assets and liabilities approximates the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheet, primarily due to their short-term nature.
The fair value of our financial assets and liabilities reflects management’s estimate of amounts that we would have received in connection with the sale of the assets or paid in connection with the transfer of the liabilities in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In connection with measuring the fair value of its assets and liabilities, we seek to maximize the use of observable inputs (market data obtained from independent sources) and to minimize the use of unobservable inputs (internal assumptions about how market participants would price assets and liabilities). The following fair value hierarchy is used to classify assets and liabilities based on the observable inputs and unobservable inputs used in order to value the assets and liabilities:
● Level 1 - inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active market.
● Level 2 - inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the assets or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instruments.
● Level 3 - inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under ASC 740 Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021. We are currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position.
We have identified the United States as its only “major” tax jurisdiction.
We may be subject to potential examination by federal and state taxing authorities in the areas of income taxes. These potential examinations may include questioning the timing and amount of deductions, the nexus of income among various tax jurisdictions and
compliance with federal and state tax laws. Our management does not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
We are incorporated in the State of Delaware and is required to pay franchise taxes to the State of Delaware on an annual basis.
Net Income (Loss) per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC 260, Earnings Per Share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares, we first considered the undistributed income (loss) allocable to both the redeemable Common Stock and non-redeemable Common Sock and the undistributed income (loss) is calculated using the total net loss less any dividends paid. We then allocated the undistributed income (loss) ratably based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding between the redeemable and non-redeemable Common Stock. Any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the Common Stock subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the public stockholders
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.