Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The last day of our fiscal year is June 30. Our fiscal quarters end on September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Overview
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of all subsidiaries in which the Company holds a controlling financial interest as of the financial statement date.
For the year ended June 30, 2021 the consolidated financial statements of Upexi, Inc. include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries; Trunano Labs, Inc., a Nevada corporation, Infusionz, Inc. a Nevada corporation, Steam Distribution, LLC, a California limited liability company; One Hit Wonder, Inc., a California corporation; Havz, LLC, d/b/a Steam Wholesale, a California limited liability company, One Hit Wonder Holdings, LLC a California corporation; SWCH LLC, a Delaware limited liability company; Cresco Management LLC, a California limited liability company, and Infusionz LLC, a Colorado limited liability company.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, the consolidated financial statements of Upexi, Inc. include all of the subsidiary accounts included in the consolidated financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2021, and include the subsidiaries in which the Company holds a controlling financial interest as of June 30, 2022, which include Grove Acquisition Subsidiary, Inc. d/b/a/ VitaMedica a Nevada corporation as of August 1, 2021, Interactive Offers, LLC a Delaware limited liability corporation as of October 1, 2021 and Cygnet Online, LLC a Delaware limited liability corporation, as of April 1, 2022.
All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated as a result of the consolidation.
Operating Segments
The Company’s financial reporting is organized into only one segment, product sales. The Company’s internal reporting for product sales is organized into three channels of distribution: Upexi, Inc. branded products, manufacturing of products to be sold under customers brands and white label products that are sold under customer brands. These product sales are aggregated and viewed by management as one reportable segment due to their similar economic characteristics, products, production, distribution processes and regulatory environment.
Results of Operations
Year Ended June 30, 2022, as compared to June 30, 2021:
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021, which are included herein.
Revenues increased by $20,489,971 or 85% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. $14,950,919 or 73% of the increase was related to the acquisition of VitaMedica, Interactive and Cygnet and $5,539.052 or 23% was related to the core business compared to the prior year period. The core business increase was related to increased manufacturing and the Company’s own brands increased direct to consumer sales. Management expects revenue to increase in the 2023 fiscal year through both organic growth of the core business, acquisitions completed during the 2022 fiscal year and additional strategic acquisitions that align with managements long-term growth strategies.
Cost of revenue increased by $7,200,000 or 59% compared with the prior year. $6,827,937 was related to the acquisition of VitaMedica, Interactive and Cygnet and $372,063 was related to the core business. The gross profit margin improved 7% to 56%, compared to the prior year gross profit margin of 49%. The gross profit of the core business improved 9% to 58% compared to the prior year. The gross margin improvement for the core business was primarily related to the consolidation of manufacturing, additional equipment purchased during the year, efficiency improvement in the manufacturing process and an increase in direct-to-consumer sales. Management expects to continue to improve gross margins as the Company consolidates acquisitions and control direct costs.
Operating expenses increased by $17,369,038 or 166% compared with the prior fiscal year. $7,834,649 was related to the sales, marketing and general administrative expenses of the acquisition of VitaMedica, Interactive and Cygnet. The core business sales and marketing increased by $2,269,751 due to the increased spending on marketing of direct-to-consumer products and the growth of the sales and marketing team to support the current and expected future sales and product growth. The core business general and administrative expenses increased $2,841,050 due to increased infrastructure, acquisition costs and employee related costs. The core business, non-cash expenses of share-based compensation, amortization and depreciation, increased $4,423,588. The Company’s management is continuing to control operating expenses while also implementing management growth strategies.
Other expense (income), net increased by $181,494 or 67% compared with the prior fiscal year. There was a decrease in interest expense of approximately $315,149 which was offset by a decrease of $102,282 related to the gain on the forgiveness of the SBA PPP loan and the gain on the settlement of a canceled lease for the year ended June 30, 2021.
The Company had net loss of $2,046,030 compared to net income of $2,978,948 for the prior year. The change in net income primarily related to the $745,042 change of income tax benefit compared to the prior year and a $4,423,588 increase in non-cash expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Cash Flows
On June 30, 2022, the Company had cash of $7,149,806 or a decrease of $7,384,405 from June 30, 2021. The decrease in cash was primarily used for investing in acquisition of new entities and the purchase of property and equipment. The Company financed some of the investment through financing activities.
The net cash provided by operating activities of $521,872 was primarily from the $2,046,030 net loss, the $2,447,038 increase in inventory, $629,153 increase to deferred revenue and offset by $5,874,087 of non-cash expenses and $229,994 of other net changes in assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021 was $11,606,021 and $1,281,007, respectively. For the year ended June 30, 2022, the use of cash was primarily related to the investment of $5,457,545 in three acquisitions, $4,515,735 for the purchase of a building in Clearwater Florida and the related remodel of the acquired building and the $1,638,741 acquisition of equipment. For the year ended June 30, 2021, cash of $62,122 was provided from the acquisition of Infusionz, Inc., $1,422,129 was used to purchase equipment and $79,000 from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2022, was $3,699,744 compared to $11,988,395 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The Company had proceeds of $6,678,506 from a convertible note and used $1,975,888 for the repurchase of the Company’s common stock and $1,002,874 in the repayment of debt.
During October of 2019, the Company entered into convertible promissory notes (the “October 2019 Notes”) for total proceeds of $1,500,000. The principal and interest of the October 2019 Notes are payable in full at the maturity date of April 2021, if not previously converted. The October 2019 Notes have an interest rate of 8%, total accrued interest is to be repaid at maturity, and are convertible into common stock if the Company enters an initial public offering arrangement which results in the Company’s common stock becoming listed or trading. The conversion rate was set at $5.00 which is equal to the price of the Company’s common stock sold in the prospectus. On June 29, 2021, the Company issued 348,309 shares of the Company’s common stock for the full payment of principal and interest of these loans.
On April 28, 2020, the Company entered a Paycheck Protection Program loan for $398,945 in connection with COVID-19. The loan and accrued interest amounted to $403,277 which was forgiven on June 11, 2021 and recognized as a gain on the extinguishment of debt.
On May 13, 2020, Infusionz entered a Paycheck Protection Program loan for $297,100 in connection with COVID-19. The loan is classified as a current liability on the balance sheet on June 30, 2021. The loan and accrued interest amounted to $300,995 and was forgiven on August 30, 2021.
On June 3, 2020, the Company entered a loan for $150,000 with the Small Business Administration. The promissory note as a fixed payment schedule commencing on June 3, 2021, consisting of principal and interest payments of $731 monthly. The balance of the principal of $150,000 and interest of $6,876 was paid on August 30, 2021 and classified as a current liability on the balance sheet at June 30, 2021.
During December 2020, the Company entered into a note agreement for total proceeds of $750,000 with the Chief Executive Officer of the Company, a related party. The principal and interest of the note is payable was repaid during the year ended June 30, 2021.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company entered into convertible promissory notes (the “March 2021 Notes”) for total proceeds of $1,000,080. The term of the March 2021 Notes is two years and bear interest at a rate 8% per annum, compounded annually. The principal amount and accrued interest of the March 2021 Notes are automatically converted into capital stock of the company upon an initial public offering by the Company at a rate of seventy five percent of the initial public offering price of the shares of capital stock of the Company sold in the initial public offering. As of June 30, 2021, all of these notes have been converted to common stock.
During June 2022, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with two accredited investors pursuant to which the Company could receive up to $15,000,000 during the following twelve months of the agreement. The Company received $6,678,506 for a Convertible Notes in the original principal amount of $7,500,000 (the “Convertible Notes”), representing the original purchase amount, less fees, costs and a $500,000 holdback by the investors. In addition to the Convertible Notes, the investors received Common Stock Purchase Warrants (the “Warrants”) to acquire an aggregate of 56,250 shares of common stock. The Warrants are exercisable for five years at an exercise price of $4.44 per share, provide for customary anti-dilution protection, and an investor put right to require the Company to redeem the Warrants for a total of $250,000. The Company has the option until June 28, 2023, to draw down up to an additional $7,500,000 of Convertible Notes under the Securities Purchase Agreement to provide financing for acquisitions, pursuant to certain underwriting conditions set forth in the Securities Purchase Agreement. The Company is subject to customary covenants, financial and otherwise, under the Securities Purchase Agreement.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) surfaced. The spread of COVID-19 around the world has caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the US and international economies and, as such, the Company has transition to a combination of work from home and social distancing operations and there has been minimal impact to our internal operations from the transition. The Company is unable to determine if there will be a material future impact to its customers’ operations and ultimately an impact to the Company’s overall revenues.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to bad debts, intangible assets, and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified below the accounting policies, related to what we believe are most critical to our business operations and are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition or Plan of Operation where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Significant estimates underlying the Company’s reported financial position and results of operations include the allowance for doubtful accounts, useful lives of property and equipment, impairment of long-lived assets, inventory valuation, fair value of stock-based compensation and valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Business Combinations - The Company accounts for its business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. The cost of an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the acquisition date fair values of the assets transferred and liabilities assumed by the Company to the seller’s cash consideration and equity instruments issued. Transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition are expensed as incurred. The excess of (i) the total costs of acquisition over (ii) the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the acquiree is recorded as identifiable intangible assets and goodwill.
Goodwill - The Company evaluates its goodwill for possible impairment, simplifying the test for goodwill Impairment at least annually and when one or more triggering events or circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. Under this guidance, annual or interim goodwill impairment testing is performed by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of goodwill.
The Company performed its annual test as of June 30, 2022. No impairment charge was identified in connection with the annual goodwill impairment test
Revenue Recognition - The Company analyzes its contracts and purchase orders to assess that revenue is properly recognized. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as the Company fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements, whether for goods and services or licensing, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company acts as a principal in its revenue transactions as the Company is the primary obligor in the transactions. Generally, the Company recognizes revenue for its products when ownership is transferred to the customer, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
Product Revenue - Most of the Company’s revenue contracts are from domestic sales and represent a single performance obligation related to the fulfillment of customer orders for the purchase of its products. Net sales reflect the transaction prices for these contracts based on the Company’s selling list price, which is then reduced by estimated costs for trade promotional programs, consumer incentives, and allowances and discounts used to incentivize sales growth and build brand awareness.
The Company recognizes revenue at the point in time that control of the ordered product is transferred to the customer, which is upon shipment to the customer or other customer-designated delivery point. Taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental agencies are accounted for on a net basis and not included as revenue.
The Company does not accept sales returns from wholesale customers, as the products are pre-approved prior to production and shipment. E-Commerce product returns must be completed within 45 days of the date of purchase. The Company does not accrue for estimated sales returns as historical sales returns have been minimal. The Company records deferred revenues when cash payments are received or due in advance of performance, including amounts which are refundable. Substantially all the deferred revenue as of June 30, 2021 was recognized as revenue in the year ended June 30, 2022.
Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in revenue. Shipping and handling fees associated with freight are generally included in cost of revenue.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. The Company periodically evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, the Company estimates the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life in measuring whether or not the asset values are recoverable. The Company did not recognize impairment on its long-lived assets during the years ended June 30, 2022, or 2021.
Stock Based Compensation - The Company recognizes all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values. That expense will be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) or immediately if the share-based payments vest immediately.
Inventory - The Company reviews the inventory level of all products and raw materials quarterly. For most products that have been in the market for one year or greater, we consider inventory levels of greater than one year’s sales to be excess or other items that show slower than projected sales. Due to limited market penetration for our products, we have decided to write down 50% of the cost against certain raw materials and finished products. Products that are no longer part of the current product offering are considered obsolete. The potential for re-sale of slow-moving and obsolete inventories is based upon our assumptions about future demand and market conditions. The recorded cost of obsolete inventories is then reduced to zero and the slow-moving and obsolete inventory is written off and are recorded as charges to cost of goods sold. All adjustments for obsolete inventory establish a new cost basis for that inventory as we believe such reductions are permanent declines in the market price of our products. Generally, obsolete inventory is sold to companies that specialize in the liquidation, while we continue to market slow-moving inventories until they are sold or become obsolete. As obsolete or slow-moving inventory is sold or disposed of, we write it off.
Non-GAAP Measures (unaudited)
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company discloses and uses the above-mentioned non-GAAP financial measures internally as a supplement to GAAP financial information to evaluate its operating performance, for financial planning purposes, to establish operational goals, for compensation plans, to measure debt service capability, for capital expenditure planning and to determine working capital needs and believes that these are useful financial measures also used by investors. Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA is defined as GAAP net income or net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) adjusted for the non-cash stock compensation and stock option expense, acquisition, integration & restructuring expenses, charges and gains or losses from extinguishment of debt and other non-cash items. Non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA are not terms defined by GAAP and, as a result, the Company’s measure of non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA might not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position, or cash flow that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measures discussed above, however, should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to net income or net loss as reported for GAAP on the Consolidated Statements of Operations, cash and cash flows on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows or other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP, and as reflected on the Company’s financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures are not a substitute for or presented in lieu of financial measures provided by GAAP and all measures and disclosures of financial information pursuant to GAAP should be read to obtain a comprehensive and thorough understanding of the Company’s financial results. The reconciliations of non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA to GAAP operating income (loss) and/or GAAP net income (net loss) referred to in the highlights or elsewhere are provided in the schedules that are a part of this document.