Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of TKB’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements, including the related notes, contained in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our initial business combination. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry, we currently intend to concentrate our efforts in identifying businesses that provide critical technologies in the industrial base supply chain recognized by the United States Government to maintain technological leadership, national security, and supply chain independence. Such vital technologies include, but are not limited to, advanced manufacturing, artificial intelligence, automation, data security, energy storage and power management, financial technology (payment solution), industrial software, internet of things (“IoT”), microelectronics, robotics, and wireless communications equipment.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors, including pursuant to the forward purchase agreements:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. Our expenses have increased substantially after the closing of our initial public offering as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from April 20, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company had net income of $8,644,188. Net income is comprised primarily of a decrease in the fair value of the warrant liability of $10,457,500 and unrealized gains and interest income of $3,950 on marketable securities held in the trust account, offset by formation costs of $1,486,610, legal and accounting services of $163,471, insurance expense of $72,192, dues and subscriptions of $35,732, administrative fees - investor relations of $20,000, rent expense of $20,740, general business and office expense of $9,623, travel expense of $6,655, advertising and marketing expense of $2,177, and $62 of business meetings expense.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of founder shares by our sponsor, TKB Sponsor, LLC, for $25,000 and a $300,000 loan from our sponsor which has been repaid in full as of December 31, 2021.
On October 29, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 23,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,000,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, the Company completed the private sale of an aggregate of 10,750,000 warrants to our sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $10,750,000.
A total of $234,600,000 of the proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants were placed in a U.S.-based trust account at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
Transaction costs of the initial public offering amounted to $21,140,059, consisting of $3,850,000 of underwriting discount, $8,800,000 of deferred underwriting discount, $7,748,431 excess fair value of founder shares and $741,628 of actual offering costs. Of these amounts, $19,774,814 was recorded to additional paid-in capital and $1,365,245 costs related to the warrant liability was expensed immediately using the residual allocation method.
For the period from April 20, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $837,851. Net earnings of $8,644,188 was adjusted by gains of $3,752 interest earned on marketable securities held in trust, $198 unrealized gain on marketable securities held in trust, and $10,457,500 change in fair value of warrant liability, and $385,834 changes in operating assets and liabilities offset by $1,365,245 expense allocation of deferred offering costs for warrant liabilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $234,603,942 (including approximately $3,942 of interest income and unrealized gains) consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S. Treasury securities with a maturity of 185 days or less.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $750,562 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We may need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. We expect to incur significant costs related to identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time within one year from the date that the financial statements are issued. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than described below.
We have an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on October 29, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of the initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee $8,800,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the fair value of warrant liabilities which requires a Black-Scholes model to fair value the warrants. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants underlying the Public Units and the warrants sold in the Private Placement (the “Private Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Under ASC 815-40, the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are not indexed to our ordinary shares in the manner contemplated by ASC 815-40 because the holder of the instrument is not an input into the pricing of a fixed-for-fixed option on equity shares. Accordingly, we classify the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Public Warrants and the Private Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are valued using a Black-Scholes model.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value at the end of each reporting period and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit. On October 29, 2021, the Company recorded an accretion of $35,299,793, $7,612,755 of which was recorded in additional paid-in capital and $27,687,038 was recorded in accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption at December 31, 2021, which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the trust account earnings. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 10,750,000 private warrants in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of net earnings (loss) per ordinary share subject to possible redemption and allocates the net income (loss) into the two classes of shares in calculating net earnings (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted. For redeemable Class A ordinary shares, net earnings (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance. For non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares, net earnings (loss) per share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average number of nonredeemable Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Non-redeemable Class B ordinary shares include the founder shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the trust account.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.