Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K of this Annual Report. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this discussion to USD Partners, USDP, the Partnership, we, our, us or like terms refer to USD Partners and the following subsidiaries, collectively: Casper Crude to Rail LLC, CCR Pipeline LLC, Stroud Crude Terminal LLC, SCT Pipeline LLC, San Antonio Rail Terminal LLC, USD Logistics Operations GP LLC, USD Logistics Operations LP, USD Rail LP, USD Rail Canada ULC, USD Rail International S.A.R.L., USD Terminals Canada ULC, USD Terminals International S.A.R.L. and West Colton Rail Terminal LLC. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Annual Report. Please also read the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” following the table of contents in this Annual Report.
We denote amounts denominated in Canadian dollars with “C$” immediately prior to the stated amount.
Overview
We are a fee-based, growth-oriented master limited partnership formed by our sponsor, USD, to acquire, develop and operate midstream infrastructure and complementary logistics solutions for crude oil, biofuels and other energy-related products. We generate substantially all of our operating cash flows from multi-year, take-or-pay contracts with primarily investment grade customers, including major integrated oil companies, refiners and marketers. Our network of crude oil terminals facilitates the transportation of heavy crude oil from Western Canada to key demand centers across North America. Our operations include railcar loading and unloading, storage and blending in onsite tanks, inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, truck transloading, as well as other related logistics services. We also provide our customers with leased railcars and fleet services to facilitate the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons by rail.
We generally do not take ownership of the products that we handle nor do we receive any payments from our customers based on the value of such products. We may on occasion enter into buy-sell arrangements in which we take temporary title to commodities while in our terminals. We expect any such arrangements to be at fixed prices where we do not take any exposure to changes in commodity prices.
We believe rail will continue as an important transportation option for energy producers, refiners and marketers due to its unique advantages relative to other transportation means. Specifically, rail transportation of energy-related products provides flexible access to key demand centers on a relatively low fixed-cost basis with faster physical delivery, while preserving the specific quality of customer products over long distances.
USDG, a wholly-owned subsidiary of USD, and the sole owner of our general partner, is engaged in designing, developing, owning, and managing large-scale multi-modal logistics centers and energy-related infrastructure across North America. USDG’s solutions create flexible market access for customers in significant growth areas and key demand centers, including Western Canada, the U.S. Gulf Coast and Mexico. Among other projects, USDG is currently pursuing the development of a premier energy logistics terminal on the Houston Ship Channel with capacity for substantial tank storage, multiple docks (including barge and deepwater), inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, as well as a rail terminal with unit train capabilities. USDG completed an expansion project in January 2019 at the Partnership’s Hardisty Terminal, referred to herein as Hardisty South, which added one and one-half 120-railcar unit trains of transloading capacity per day, or approximately 112,500 barrels per day, or bpd.
USD’s Diluent Recovery Unit and Port Arthur Terminal Projects
During 2021, USD, along with its joint venture partner, Gibson, successfully completed construction on and placed into service a diluent recovery unit, or DRU, at the Hardisty Terminal, as a part of a long-term solution to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada by rail. USD also placed into service a new
destination terminal in Port Arthur, Texas, or PAT. Refer to the Growth Opportunities for our Operations section below for further information.
Recent Developments
Market Update
Substantially all of our operating cash flows are generated from take-or-pay contracts and, as a result, are not directly related to actual throughput volumes at our crude oil terminals. Throughput volumes at our terminals are primarily influenced by the difference in price between Western Canadian Select, or WCS, and other grades of crude oil, commonly referred to as spreads, rather than absolute price levels. WCS spreads are influenced by several market factors, including the availability of supplies relative to the level of demand from refiners and other end users, the price and availability of alternative grades of crude oil, the availability of takeaway capacity, as well as transportation costs from supply areas to demand centers.
COVID-19 and Crude Oil Pricing Environment Update
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility in the financial markets. As a result, beginning in March 2020, there was significant reductions in demand for crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids, which led to a decline in commodity prices. This drove Canadian producers to curtail production, which in turn resulted in lower crude oil supply levels and led to lower throughput volume through our facilities.
Vaccination implementation and efforts to reopen the economy to date have driven demand for crude oil and petroleum products to near pre-COVID levels. As a result, crude oil prices have recovered and stabilized at higher than pre-pandemic levels and continued to strengthen through the fourth quarter of 2021. In February of 2022, WTI prices reached approximately $95 per barrel, which represents the highest price levels for WTI since 2014. Given these higher prices and currently tight discount levels in the Canadian heavy market, Canadian producers are achieving higher netbacks than pre-pandemic levels. If the increases in demand for oil and natural gas continue, we expect global production levels will trend higher throughout 2022. Per the U.S. Energy Information Administration, or EIA, February 2022 Short Term Energy Outlook, global petroleum fuels consumption is expected to grow by 3.5 million barrels per day in 2022, which should support global prices and drive increased global production of oil and petroleum products. However, given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, increases in demand and price levels are difficult to predict.
The broader implications of COVID-19, the impact of any new variants of the virus, and volatile oil and natural gas prices on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain. We have implemented protocols and procedures designed to manage risk associated with the direct impact of COVID-19 on our operations. We have not experienced material disruptions to our operations or material increase in our cash expenses. Currently, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to operate our business and remain in compliance with the financial covenants under our credit agreement for at least the next twelve months following the filing of this Report and we do not expect our customers to terminate existing contracts. However, if the pandemic continues for a further extended period of time, COVID-19 related lockdowns or other restrictions are reinstated and/or oil prices decrease to relatively low levels, these conditions may have an adverse effect on the Company’s results of future operations, financial position, and liquidity. Given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the state of the commodity markets, we continue to actively monitor their impact on our operations and financial condition. Refer to Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report for further discussion of certain risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impact of Current Market Events
Given that crude oil prices have recovered and are higher than pre-COVID levels, Canadian production that was temporarily shut-in due to COVID-19 has also returned to pre-COVID levels. Additionally, in January 2022, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, or CAPP, announced that they are forecasting a $6 billion dollar increase in planned upstream oil and gas spending as compared to 2021 levels. The expected growth spending for
2022 would mark the second straight year of significant increases in investment as Canadian producers look to capitalize on stronger commodity prices due to rapidly growing global demand for natural gas and crude oil.
Despite Canadian production increases in 2021 relative to 2020, recent extreme cold weather events in Canada have created supply disruptions for producers in the form of unplanned production outages, which has led to a reduction in supply and a corresponding reduction in inventory levels in Western Canada. Additionally, in the fourth quarter of 2021, two new pipeline projects were placed into service, creating a one time demand events for line fill. The combination of these specific supply and demand events jointly contributed to the record draw on inventories that began in December 2021 and continued in January 2022.
Despite the events discussed above and based on the forecasted production increases in Canada, we expect inventory levels and pipeline apportionment to return to 2020 type levels. Therefore, we expect demand for a crude by rail egress solution to increase when those inventory and apportionment levels return to the higher end of the range. There still remains significant uncertainty given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the extent and duration of any increases in apportionment or inventory levels are difficult to predict, if such increases occur at all.
Another factor that may contribute to the demand for a crude by rail egress solution is the significant regulatory and legal obstacles that pipeline projects and existing pipelines experience in the U.S and Canada. For example, it was recently announced by Trans Mountain Corp, or TMC, that the cost of the Trans Mountain Pipeline expansion project has nearly doubled and the timeline for completing the project has now been extended out further into 2023. This prompted the Canadian Government to announce that it is cutting off funding for the project and advised TMC to secure the necessary funding from public debt markets or financial institutions. The Canadian government does not plan to be the long-term owner of the pipeline and expects to launch a sale process in due course. As environmental, regulatory and political challenges to increase pipeline export capacity remain, crude by rail exports will remain a valuable egress solution.
In the long-term, as stated above, we expect demand for rail capacity at our terminals to continue to increase over the next several years and potentially longer if proposed pipeline developments do not meet currently planned timelines and regulatory or other challenges to pipeline projects persist. Our Hardisty and Casper terminals, with established capacity and scalable designs, are well-positioned as strategic outlets to meet takeaway needs as Western Canadian crude oil supplies continue to exceed available pipeline takeaway capacity. Also, as previously discussed, USD along with its partner, successfully completed construction of and placed into service a diluent recovery unit, or DRU, at the Hardisty Terminal, as a part of a long-term solution to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada by rail. Additionally, we believe our Stroud Terminal provides an advantageous rail destination for Western Canadian crude oil given the optionality provided by its connectivity to the Cushing hub and multiple refining centers across the United States. Rail also generally provides a greater ability to preserve the specific quality of a customer’s product relative to pipelines, providing value to a producer or refiner. We expect these advantages, including our origin-to-destination capabilities, to continue to result in long-term contract extensions and expansion opportunities across our terminal network.
Growth Opportunities for our Operations
We apply a disciplined approach to pursuing our growth strategy, which may include organic growth initiatives as well as acquisitions of energy-related logistics assets. Potential acquisitions may include assets developed by our sponsor or by third-party logistics providers. We believe these represent attractive opportunities to leverage our established and scalable network footprint to enhance and extend our currently-contracted cash flows.
USD is currently pursuing several development projects related to long-term solutions to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada, as well as projects related to the storage and the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. As the role of biofuels continues to expand in the clean energy transition, we and USD are committed to offering new capabilities and services across growing demand in clean fuels to include ethanol, renewable diesel and biodiesel. These development projects are expected to be supported by multi-year, take-or-pay agreements with strategic customers which would generate stable and predictable cash flows, as discussed in further detail below.
Opportunities Related to USD’s Diluent Recovery Unit and Port Arthur Terminal Projects
In December 2019, USD and Gibson jointly announced an agreement and formed a 50%/50% joint venture to construct and operate a diluent recovery unit, or DRU, located adjacent to the Partnership’s Hardisty Terminal. A subsidiary of ConocoPhillips contracted to process 50,000 barrels per day of dilbit through the DRU to produce and ultimately ship bitumen by rail to USD’s newly constructed Port Arthur Terminal, or PAT, on the U.S. Gulf Coast.
In December 2021, USD and Gibson jointly announced that the DRU has been declared fully operational and the shipment of DRUbit™ by Rail™, or DBR, has commenced. The DBR network creates a first-of-its-kind separation technology and network that safely and sustainably moves heavy Canadian crude oil, also known as bitumen, from Canada to the U.S. Gulf Coast at a cost that is competitive with pipeline alternatives. The DBR network is highly scalable and is well-positioned for future commercial expansions. USD and Gibson continue to pursue commercial discussions with current and potential producer and refiner customers to secure additional long-term agreements to support future expansions at both the DRU and the PAT.
USD’s patented DRU technology separates the diluent that is added to raw bitumen in the production process, which meets two important market needs. It creates DRUbit™, a proprietary heavy Canadian crude oil or bitumen that ships by rail and does not meet any of the defined categories of hazardous materials by U.S. DOT Hazardous Materials regulations and Canada’s Transport of Dangerous Goods regulations, creating safety and environmental benefits. Additionally, it returns the recovered diluent for reuse in the Western Canadian market, which reduces delivered costs for diluent. The DBR network provides meaningful safety, economic and environmental benefits relative to conventional crude by rail. The DBR network is supported by Canadian Pacific and Kansas City Southern Railway Company. As the initial destination terminal, PAT is unloading DRUbit™, blending it to customers’ specifications, and is currently delivering it downstream through pipe or barge at or above current contractual requirements. PAT has significant marine, pipeline, rail and tank expansion capabilities and it is pipeline connected to Phillips 66’s Beaumont Terminal, providing customers access to a large network of refining and marine facilities. We believe PAT has the infrastructure and ability to support growth, including allowing for efficient rail movements along mainlines from Canada and into the growing Mexico market, as discussed below.
Port Arthur Terminal
PAT has the capability for rail unloading, barge dock loading and unloading, tank storage and blending and is pipeline connected to Phillips 66’s Beaumont Terminal, providing customers access to a large network of refining and marine facilities. The facility can handle DRUbit™, Dilbit and a heavy Canadian conventional barrel and manage the blending of DRUbit™ into a marketable product for shippers. The marine and pipeline delivery options for blended products at the terminal allows customers to enhance market flexibility and take advantage of cost advantaged delivery options. PAT is served by the Kansas City Southern railroad and sits on exclusive rail infrastructure, providing seamless scheduling, operations, and communications resulting in ratable and reliable service. Within the 233-acre terminal footprint, there is ample waterfront and upland acreage that allows PAT expansion capabilities to accommodate any foreseeable demand.
We believe the PAT project is well positioned in a market poised for growth. The Port Arthur market is home to over 1.6 million barrels of refining capacity per the EIA and a growing petrochemical market. With ExxonMobil’s 250,000 barrel per day refinery expansion expected to be in service in 2023, and Motiva’s acquisition of the Flint Hills ethane cracker dovetailing into planned downstream expansions into the petrochemical market, Port Arthur’s heavily utilized midstream infrastructure can expect liquid volumes to increase.
Within the Port Arthur market, PAT will be well positioned to take advantage of these opportunities and other organic growth projects. Pipeline connectivity to the hub of Port Arthur’s liquids business provides an advantage through reduced costs to deliver crude locally relative to a barge alternative and will extend the market reach for customers of PAT. Customers of PAT are able to deliver barrels by pipeline and water into Louisiana markets and it is expected that customers of PAT will also be able to deliver into Houston in the future, as a pipeline connection project is currently under construction and is expected to be placed into service during the first quarter of 2022.
Benefits to the Partnership
The successful completion of USD’s Hardisty DRU project enhanced the sustainability and quality of the Partnership’s cash flows by significantly increasing the average tenor of terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal. The average remaining terms of our three terminalling services agreements with ConocoPhillips at the Hardisty Terminal were extended through mid-2031, representing approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity. We expect that future customers of the Hardisty DRU project will enter into similar long-term, more sustainable commitments for terminalling services at the Partnership’s Hardisty Terminal. USD’s interest in the Hardisty DRU and PAT projects would also be available for possible acquisition by the Partnership, and would be subject to the Partnership’s ROFO on USD’s assets pursuant to the Omnibus Agreement between USD and the Partnership, which extends through October 15, 2026.
Other Opportunities Related to Our Crude Oil Terminal Network
Western Canadian crude oil production is projected to increase throughout the next decade, driven primarily by developments in Alberta’s oil sands region. Additionally, certain end users, including refineries across North America, have made substantial investments in recent years in order to efficiently process heavy grades of crude oil, such as those from Western Canada. Additions to pipeline takeaway capacity from Western Canada to key demand centers in the United States are not expected to keep pace with forecasted production growth. As such, demand for rail takeaway out of Western Canada is expected to increase over the next several years and potentially longer if currently planned timelines are not met. Our strategically-located crude oil terminal network, with established capacity and scalable design, is well-positioned to meet these growing takeaway needs.
Hardisty Terminal
We have contracted 100% of the capacity at our Hardisty Terminal through mid-2022, with approximately 73% extended through mid-2023 with customers under multi-year take-or-pay agreements. As previously discussed, due to the successful commencement of USD’s DRU and PAT projects discussed above, approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity was automatically extended through mid-2031. We remain focused on renewing and extending our Hardisty agreements that expire in mid-2022 and mid-2023 on a multi-year take-or-pay basis. Additionally, if USD and Gibson are successful in securing an additional customer at the DRU, the capacity associated with such commitment will likely be contracted for transloading at the Hardisty Terminal on a long-term basis.
Additionally, USDG, pursuant to its development rights at the Hardisty Terminal, completed Hardisty South in early 2019. The existing Hardisty Terminal, which is owned by us, has designed capacity for two unit trains per day, or approximately 150,000 barrels per day. Hardisty South, which is owned by USDG, added one and one-half unit trains per day, or approximately 112,500 barrels per day, of takeaway capacity to the terminal by modifying the existing loading rack and building additional infrastructure and trackage. We believe Hardisty South could present an attractive future acquisition opportunity for the Partnership. The asset is covered by our existing ROFO, should USDG propose to sell or transfer the asset before October 15, 2026.
Stroud Terminal
Our Stroud Terminal is a crude oil destination terminal in Stroud, Oklahoma, which we use to facilitate rail-to-pipeline shipments of crude oil from our Hardisty Terminal to the crude oil storage hub located in Cushing, Oklahoma. Our Stroud Terminal is the only rail facility connected to the Cushing storage hub, which provides for strategic and competitive advantages. The benchmark price in the domestic spot market for U.S. crude oil known as West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, is set at the Cushing hub. According to the EIA, the Cushing storage hub has approximately 76 million barrels of working storage capacity. There is also an expansive pipeline infrastructure that connects into and out of the Cushing hub. Because of the vast connectivity that Cushing offers, crude oil that is delivered into Cushing can then be delivered to either local refineries or it can be shipped to other markets such as the United States Gulf Coast, which is the largest refinery complex in the U.S. As such, we believe our Stroud Terminal provides an advantageous rail destination for Western Canadian crude oil given the optionality provided by its connectivity to the Cushing hub and multiple refining centers across the United States.
We own 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity, of which 67% of that capacity is contracted under a take-or-pay terminalling services agreement between the Partnership and ConocoPhillips through June 2022.
USDM owns the rights to the other 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity pursuant to the Marketing Services Agreement, or MSA, that was established at the time of the acquisition of the Stroud Terminal. Per the MSA, we granted USDM the right to market the capacity at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the capacity of our initial customer in exchange for a nominal per barrel fee. The capacity attributable to USDM is currently not under any contracted agreements.
To facilitate marketing the capacity that is currently available at the Stroud Terminal, USDM is currently working on an expansion of the downstream connectivity at our Stroud Terminal that when completed will add a pipeline connection to a second storage tank at a third-party facility at the Cushing, Oklahoma crude oil hub, or the Cushing Hub. The expanded connectivity is expected to facilitate incremental rail-to-pipeline shipments of crude oil to the Cushing Hub by giving the Stroud Terminal better capability to service multiple customers and/or grades of crude oil simultaneously including the unloading of multiple grades of dilbit. The expansion is expected to be completed in the first half of 2022. If successful, these efforts could provide us with incremental cash flows. Additionally, any such development project would be wholly-owned by USDG and would be subject to our existing ROFO, should USDG propose to sell or transfer the asset.
Casper Terminal
Our Casper Terminal currently includes approximately 100,000 bpd of loading capacity and 900,000 barrels of tank storage capacity. The Casper Terminal receives inbound crude oil primarily through our dedicated direct pipeline connection from Enbridge’s Express pipeline, which is subsequently loaded onto unit or manifest trains. Additionally, in December 2019, the Partnership completed construction of and placed into service an outbound pipeline connection from the Casper Terminal to the nearby Platte Terminal located at the termination point of the Express pipeline.
In January 2022, an existing customer of our Casper Terminal extended its terminalling services agreement that was to expire on December 31, 2021 for an additional year. The agreement contains take-or-pay terms for storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services.
In July 2019, Enbridge announced a program to increase the capacity of the Express pipeline by up to an additional 50,000 bpd with the use of drag reducing agent, or DRA, and additional pump stations, of which 30,000 bpd of additional capacity was placed into service which resulted in higher throughput at the Casper Terminal during 2021.
West Colton Terminal
We receive fixed fees per gallon of ethanol transloaded at our terminal pursuant to a terminalling services agreement with one of the world’s largest producers of biofuels. Effective January 2022, we entered into a new five-year agreement with the existing West Colton ethanol customer that has a minimum monthly throughput commitment. This new agreement replaced the previous short-term agreement at the terminal that had been in place since July 2009 and is expected to add incremental “Net Cash from Operating Activities” over the previous agreement, subject to changes in expected throughput. Refer to Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Financial Results below for further information.
Additionally, in June 2021, we entered into a new terminalling services agreement with USD Clean Fuels LLC, or USDCF, a newly formed subsidiary of USD, that is supported by a minimum throughput commitment to USDCF from an investment-grade rated, refining customer as well as a performance guaranty from USD. The terminalling services agreement provides for the inbound shipment of renewable diesel on rail at our West Colton Terminal and the outbound shipment of the product on tank trucks to local consumers. The new terminalling services agreement has an initial term of five years and commenced December 1, 2021. We completed the process of modifying our existing West Colton Terminal so that it now has capability to transload renewable diesel in addition to the ethanol that it is was initially transloading.
In exchange for the new terminalling agreement at our West Colton Terminal with USDCF discussed above, we also entered into a Marketing Services Agreement with USDCF in June 2021, or the West Colton MSA, pursuant to which we agreed to grant USDCF marketing and development rights pertaining to future renewable diesel opportunities associated with the West Colton Terminal in excess of the terminalling services agreement with USDCF discussed above. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties in this Annual Report for further information.
USDCF was organized by USD for the purpose of providing production and logistics solutions to the growing market for clean energy transportation fuels. The policy for clean energy transportation fuels in the United States continues to evolve and grow at both the federal and state levels. As the role of advanced biofuels continues to expand in the clean energy transition, we believe the magnitude of change and challenges throughout the entire value chain represent opportunities for USDCF in the areas of feedstock gathering and handling, production and processing and downstream distribution. To complement the Partnership’s existing ethanol business, USDCF will focus on renewable diesel and sustainable aviation fuel as it looks to build a growth platform across new commodities, markets and partnerships. USDCF is focused on the markets that have adopted Low Carbon Fuel Standards, as they represent the greatest potential for accelerated growth in the U.S. West Coast states and in Canada. Any such development project pursued by USDCF would be wholly-owned by USDCF, financed by USDCF, and subject to our existing ROFO, should USDCF propose to sell or transfer the asset.
Opportunities Related to Our Sponsor’s Texas Deepwater Development on U.S. Gulf Coast
In October 2015, our sponsor entered into a joint venture to develop a premier U.S. Gulf Coast logistics terminal on a 988-acre parcel of property on the Houston Ship Channel. Its strategic location is uniquely positioned to provide customers with flexible market access to key demand centers, both domestic and abroad. Current master planning and permitting efforts have positioned the property footprint to support up to twelve million barrels of storage capacity, seven marine docks (including barge and deep water), inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, and a rail terminal with capacity to unload multiple unit trains per day as well as provide ample railcar storage. The property is in proximity to substantially all major inbound and outbound pipelines and can be directly accessed by multiple Class 1 railroads.
Since August 2019, Texas Deepwater has operated the Deer Park Rail Terminal, or DPRT, now owned by Petroleos Mexicanos, or Pemex, on the Houston Ship Channel. The DPRT has the capability of loading up to 48 railcars per day, or approximately 33,000 barrels of refined products per day. The terminal is also capable of providing additional value-added services, including the ability of adding lubricity additives and red dye. The facility is equipped with two operational tanks with 50,000 barrels of total storage capacity, which will service the railcar loading rack at the terminal with direct pipeline connectivity to the Deer Park Refinery and the Colex Products Terminal. With Pemex’s acquisition of DPRT from Shell, we are now actively working with both Pemex and P.M.I. Services North America, Inc. to support their joint goal in providing efficient refinery feedstocks as well as market access for refined products in Mexico. With current discussions, there may be a potential to further expand the DPRT by adding incremental storage capacity and rail loading capabilities to handle additional refined products.
According to the February 2022 short-term outlook published by the EIA, worldwide fuel consumption is estimated to have increased by approximately 5.2 Mmbpd in 2021 compared to 2020 and the EIA projects that worldwide fuel consumption will increase by 3.5 Mmbpd by 2022 compared to 2021, based on the expectation that global markets will continue to recover. Recent industry developments highlight the Gulf Coast’s strategic importance within global energy markets and its ability to meet growing demand. Since the ban on exports of crude oil was lifted in 2015, exports of crude oil and petroleum products from PADD III on the Gulf Coast have increased from approximately 3.5 million bpd to approximately 7.2 million bpd in 2020, which represented approximately 84% of the total crude oil and petroleum products exported out of the U.S. during 2020. The EIA’s Annual Energy Outlook published in February 2022 in its base case forecasts that in the long-term the U.S. is expected to remain a net exporter of crude oil and petroleum products. The U.S. continues to be an integral part of global oil markets and a significant source of supply, despite uncertainty surrounding post-pandemic expectations for oil and natural gas demand. Our sponsor’s Texas Deepwater development will continue to pursue projects that position the terminal to take advantage of this macro trend, and participate heavily in export markets.
Our sponsor expects that these industry dynamics will contribute to growing demand for storage, staging, blending, export and other logistics services along the Gulf Coast, including at its Houston Ship Channel property. Accordingly, our sponsor is actively engaged in commercial negotiations with potential customers to provide export solutions for crude oil, refined products, petrochemicals and natural gas liquids. Any such development project would be wholly-owned by USD and its joint venture partner, and USD’s interest in the Texas Deepwater development joint venture would be subject to our existing ROFO should USD propose to sell or transfer its ownership. If successfully commercialized and developed, and subsequently acquired by us, the Texas Deepwater development represents a meaningful opportunity to add complementary logistics assets that diversify our current network and have the potential to add additional high-quality take-or-pay agreements with terms beyond those related to our existing network.
Right of First Offer
In October 2014, we entered into the Omnibus Agreement with USD and USDG, pursuant to which we were granted a ROFO on any midstream infrastructure assets that they may develop, construct, or acquire for a period of seven years. In June 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Omnibus Agreement with USD, USDG and certain other of their subsidiaries, which amends and restates the Omnibus Agreement, dated October 15, 2014, to extend the termination date of the ROFO period, as defined in the Omnibus Agreement, by an additional five years such that the ROFO Period will terminate on October 15, 2026 unless a Partnership Change of Control, as defined in the Omnibus Agreement, occurs prior to such date. Additional information about the Omnibus Agreement and the ROFO are included in Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties of our consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report.
USD has not engaged in any transactions that implicate our ROFO. We cannot assure you that USD will be able to develop or construct, or that we or USD will be able to acquire, any additional midstream infrastructure projects. Among other things, the ability of USD or the Partnership to further develop the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, the DRU project, or any other project, and our ability to acquire such projects, will depend upon USD’s or our ability to raise additional capital, including through equity and debt financing. We are under no obligation to make any offer, and USD and USDG are under no obligation to accept any offer we make, with respect to any asset subject to our ROFO. Additionally, the approval of Energy Capital Partners is required for the sale of any assets by USD or its subsidiaries, including us (other than sales in the ordinary course of business), acquisitions of securities of other entities that exceed specified materiality thresholds and any material unbudgeted expenditures or deviations from our approved budgets. Energy Capital Partners may make these decisions free of any duty to us and our unitholders. This approval would be required for the potential acquisition by us of any project to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, as well as any other projects or assets that USD may develop or acquire in the future or any third-party acquisition we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. Energy Capital Partners is under no obligation to approve any such transaction. Please refer to the discussion under Part III, Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance-Special Approval Rights of Energy Capital Partners in this Annual Report regarding the rights of Energy Capital Partners. If we are unable to acquire any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal from USD, such expansions may compete directly with our existing business for future throughput volumes, which may impact our ability to enter into new terminalling services agreements, including with our existing customers, following the expiration of our existing agreements, or the terms thereof, and our ability to compete for future spot volumes. Furthermore, cyclical changes in the demand for crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbons may cause USD, or us, to further re-evaluate any future expansion projects, including expansion of the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal.
How We Generate Revenue
We conduct our business through two distinct reporting segments: Terminalling services and Fleet services. We have established these reporting segments as strategic business units to facilitate the achievement of our long-term objectives, to assist in resource allocation decisions and to assess operational performance.
Terminalling Services
The Terminalling services segment includes a network of strategically-located terminals that provide customers with railcar loading and/or unloading capacity, as well as related logistics services, for crude oil and
biofuels. Substantially all of our cash flows are generated under multi-year, take-or-pay terminalling services agreements that include minimum monthly commitment fees. We generally have no direct commodity price exposure, although fluctuating commodity prices could indirectly influence our activities and results of operations over the long term. We may on occasion enter into buy-sell arrangements in which we take temporary title to commodities while in our terminals. We expect any such agreements to be at fixed prices where we do not take commodity price exposure.
Hardisty Terminalling Services Agreements. We have terminalling services agreements with four high-quality, primarily investment grade counterparties or their subsidiaries: Cenovus Energy, Gibson, Suncor Energy, and ConocoPhillips. Substantially all of the terminalling capacity at our Hardisty Terminal is contracted under multi-year, take-or-pay terminalling services agreements subject to inflation-based escalators with a volume-weighted average remaining contract life of 7.3 years as of December 31, 2021. The successful completion of USD’s DRU project, as previously discussed, automatically extended approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity through mid-2031. All of our counterparties are obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee for the capacity to load an allotted number of unit trains, representing a specified number of barrels per month. If a customer loads fewer unit trains than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to12 months. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of the customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. We will receive a per-barrel fee on any volumes handled in excess of the customers’ allowed amount, to the extent the additional volume is not subject to the credit discussed above. If a force majeure event occurs, a customer’s obligation to pay us may be suspended, in which case the length of the contract term will be extended by the same duration as the force majeure event.
Stroud Terminalling Services Agreements. We own 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity, of which 67% of that capacity is contracted under a take-or-pay terminalling services agreement between the Partnership and ConocoPhillips through June 2022. Our customer is obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee and can load an allotted number of barrels per month. If our customer loads fewer barrels than its allotted amount in any given month, the customer receives a credit for up to 12 months. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of our customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. We will receive a per-barrel fee on any volumes handled in excess of our customer’s allotted amount, to the extent the additional volume is not subject to the credit discussed above.
USDM owns the rights to the other 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity pursuant to the Marketing Services Agreement, or MSA, that was established at the time of the acquisition of the Stroud Terminal. Pursuant to the terms of the MSA, we granted USDM the right to market the capacity at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the capacity of our initial customer in exchange for a nominal per barrel fee. The capacity attributable to USDM is currently not under any contracted agreements. Upon expiration of our contract with the initial Stroud customer in June 2020, the same marketing rights now apply to all throughput at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the throughput necessary for the Stroud Terminal to generate Adjusted EBITDA that is at least equal to the average monthly Adjusted EBITDA derived from the initial Stroud customer during the 12 months prior to expiration.
Casper Terminalling Services Agreements. Our Casper Terminal includes terminalling services agreements with a high quality, investment grade multi-national customer and a midstream customer. The agreement with the investment grade multi-national customer contains take-or-pay terms for terminalling and storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services. The agreement with the midstream customer contains take-or-pay terms for storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services.
Additionally, we may on occasion utilize our available storage and throughput capacity to support our customers’ spot activity through buy-sell agreements that generate cash flows in addition to those provided by our multi-year agreements.
West Colton Terminalling Services Agreements. Our West Colton Terminal receives fixed fees per gallon of ethanol transloaded at our terminal pursuant to a terminalling services agreement with one of the world’s largest producers of biofuels. Effective January 2022, we entered into a new five-year agreement with the existing West
Colton ethanol customer that has a minimum monthly throughput commitment. This new agreement replaced the previous short-term agreement at the terminal that had been in place since July 2009. Under this new agreement, our customer is obligated to pay the greater of a minimum monthly commitment fee or a throughput fee based on the actual volume of ethanol loaded at our West Colton Terminal. Under the new agreement, if the customer loads fewer volumes than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to six months, which may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of its minimum monthly commitments in future periods, to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume.
Additionally, in June 2021, we entered into a new terminalling services agreement with USD Clean Fuels LLC, or USDCF, a newly formed subsidiary of USD, that is supported by a minimum throughput commitment to USDCF from an investment-grade rated, refining customer as well as a performance guaranty from USD. The terminalling services agreement provides for the inbound shipment of renewable diesel on rail at our West Colton Terminal and the outbound shipment of the product on tank trucks to local consumers. The new terminalling services agreement has an initial term of five years and commenced on December 1, 2021. We have modified our existing West Colton Terminal so that it now has the capability to transload renewable diesel in addition to the ethanol that it has been transloading.
In exchange for the new terminalling agreement at our West Colton Terminal with USDCF discussed above, we also entered into an MSA with USDCF in June 2021, or the West Colton MSA, pursuant to which we agreed to grant USDCF marketing and development rights pertaining to future renewable diesel opportunities associated with the West Colton Terminal in excess of the terminalling services agreement with USDCF discussed above. For additional information, refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties of this Annual Report.
Fleet Services
We provide our customers with leased railcars and fleet services related to the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons by rail on multi-year, take-or-pay terms under master fleet services agreements. We do not own any railcars. As of December 31, 2021, our railcar fleet consisted of 200 railcars, which we lease from a railcar manufacturer all of which are C&I railcars. The weighted average remaining contract life on our railcar fleet is one year as of December 31, 2021.
Under the master fleet services agreements, we provide customers with railcar-specific fleet services, which may include, among other things, the provision of relevant administrative and billing services, the repairs and maintenance of railcars in accordance with standard industry practice and applicable law, the management and tracking of the movement of railcars, the regulatory and administrative reporting and compliance as required in connection with the movement of railcars, and the negotiation for and sourcing of railcars. Our customers typically pay us and our assignees monthly fees per railcar for these services, which include a component for fleet services.
Historically, we contracted with railroads on behalf of some of our customers to arrange for the movement of railcars from our terminals to the destinations selected by our customers. We were the contracting party with the railroads for those shipments and were responsible to the railroads for the related fees charged by the railroads, for which we were reimbursed by our customers. Both the fees charged by the railroads to us and the reimbursement of these fees by our customers are included in our consolidated statements of operations in the revenues and operating costs line items entitled “Freight and other reimbursables.”
Also, we have historically assisted our customers with procuring railcars to facilitate their use of our terminalling services. Our wholly-owned subsidiary USD Rail LP has historically entered into leases with third-party manufacturers of railcars and financial firms, which it has then leased to customers. Although we expect to continue to assist our customers in obtaining railcars for their use transporting crude oil to or from our terminals, we do not intend to continue to act as an intermediary between railcar lessors and our customers as our existing lease agreements expire, are otherwise terminated, or are assigned to our existing customers. Should market conditions change, we could potentially act as an intermediary with railcar lessors on behalf of our customers again in the future.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to evaluate our operations. When we evaluate our consolidated operations and related liquidity, we consider these metrics to be significant factors in assessing our ability to generate cash and pay distributions and include: (i) Adjusted EBITDA and DCF; (ii) operating costs; and (iii) volumes. We define Adjusted EBITDA and DCF below. When evaluating our operations at the segment level, we evaluate using Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15. Segment Reporting of this Annual Report.
Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow
We define Adjusted EBITDA as “Net cash provided by operating activities” adjusted for changes in working capital items, interest, income taxes, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and other items which do not affect the underlying cash flows produced by our businesses. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP, supplemental financial measure used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as investors and commercial banks, to assess:
•our liquidity and the ability of our business to produce sufficient cash flows to make distributions to our unitholders; and
•our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures.
We define Distributable Cash Flow, or DCF, as Adjusted EBITDA less net cash paid for interest, income taxes and maintenance capital expenditures. DCF does not reflect changes in working capital balances. DCF is a non-GAAP, supplemental financial measure used by management and by external users of our financial statements, such as investors and commercial banks, to assess:
•the amount of cash available for making distributions to our unitholders;
•the excess cash flows being retained for use in enhancing our existing business; and
•the sustainability of our current distribution rate per unit.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and DCF in this Report provides information that enhances an investor’s understanding of our ability to generate cash for payment of distributions and other purposes. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA and DCF is “Net cash provided by operating activities.” Adjusted EBITDA and DCF should not be considered alternatives to “Net cash provided by operating activities” or any other measure of liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and DCF exclude some, but not all, items that affect “Net cash provided by operating activities,” and these measures may vary among other companies. As a result, Adjusted EBITDA and DCF may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of “Net cash provided by operating activities,” the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA and DCF:
(1) Represents foreign exchange transaction amounts associated with activities between our U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries.
(2) Represents the change in non-cash contract assets and liabilities associated with revenue recognized at blended rates based on tiered rate structures in certain of our customer contracts and deferred revenue associated with deficiency credits that are expected to be used in the future prior to their expiration. Amounts presented are net of the corresponding prepaid Gibson pipeline fee that will be recognized as expense concurrently with the recognition of revenue.
(3) Includes the net effect of tax refunds of $480 thousand received in the third quarter of 2020 associated with carrying back U.S. net operating losses incurred during 2020 and prior periods allowed for by the provisions of the CARES Act.
Operating Costs
Our operating costs are comprised primarily of subcontracted rail services, pipeline fees, repairs and maintenance expenses, materials and supplies, utility costs, insurance premiums and lease costs for facilities and equipment. In addition, our operating expenses include the cost of leasing railcars from third-party railcar suppliers and the shipping fees charged by railroads, which costs are generally passed through to our customers. We expect our expenses to remain relatively stable, but they may fluctuate from period to period depending on the mix of activities performed during a period and the timing of these expenditures. We expect to incur additional operating costs, including subcontracted rail services and pipeline fees, when we handle additional volumes at our terminals.
Our management seeks to maximize the profitability of our operations by effectively managing both our operating and maintenance expenses. As our terminal facilities and related equipment age, we expect to incur regular maintenance expenditures to maintain the operating capabilities of our facilities and equipment in compliance with sound business practices, our contractual relationships and regulatory requirements for operating these assets. We record these maintenance and other expenses associated with operating our assets in “Operating and maintenance” costs in our consolidated statements of operations.
Volumes
The amount of Terminalling services revenue we generate depends on minimum customer commitment fees and the throughput volume that we handle at our terminals in excess of those minimum commitments. These
volumes are primarily affected by the supply of and demand for crude oil, refined products and biofuels in the markets served directly or indirectly by our assets. Additionally, these volumes are affected by the spreads between the benchmark prices for these products, which are influenced by, among other things, the available takeaway capacity in those markets. Although customers at our terminals have committed to minimum monthly fees under their terminalling services agreements with us, which will generate the majority of our Terminalling services revenue, our results of operations will also be affected by:
•our customers’ utilization of our terminals in excess of their minimum monthly volume commitments;
•our ability to identify and execute accretive acquisitions and commercialize organic expansion projects to capture incremental volumes; and
•our ability to renew contracts with existing customers, enter into contracts with new customers, increase customer commitments and throughput volumes at our terminals, and provide additional ancillary services at those terminals.
General Trends and Outlook
In addition to the discussion provided below, refer also to the Overview and Recent Developments- Market Update section above. To the extent our underlying assumptions about or interpretations of available information prove to be incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from our expected results. The unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, its impact on world economic conditions and the volatility in the oil and natural gas markets have created increased uncertainty with respect to future conditions and our ability to accurately predict future results.
Hardisty and Stroud Terminals Customer Contract Renewals
Prior to August 2021, we had renewed and extended 100% of the capacity at our Hardisty Terminal through mid-2022, with approximately 73% extended through mid-2023 with customers under multi-year take-or-pay agreements. As previously discussed, construction of USD’s DRU project was completed in July 2021 and was declared fully operational in December 2021. Effective August 2021, the maturity date of three terminalling services agreements that are with the existing DRU customer at our Hardisty Terminal have been extended through mid-2031, with two-thirds of the volume commitment with respect to one of these agreements terminating at the end of June 2022. Effective with these changes, approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity has been extended through mid-2031. Due to the significantly longer contract tenor of the terminalling services agreements associated with the DRU volumes, contracted rates on an annual basis will be lower as compared to historical, shorter-term, agreements, which will result in lower cash flows to the Partnership on an annual basis, but support a higher net present value to the Partnership and provide a more predictable cash flow profile.
Additionally, certain of our terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal that expire in mid-2023 include a tiered rate structure that includes rate decreases that occur annually on July 1st of each year throughout the term of the agreement. We remain focused on renewing, extending or replacing our agreements at Hardisty that expire in mid-2022 and mid-2023 with new, multi-year take or pay commitments, including, if USD and Gibson are successful in securing additional customers at the DRU, on a long-term basis similar to the existing DRU customer.
Effective August 2021, the existing DRU customer has elected to reduce its volume commitments at the Stroud Terminal attributable to the Partnership by one-third of the current commitment through June 2022, at which point the agreement will terminate and there will be no renewal period. Management believes that the lower utilization at the Stroud Terminal as a result of successful completion of the DRU project will be short-term in nature, and will allow the Partnership the opportunity to offer terminalling services to other customers that may be in need of access to the numerous markets connected to the Cushing oil hub. If and to the extent we are unable to renew, extend or replace our customer at the Stroud Terminal, our revenue, cash flows from operating activities and Adjusted EBITDA would be materially adversely impacted. Refer to Growth Opportunities for our Operations - Other Opportunities Related to Our Crude Oil Terminal Network - Stroud Terminal of this section for further details. Additionally, refer to Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of certain risks relating to our customer contract renewals.
Potential Impact of Hardisty and Stroud Deficiency Credit Usage by Our Customers
As previously discussed, customers of our Hardisty and Stroud terminals are obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee for the capacity to load an allotted number of unit trains, representing a specified number of barrels per month. If a customer loads fewer unit trains than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to 12 months, also referred to as a deficiency credit. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of the customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. As of December 31, 2021, we deferred revenues of $1.4 million associated with the expected usage of the deficiency credits during 2022, which will remain deferred until either the deficiency credit has been used or the likelihood of the credit’s usage has been deemed remote. Additionally, we could incur incremental costs associated with loading the additional trains for our customers if they have and use their accrued deficiency credits, but such costs are not expected to be material.
Factors That May Impact Future Results of Operations
Demand for Rail Transportation of Crude Oil and Biofuels
High-growth crude oil production areas in North America are often located at significant distances from refining centers, creating constantly evolving regional imbalances, which require the expedited development of flexible and sustainable transportation solutions. The extensive existing rail network, combined with rail transportation’s relatively low capital and fixed costs compared to other transportation alternatives, has strategically positioned rail as a long-term transportation solution for growing and evolving energy infrastructure needs. In the event that additional pipeline capacity is constructed, or crude oil production decreases significantly, demand for transportation of crude oil by rail may be adversely impacted. Please also refer to the Overview and Recent Developments- Market Update section above.
Changes in environmental and gasoline blending regulations may affect the use of ethanol in the market for transportation fuel. Due to corrosion concerns unique to biofuels, such as ethanol, the long-haul transportation of biofuels via multi-product pipelines is less efficient and less economical than rail. Rail also helps aggregate fragmented ethanol production across the country. In the event that dedicated pipelines are constructed, or additional technologies are developed to allow for more economical transportation of biofuels on multi-product pipelines, demand for transportation of biofuels by rail may be affected.
Supply and Demand for Crude Oil and Refined Products
The volume of crude oil and biofuels that we handle at our terminals and the number of railcars for which we provide and perform railcar-specific fleet services ultimately depends on refining and blending margins. Refining and blending margins are dependent mostly upon the price of crude oil or other refinery feedstocks and the price of refined products. These prices are affected by numerous factors beyond our control, including the global supply and demand for crude oil and gasoline and other refined products. The supply of crude oil will depend on numerous factors, including commodity pricing, improvements in extractive technology, environmental regulation and other factors. We believe that our Adjusted EBITDA and DCF will not be affected in the near term due to our multi-year, take-or-pay terminalling services agreements. However, our ability to grow through expansion or acquisitions and our ability to renew or extend our terminalling services agreements could be affected by a long-term reduction in supply or demand.
Customer Contracts
Our business is subject to the risk that we may not be able to renew, extend or replace our customer contracts as their terms expire. During 2019, we renewed and extended multiple terminalling services agreements at the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal with existing customers for terms that are generally improved from the original agreements. Additionally, although all legacy contracts at our Casper Terminal terminated, we have partially replaced these agreements with arrangements that we have negotiated with new customers. While the legacy contracts provided for minimum volume commitments, the new agreements provide for committed storage fees and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes. With regards to the terminalling service agreement at our Stroud Terminal, our Stroud customer elected to reduce its volume commitments by one-third of the current
commitment through June 2022, at which point this agreement will terminate and there will be no renewal period, due to the completion of USD’s DRU project, as previously discussed. Management believes that the lower utilization at the Stroud Terminal as a result of successful completion of the DRU project will be short-term in nature, and will allow the Partnership the opportunity to offer terminalling services to other customers that may be in need of access to the numerous markets connected to the Cushing oil hub. Refer to the discussion above under the heading General Trends and Outlook for information regarding customer contract renewals and expirations and changes in fee structures. For a discussion of the risks associated with our ability to renew, extend or replace customer contracts, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors-Our contracts are subject to termination at various times which creates renewal risks of this Annual Report.
Regulatory Environment
Our operations are subject to federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the protection of health and the environment, including laws and regulations that govern the handling of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. Additionally, we are subject to regulations governing railcar design and evolving regulations pertaining to the shipment of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels by rail as discussed in greater detail in Part I, Item 1. Business-Impact of Regulation in this Annual Report. Similar to other industry participants, compliance with existing environmental laws and regulations, as well as those that may be added in the future, could increase our overall cost of doing business. Such costs, include the costs we incur to construct, maintain, operate and upgrade equipment and facilities, or the costs of our customers, which may reduce the attractiveness of rail transportation. Our master fleet services agreements generally obligate our customers to pay for modifications and other required repairs to our leased and managed railcar fleet. However, we cannot assure that we will be able to successfully pass all such regulatory costs on to our customers. While changes in these laws and regulations could indirectly affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, we believe that consumers of our services place additional value on utilizing established and reputable third-party providers to satisfy their rail terminalling and logistics needs, which may allow us to increase market share relative to customer-owned operations or smaller operators that lack an established track record of safety and regulatory compliance.
Acquisition Opportunities
We plan to continue to pursue strategic acquisitions of energy-related logistics assets from both USD and third parties that will provide attractive returns to our unitholders, including facilities that provide for storage and transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. We intend to leverage our industry relationships and market knowledge to successfully execute on such opportunities, which we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. We have entered into the Omnibus Agreement with USD and USDG, pursuant to which USDG has granted us a ROFO on any midstream infrastructure assets that they may develop, construct, or acquire until October 15, 2026. Additional information regarding our growth opportunities is discussed in Growth Opportunities for our Operations above and information regarding the Omnibus Agreement is presented in Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties-Omnibus Agreement of Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplementary Data in this Annual Report. We cannot assure you that USD will be able to develop or construct, or that we or USD will be able to acquire, any other midstream infrastructure projects, including any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal. Among other things, the ability of USD to further develop the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, or any other project, and our ability to acquire such projects, will depend upon USD’s and our ability to raise additional equity and debt financing. We are under no obligation to make any offer, and USD and USDG are under no obligation to accept any offer we make, with respect to any asset subject to our ROFO. Additionally, the approval of Energy Capital Partners is required for the sale of any assets by USD or its subsidiaries, including us (other than sales in the ordinary course of business), acquisitions of securities of other entities that exceed specified materiality thresholds and any material unbudgeted expenditures or deviations from our approved budget. Energy Capital Partners may make these decisions free of any duty to us and our unitholders. This approval would be required for the potential acquisition by us of any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, as well as any other projects or assets that USD may develop or acquire in the future or any third-party acquisition we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. Energy Capital Partners is under no obligation to approve any such transaction. Additional discussion of the special approval rights of Energy Capital Partners is included in Part III, Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance-Special Approval Rights of Energy Capital Partners in this Annual Report. If we are unable to acquire any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal from USD,
which USD retained the right to develop and operate, these projects may compete directly with our current terminal assets for future throughput volumes. As a result, our ability to enter into new terminalling services agreements, or to renew such agreements with our existing customers, following the termination of our existing agreements or the terms thereof and our ability to compete for future spot volumes could be affected. Furthermore, cyclical changes in the demand for crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbons may cause USD or us to reevaluate any future expansion projects, including any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal. Lastly, if we do not make acquisitions on economically beneficial terms, our future growth will be limited, and the acquisitions we do make may reduce, rather than increase, our results of operations and cash flows.
Interest Rate Environment
The interest rates available in U.S. and international credit markets remain near historic lows. This could affect our future ability to access the credit markets to fund our future growth. Additionally, as with other yield-oriented securities, our unit price could be affected by the level of our cash distributions and the associated implied distribution yield. Therefore, changes in interest rates, either positive or negative, may affect the yield requirements of investors who invest in our units, and, as such, a rising interest rate environment could have an adverse impact on our unit price and our ability to issue additional equity, or increase the cost of issuing equity. However, we expect that our cost of capital would remain competitive, as our competitors would face similar circumstances. We have entered into an interest rate swap contract to partially mitigate our exposure to interest rate fluctuations on our variable rate debt. The swap contract establishes a fixed LIBOR value for our debt of 0.84%. Refer to Note 18. Derivative Financial Instruments of Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplementary Data in this Annual Report for more information on our interest rate swap.
Unit Based Compensation
We incur unit based compensation expenses associated with the Phantom Units granted to directors, officers and employees of our sponsor pursuant to the A/R LTIP. We recognize the expense associated with the outstanding Phantom Units ratably over its requisite service period. For more information related to our A/R LTIP including total compensation expense not yet recognized refer to Note 20. Unit Based Compensation of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Financial Results
The comparability of our current financial results in relation to prior periods are affected by the factors described below.
Impact of Hardisty and Stroud Terminals Contract Changes
As a result of the successful commencement of the DRU as previously discussed, effective August 1, 2021, the maturity date of three terminalling services agreements that are with the existing DRU customer at our Hardisty Terminal have been extended through mid-2031, with two-thirds of the volume commitment with respect to one of these agreements terminating at the end of June 2022. Effective with these changes, approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity has been extended through mid-2031. Due to the significantly longer contract tenor of the terminalling services agreements associated with the DRU volumes, contracted rates on an annual basis will be lower as compared to historical, shorter-term, agreements, which will result in lower cash flows to the Partnership on an annual basis, but support a higher net present value to the Partnership and provide a more predictable cash flow profile. Additionally, effective August 1, 2021, the existing DRU customer has elected to reduce its volume commitments at the Stroud Terminal attributable to the Partnership by one-third of the previous commitment through June 2022, at which point the agreement will terminate and there will be no renewal period. We expect an approximate $2.0 million adverse impact to our “Net cash provided by operating activities” for both the first and second quarters of 2022 resulting from these contract changes as compared to the amounts earned under the agreements prior to the changes.
Casper Terminal Customer Contract Expirations and Goodwill Impairment
Our last legacy terminalling services agreement at our Casper Terminal expired at the end of August 2019 and was not renewed or extended. The expired agreement contributed $9.3 million to our “Terminalling Services” revenue during the twelve months preceding the expiration of the agreement. We continue to seek other opportunities to enhance the utilization and profitability of the Casper Terminal with other producers, refiners and marketers of crude oil. The revenue provided by the current agreements at our Casper Terminal, certain of which contain take-or-pay terms for storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services, may be less predictable than the revenue historically provided by the legacy contracts, which were based on minimum volume commitments. We have not yet entered into arrangements to replace all of the revenue previously provided by the legacy contracts at the Casper Terminal.
Furthermore, in March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal for impairment due to the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products, which could lead to delays or reductions of expected throughput levels and changes in expectations for current contracts in place at the Casper Terminal. As a result of our impairment testing, we recognized an impairment loss of $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We did not recognize a goodwill impairment loss in 2021 or 2019.
West Colton Terminal Customer Contracts
Our West Colton Terminal receives fixed fees per gallon of ethanol transloaded at our terminal pursuant to a terminalling services agreement with one of the world’s largest producers of biofuels. Effective January 2022, we entered into a new five-year agreement with the existing West Colton ethanol customer that has a minimum monthly throughput commitment. This new agreement replaced the previous short-term agreement at the terminal that had been in place since July 2009. Under this new agreement, our customer is obligated to pay the greater of a minimum monthly commitment fee or a throughput fee based on the actual volume of ethanol loaded at our West Colton Terminal. If the customer loads fewer volumes than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to six months, which may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of its minimum monthly commitments in future periods, to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. This contract is expected to add incremental “Net cash provided by operating activities” and Adjusted EBITDA of approximately $1.0 million to $1.5 million per year, subject to changes in expected throughput.
Additionally, in June 2021, we entered into a new terminalling services agreement with USD Clean Fuels LLC, or USDCF, a newly formed subsidiary of USD, that is supported by a minimum throughput commitment to USDCF from an investment-grade rated, refining customer as well as a performance guaranty from USD. The terminalling services agreement provides for the inbound shipment of renewable diesel on rail at our West Colton Terminal and the outbound shipment of the product on tank trucks to local consumers. The new terminalling services agreement has an initial term of five years and commenced on December 1, 2021 and is expected to add approximately $2.0 million per year of incremental “Net cash provided by operating activities” and Adjusted EBITDA over the five-year term of the agreement. We have modified our existing West Colton Terminal so that it now has the capability to transload renewable diesel in addition to the ethanol that it has been transloading.
Income Tax
In June 2019, the Canadian Province of Alberta enacted a tax rate decrease that reduced the tax rate on business income from the previous rate of 12% to an ultimate rate of 8% effective for 2022. The reduction in the tax rate on business income was to be phased in over three years beginning with a reduction to an 11% rate effective July 1, 2019, with further reductions of 1% in each successive year until it reached 8% on January 1, 2022. In December 2020, the Alberta government passed legislation accelerating the change to 8% to be effective as of July 1, 2020. As a result, the Alberta tax rate on business income for Alberta businesses in 2020 is 9%, representing a blended rate of 10% from January 1, 2020 through June 30, 2020 and 8% from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020. For the 2021 year forward the Alberta tax rate on business income will be 8%.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package enacted in response to the coronavirus outbreak which, among other measures, contains numerous income tax provisions. Some of these tax provisions are expected to be effective retroactively for tax years ending before the date of enactment. For us, the most significant change included in the CARES Act was the impact to U.S. net operating loss carryback provisions. U.S. net operating losses incurred in tax years 2018, 2019, and 2020 can now be fully carried back to the preceding five tax years and may be used to fully offset taxable income (i.e. they are not subject to the 80 percent net income offset limitation of Section 172 of the U.S. Tax Code).
As a result of these CARES Act changes, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a current tax benefit of $536 thousand for a claimable tax refund by carrying back to U.S. net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020. We also recognized a one-time deferred tax expense of $46 thousand in the first quarter of 2020 due to the net effect of utilizing all U.S. net operating loss deferred tax assets and releasing the corresponding U.S. valuation allowance as of December 31, 2019. The tax impacts of the CARES Act were computed with the best available information, and any remaining refund is in the process of being claimed. We do not expect any material change to the tax provision in future periods associated with these refundable tax claims.
Segment Allocation of Certain Selling, General and Administrative Costs
Historically, we have allocated certain selling, general and administrative expenses to our Terminalling services and Fleet services segments that included corporate function personnel costs for managing our business that are allocated to us by our general partner, as well as other administrative expenses including audit fees and certain consulting fees. Beginning with the first quarter in 2021, these selling, general, and administrative expenses that are not directly related to operating our Terminalling services and Fleet services segments will now be allocated to corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses to better reflect the financial results of our Terminalling services and Fleet services segments. The effect of the change in allocation of the certain selling, general and administrative expenses increases the segment profit for both the Terminalling and Fleet segments with a corresponding increase to the loss associated with Corporate activities, as compared to the method of allocation that was used in the prior periods.
Cash Distributions
The board of directors of our general partner has adopted a cash distribution policy pursuant to which we intend to distribute at least the minimum quarterly distribution of $0.2875 per unit ($1.15 per unit on an annualized basis) on all of our units to the extent we have sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses, including payments to our general partner and its affiliates. The board of directors of our general partner may change our distribution policy at any time and from time to time. Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay cash distributions on a quarterly or other basis. The amount of distributions we pay under our cash distribution policy and the decision to make any distributions are determined by our general partner. We intend to pay distributions no later than 60 days after the end of each quarter. Given the uncertainty in the energy industry, as a proactive measure to strengthen our financial position and redeploy certain free cash to de-lever, the board of directors of our general partner elected in the first quarter of 2020 to reduce the quarterly distribution per unit declared by 70% as compared to the distribution for the fourth quarter of 2019. Commencing with the first quarter of 2021, the board of directors of our general partner determined that we had sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses to increase our distribution slightly over this amount. For the quarter ended December 31, 2021, our board of directors declared a distribution of $0.121 per unit ($0.484 per unit on an annualized basis) on all of our units, which we paid on February 18, 2022 to unitholders of record at the close of business on February 9, 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We conduct our business through two distinct reporting segments: Terminalling services and Fleet services. We have established these reporting segments as strategic business units to facilitate the achievement of our long-term objectives, to aid in resource allocation decisions and to assess operational performance.
The following table summarizes our operating results by business segment and corporate charges for each of the years indicated:
Summary Analysis of Operating Results
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Changes in our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, were primarily driven by:
•activities associated with our Terminalling services business including:
-higher revenue at our Hardisty Terminal due to increased rates on certain of our Hardisty agreements when compared to 2020 and a favorable variance on the change in the Canadian exchange rate associated with our Canadian-dollar denominated contracts for 2021 as compared to 2020, partially offset by no recognition of previously deferred revenue during 2021 that had been deferred in a prior year associated with the make-up right options we granted to our customers as compared to the recognition of previously deferred revenue in 2020 associated with make-up rights;
-lower revenue at our Stroud Terminal due to lower revenues associated with a decrease in contracted volume commitments at the terminal that occurred during the last half of the year as discussed in more detail below coupled with revenue that was deferred in the fourth quarter of 2021 associated with the make-up right options we granted our customer with no similar occurrence in 2020, partially offset by higher rates during the year that are based on crude oil pricing index differentials;
-higher revenues at our Casper Terminal due to higher throughput volumes at the terminal in 2021 as compared to 2020; and
-lower operating costs resulting primarily from a non-cash impairment of the goodwill that was recognized in the first quarter of 2020 associated with our Casper Terminal due to economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products with no comparable loss in 2021.
•a decrease in interest expense primarily due to lower interest rates coupled with a lower weighted average balance of debt outstanding;
•non-cash gains associated with increases in the fair value of our interest rate derivatives resulting from increases in the interest rate index upon which the derivative values are based in 2021 as compared to 2020; and
•an increase in the provision for income taxes associated with our Fleet services segment primarily resulting from a tax benefit that was recognized in 2020 associated with the net operating loss carrybacks that were made available and utilized by provisions in the CARES Act in 2020 with no similar tax benefits recognized in 2021.
A more comprehensive discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operation for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 4, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our website at www.usdpartners.com.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - BY SEGMENT
TERMINALLING SERVICES
The following table sets forth the operating results of our Terminalling services business and the approximate average daily throughput volumes of our terminals for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Terminalling Services Revenue
Revenue generated by our Terminalling services segment increased $2.3 million to $117.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $114.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher revenues at our Hardisty and Casper terminals, partially offset by lower revenues at our Stroud Terminal. At our Hardisty Terminal we had increased revenues due to a favorable variance resulting from the Canadian exchange rate on our Canadian-dollar denominated contracts during 2021 as compared to 2020, discussed in more detail below, coupled with an increase in rates on certain of our agreements when compared to 2020. Partially offsetting these increases were revenues that were recognized in 2020 at our Hardisty Terminal that were previously deferred in the prior year associated with the make-up right options we granted to customers as these rights were deemed unlikely to be used in future periods, with no similar recognition of revenue occurring during 2021. Our Casper Terminal revenues increased due to higher throughput volumes at the terminal during 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in revenues at our Stroud Terminal was primarily due to lower revenues during the second half of 2021 associated with the existing customer electing to reduce its contracted volume commitments by one-third of their previous commitment effective August 2021 as a result of the successful commencement of the DRU, as discussed above in Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Financial Results. In addition, we deferred revenue at our Stroud Terminal during the fourth quarter of 2021 associated with the make-up right options we grant our customers that are expected to be exercised in 2022. These decreases in revenues at our
Stroud Terminal were partially offset by higher revenues due to higher rates that are based on crude oil pricing index differentials.
Our average daily terminal throughput increased 28,945 bpd to 101,685 bpd for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with 72,740 bpd for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to higher throughput volumes at our Hardisty, Stroud and Casper terminals. Throughput volumes at our Hardisty Terminal increased on a year-to-date basis in 2021 resulting from higher crude oil price levels and a wider average WCS to WTI pricing spread as compared to the low levels that existed in 2020 due to the decreased demand that existed resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Refer to Overview and Recent Developments- Market Update - COVID-19 and Crude Oil Pricing Environment Update for more information. In addition, a portion of our Hardisty throughput volumes also drives the demand for deliveries to our Stroud Terminal and its connection to the Cushing oil hub, and as a result, throughput at our Stroud Terminal increased during 2021 as compared to 2020. The favorable pricing environment discussed above also led to the increase in throughput volumes at our Casper Terminal. Our terminalling services revenues are recognized based upon the contractual terms set forth in our agreements that contain primarily “take-or-pay” provisions, where we are entitled to the payment of minimum monthly commitment fees from our customers, which are recognized as revenue as we provide terminalling services. Increases in the average daily terminal throughput activity usually only affect revenue to the extent such amounts are in excess of the minimum monthly committed volumes. However, increases in throughput activity do increase the variable operating costs associated with our terminals, as discussed below.
Our terminalling services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, would have been $3.4 million lower if the average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the same as the average exchange rate for the year ended December 31, 2020. The average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar was 0.7978 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with 0.7463 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Costs
The operating costs of our Terminalling services segment decreased $30.6 million to $80.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to an impairment of our goodwill recognized in 2020 at our Casper Terminal due to economic conditions in 2020, coupled with lower selling, general and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2021. Partially offsetting these decreases in operating costs were increases in subcontracted rail services costs and pipeline fees.
Our terminalling services operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, would have been $3.0 million less if the average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the same as the average exchange rate for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Subcontracted rail services. Our costs for subcontracted rail services increased $3.0 million to $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the increased throughput at our terminals that occurred during the current year, as discussed above.
Pipeline fees. We incur pipeline fees related to a facilities connection agreement with Gibson for the delivery of crude oil from Gibson’s Hardisty storage terminal to our Hardisty Terminal via pipeline. The pipeline fees we pay to Gibson are based on a predetermined formula, which includes amounts collected from customers at our Hardisty Terminal less direct operating costs. Our pipeline fees increased $0.5 million to $24.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher revenues at our Hardisty Terminal. Partially offsetting this increase, during 2020 we recognized previously deferred pipeline fees associated with the make-up right options we granted to customers of our Hardisty Terminal, with no similar occurrence in 2021.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expense decreased $1.4 million to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a change in the allocation of certain selling, general and administrative expenses from the Terminalling services segment to corporate that are not directly related to operating our Terminalling services
segment that began in the first quarter of 2021. As such, there is a corresponding increase in corporate selling, general and administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, discussed below. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15. Segment reporting in this Annual Report for further discussion on the change in segment cost allocation. Additionally, our Terminalling services segment selling, general and administrative costs decreased during 2021 as compared to 2020 due to lower costs allocated to us associated with the management and operations of our terminals.
Goodwill impairment loss. In 2021, we had no goodwill impairment loss compared to the $33.6 million impairment loss that was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020. In March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal for impairment due to the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products. As a result of our impairment testing, we recognized an impairment loss of $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses (Income)
Other income, net. Other income, net decreased $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had no significant other income or expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $0.9 million of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily associated with a decrease in income earned as an incentive for railcar movements of a customer at our Hardisty Terminal.
Provision for income taxes. A significant amount of our operating income is generated by our Hardisty Terminal located in the Canadian province of Alberta. As a Canadian business, operating income derived from our Hardisty Terminal is subject to Canadian corporate income taxes at the corporate income tax rates enacted by the Canadian federal and provincial governments which totals 23% on a combined basis as of December 31, 2021.
Our income taxes for the Terminalling services segment increased by $0.2 million to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase resulted primarily due to a benefit recognized in the Canadian tax filings for an adjustment to the appropriate economic return from the Hardisty Terminal in 2020, with no similar occurrence in 2021.
FLEET SERVICES
The following table sets forth the operating results of our Fleet services business for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Operating Results
The underlying business activities associated with our Fleet services segment have remained relatively constant for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, we have experienced only modest changes in the operating revenues associated with this business. We expect only modest changes in the revenue results of our fleet services business for the near future.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $0.6 million to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a change in the allocation of certain selling, general and administrative expenses from the Fleet services segment to corporate that are not directly related to operating our Fleet services segment that began in the first quarter of 2021. As such, there is a corresponding increase in corporate selling, general and administrative costs during 2021, discussed below. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15. Segment reporting in this Annual Report for further discussion on the change in segment cost allocation. Additionally, our Fleet services segment selling, general and administrative costs decreased during the current year as compared to 2020 due to lower costs allocated to us associated with the management and operation of our fleet assets.
Our provision for income taxes in the Fleet services segment increased $0.6 million to a provision of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with a benefit of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in provision is due to a benefit in 2020 that was associated with a provision in the CARES Act that allowed U.S. net operating losses incurred in tax years 2018, 2019, 2020 to be carried back to the preceding five years and generate a tax refund for 2020. Under prior guidance, these net operating losses could only be carried forward.
CORPORATE ACTIVITIES
The following table sets forth our corporate charges for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Costs associated with our corporate activities decreased by $9.6 million to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our corporate selling, general and administrative expenses increased $1.0 million to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to a change in the allocation of certain selling, general and administrative expenses from the Terminalling services and Fleet services segments to corporate activities that are not directly related to operating our Terminalling services and Fleet services segments that began in the first quarter of 2021. As such, there is a corresponding decrease in both the Terminalling services and Fleet services segments selling, general and administrative costs during the year ended December 31, 2021, as discussed above. Partially offsetting the increased corporate selling, general and administrative costs allocations was a decrease in salaries and benefits, including unit
based compensation expenses, incurred in 2021 as compared to 2020. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15. Segment reporting in this Annual Report for further discussion on the change in segment cost allocation.
Interest expense costs decreased $2.4 million to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in interest rates we were charged under our Credit Agreement during 2021 coupled with a lower weighted average balance of debt outstanding, as compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, we had a non-cash gain of $4.1 million recognized on our interest rate derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a non-cash loss of $3.9 million for the same period in 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal liquidity requirements include:
•financing current operations;
•servicing our debt;
•funding capital expenditures, including potential acquisitions and the costs to construct new assets; and
•making distributions to our unitholders
We have historically financed our operations with cash generated from our operating activities, borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and loans from our sponsor.
Liquidity Sources
We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include borrowings under our senior secured credit agreement, issuances of debt securities and additional partnership interests as well as cash generated from our operating activities. We believe that cash generated from these sources will be sufficient to meet our ongoing working capital and capital expenditure requirements and to make quarterly cash distributions at current levels for at least the next 12 months following the filing of this Report.
Credit Agreement
In November 2018, we amended and restated our senior secured credit agreement, which we originally established in October 2014. We refer to the amended and restated senior secured credit agreement executed in November 2018 as the Credit Agreement and the original senior secured credit agreement as the Previous Credit Agreement. Our Credit Agreement amended and restated in its entirety our Previous Credit Agreement.
On October 29, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our Credit Agreement, referred to as the Credit Agreement, as amended, with a syndicate of lenders. The Credit Agreement, as amended, extends the maturity date of the agreement by one year and decreases the aggregate borrowing capacity of the facility from $385 million to $275 million. The Credit Agreement, as amended, also reflects the resignation of Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent and swing line lender under the facility and the appointment of Bank of Montreal as the successor administrative agent and swing line lender under the facility. The Credit Agreement, as amended, sets forth provisions for replacing LIBOR with an alternative benchmark rate.
Our Credit Agreement, as amended, matures on November 2, 2023. Our Credit Agreement, as amended, provides us with the ability to request an additional one-year maturity date extension, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions including consent of the lenders, and allows us the option to increase the maximum amount of credit available up to a total facility size of $390 million, subject to receiving increased commitments from lenders and satisfaction of certain conditions. The Credit Agreement, as amended, keeps the financial covenants substantially consistent with our Credit Agreement. Our Credit Agreement, as amended, contains customary representations, warranties, covenants and events of default for facilities of this type. In connection with establishing the Credit Agreement, as amended, we incurred additional deferred financing costs of $1.6 million, which, in addition to any remaining deferred financing costs from our previous Credit Agreement, will be amortized over the remaining term of the Credit Agreement, as amended, using the straight line method, which approximates the effective interest method.
Our Credit Agreement, as amended, and any issuances of letters of credit are available for working capital, capital expenditures, general partnership purposes and continue the indebtedness outstanding under the Previous Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement, as amended, includes an aggregate $20 million sublimit for standby letters of credit and a $20 million sublimit for swingline loans. Obligations under the Credit Agreement, as amended, are guaranteed by our restricted subsidiaries (as such term is defined therein) and are secured by a first priority lien on our assets and those of our restricted subsidiaries, other than certain excluded assets.
Our borrowings under the Credit Agreement, as amended, bear interest at either a base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 2.00%, or at a rate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, or a
comparable or successor rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 3.00%. The applicable margin, as well as a commitment fee of 0.375% to 0.50% per annum on unused commitments under the Credit Agreement, as amended, will vary based upon our consolidated net leverage ratio, as defined in our Credit Agreement, as amended.
Our Credit Agreement, as amended, contains affirmative and negative covenants that, among other things, limit or restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to incur or guarantee debt, incur liens, make investments, make restricted payments, engage in certain business activities, engage in mergers, consolidations and other organizational changes, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of assets, enter into burdensome agreements or enter into transactions with affiliates on terms that are not at arm’s length, in each case, subject to exceptions.
Additionally, we are required to maintain the following financial ratios, each determined on a quarterly basis for the immediately preceding four quarter period then ended (or such shorter period as shall apply, on an annualized basis):
•Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of at least 2.50 to 1.00;
•Consolidated Net Leverage Ratio of not greater than 4.50 to 1.00 (or 5.00 to 1.00 at any time after we have issued at least $150 million of certain qualified unsecured notes and for so long as the notes remain outstanding (the “Qualified Notes Requirement”)). In addition, upon the consummation of a Specified Acquisition (as defined in our Credit Agreement, as amended), for the fiscal quarter in which the Specified Acquisition is consummated and for two fiscal quarters immediately following such fiscal quarter (the “Specified Acquisition Period”), if timely elected by us by written notice to the Administrative Agent, the maximum permitted ratio shall be increased to 5.00 to 1.00 (or 5.50 to 1.00 if the Qualified Notes Requirement has been met); and
•after we have met the Qualified Notes Requirement, a Consolidated Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement, as amended) of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00 (or 4.00 to 1.00 during a Specified Acquisition Period).
Our Credit Agreement, as amended, generally prohibits us from making cash distributions (subject to exceptions as set forth in the Credit Agreement). However, so long as no default exists or would be caused by making a cash distribution, we may make cash distributions to our unitholders up to the amount of our available cash (as defined in our partnership agreement).
The Credit Agreement, as amended, contains events of default, including, but not limited to (and subject to grace periods in circumstances set forth in the Credit Agreement, as amended), the failure to pay any principal, interest or fees when due, failure to perform or observe any covenant (subject in some cases to certain grace periods or other qualifications), any representation, warranty or certification made or deemed made in the agreements or related loan documentation being untrue in any material respect when made, default under certain material debt agreements, commencement of bankruptcy or other insolvency proceedings, certain changes in our ownership or the ownership of our general partner, certain material judgments or orders, ERISA events or the invalidity of the loan documents. Upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an event of default under the agreements, the lenders may, among other things, terminate their commitments, declare any outstanding loans to be immediately due and payable and/or exercise remedies against us and the collateral as may be available to the lenders under the agreements and related documentation or applicable law.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants set forth in our Credit Agreement, as amended.
The weighted average interest rate on our outstanding indebtedness was 2.35% and 2.66% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, without consideration to the effect of our derivative contracts.
The following table presents our available liquidity as of the dates indicated:
(1) Excludes amounts that are restricted pursuant to our collaborative agreement with Gibson.
(2) Pursuant to the terms of our Credit Agreement, as amended, our borrowing capacity is limited to 4.5 times our trailing 12-month consolidated EBITDA, which equates to $80.0 million and $53.2 million of borrowing capacity available at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Energy Capital Partners must approve any additional issuances of equity by us, and such determinations may be made free of any duty to us or our unitholders. Members of our general partner’s board of directors appointed by Energy Capital Partners must also approve the incurrence by us of additional indebtedness or refinancing outside of our existing indebtedness that is not in the ordinary course of business.
Cash Flows
The following table and discussion summarizes the cash flows associated with our operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $1.3 million to $47.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $45.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily attributable to the changes in cash flow derived from our operating results as discussed above in Results of Operations. While our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $41.3 million more than our net loss for 2020, the net loss from 2020 included a significant amount of non-cash expenses that increase our net loss but did not decrease cash flow, such as our goodwill impairment loss recognized in 2020 and the loss associated with derivative instruments in 2020 as compared to the non-cash derivative gain we recognized in 2021. The change in net cash provided by operating activities was also impacted by the timing of receipts and payments on accounts receivable, accounts payable and deferred revenue balances.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1.9 million to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to project costs incurred in 2021 associated with the renewable diesel project at our West Colton Terminal. Refer to Growth Opportunities for our Operations - Other Opportunities Related to Our Crude Oil Terminal Networks - West Colton Terminal for more information.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $0.2 million to $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in cash paid for distributions and participant withholding taxes associated with vested Phantom Units, partially offset by an increase of $6.0 million in our net payments on our long-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the net amounts during the year ended December 31, 2020. We also incurred $1.6 million of deferred financing costs associated with the refinancing of our Credit Agreement, as amended during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash Requirements
Our primary requirements for cash are: (1) financing current operations, (2) servicing our debt, (3) funding capital expenditures, including potential acquisitions and the costs to construct new assets, and (4) making distributions to our unitholders. We expect to fund our future cash requirements from cash from our balance sheet, cash flow generated by our operating activities, borrowings under our Credit Agreement and the issuance of additional partnership interests or long-term debt.
Capital Requirements
Our historical capital expenditures have primarily consisted of the costs to construct and acquire energy-related logistics assets. Our operations are expected to require investments to expand, upgrade or enhance existing facilities and to meet environmental and operational regulations. We also occasionally invest in our assets to expand their capacity or capability, such as the pipeline connection from our Casper Terminal to the Platte Terminal. We may incur unanticipated costs in connection with any expansion projects, which costs could be material or be incurred in periods after the project is completed.
Our partnership agreement requires that we categorize our capital expenditures as either expansion capital expenditures, maintenance capital expenditures, or investment capital expenditures.
• Expansion capital expenditures are cash expenditures incurred for acquisitions or capital improvements that we expect will increase our operating income or operating capacity over the long term. Examples of expansion capital expenditures include the acquisition of terminals or other complementary midstream assets from USD or third parties and the construction or development of new terminals or additional capacity at our existing terminals to the extent such capital expenditures are expected to expand our operating capacity or operating income. Expansion capital expenditures include interest payments (and related fees) on debt incurred to finance all or a portion of expansion capital expenditures in respect of the period from the date that we enter into a binding obligation to commence the construction, development, replacement, improvement or expansion of a capital asset and ending on the earlier to occur of the date that such capital improvement commences commercial service and the date that such capital improvement is disposed of or abandoned.
• Maintenance capital expenditures are cash expenditures made to maintain, over the long term, our operating capacity, operating income or our asset base. Examples of maintenance capital expenditures are expenditures to repair and refurbish our terminals.
• Investment capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that are neither maintenance capital expenditures nor expansion capital expenditures. Investment capital expenditures will largely consist of capital expenditures made for investment purposes. Examples of investment capital expenditures include traditional capital expenditures for investment purposes, such as purchases of securities, as well as other capital expenditures that might be made in lieu of such traditional investment capital expenditures, such as the acquisition of a capital asset for investment purposes or development of facilities that are in excess of the maintenance of our existing operating capacity or operating income, but that are not expected to expand our operating capacity or operating income over the long term.
Although we have not experienced significant maintenance capital expenditures in prior years, as the age and usage of our assets increase, we expect that costs we incur to maintain our assets in compliance with sound business practice, our contractual relationships and applicable regulatory requirements will likely increase. Some of these
costs will be characterized as maintenance capital expenditures. We incurred $612 thousand and $171 thousand of maintenance capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Our total expansion capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to $1.8 million and were primarily associated with the project costs associated with the renewable diesel project at our West Colton Terminal as previously discussed. Our total expansion capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.3 million. We expect to fund future capital expenditures from cash on our balance sheet, cash flow generated from our operating activities, borrowings under our Credit Agreement and the issuance of additional partnership interests or long-term debt.
Financing our Current Operations
We finance our current operations through cash generated by our operating activities. Our operating costs are comprised primarily of subcontracted rail services, pipeline fees, repairs and maintenance expenses, materials and supplies, utility costs, insurance premiums and lease costs for facilities and equipment. In addition, our operating expenses include the cost of leasing railcars from third-party railcar suppliers and the shipping fees charged by railroads, which costs are generally passed through to our customers. We expect our expenses to remain relatively stable, but they may fluctuate from period to period depending on the mix of activities performed and actual volumes throughput during a period and the timing of these expenditures. We expect to incur additional operating costs, including subcontracted rail services and pipeline fees, when we handle additional volumes at our terminals. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 8. Leases and Note 14. Commitments and Contingencies in this Annual Report for more information.
Debt Service
We anticipate reducing our outstanding indebtedness to the extent we generate cash flows in excess of our operating, investing and distribution needs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made repayments of $29.0 million on our Revolving Credit Facility from cash flow in excess of our operating and investing needs. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10. Debt in this Annual Report for more information. Subsequent to December 31, 2021 and as of February 25, 2022, we have made additional repayments of $3.0 million to the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility. As of February 25, 2022, we had amounts outstanding of $165.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility and $110.0 million available for borrowing under the Revolving Credit Facility based on capacity that is subject to certain covenants. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10. Debt of this Annual Report for more information.
Distributions
Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay cash distributions on a quarterly or other basis, and we do not have a legal obligation to distribute any particular amount per common unit.
For the quarter ended December 31, 2021, the board of directors of our general partner determined that we had sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses to distribute $0.121 per unit on all of our units. Our current quarterly distribution of $0.121 per unit equates to $3.4 million per quarter, or $13.4 million per year, based on the number of common and general partner units outstanding as of February 9, 2022. This distribution represents an increase of 9.0% from the distribution with respect to the fourth quarter of 2020, and is the result of an improved outlook for our business and enhanced liquidity position. Given the uncertainty in the energy industry that existed during 2020, the board of directors made a proactive decision to strengthen our financial position by reducing our quarterly distributions in 2020 from previous levels and redeploying certain free cash flow to de-lever. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we made repayments of $29 million of the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility. Subsequent to December 31, 2021 and as of February 25, 2021, we have made additional repayments of $3.0 million of the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility.
The board of directors of our general partner may change our distribution policy or suspend distributions at any time and from time to time. Additionally, members of our general partner’s board of directors appointed by Energy Capital Partners, must approve any distributions made by us.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
Credit Risk
Our exposure to credit risk may be affected by the concentration of our customers within the energy industry, as well as changes in economic or other conditions. Our customers’ businesses react differently to changing conditions. We believe that our credit-review procedures, customer deposits and collection procedures have adequately provided for amounts that may become uncollectible in the future.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk
We currently derive a significant portion of our cash flows from our Canadian operations, particularly our Hardisty Terminal. As a result, portions of our cash and cash equivalents are denominated in Canadian dollars and are held by foreign subsidiaries, which amounts are subject to fluctuations resulting from changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar. We employ derivative financial instruments to minimize our exposure to the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, as we deem necessary based upon anticipated economic conditions.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Refer to Note 22. Subsequent Events of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report for a discussion regarding subsequent events.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our selection and application of accounting policies is an important process that has developed as our business activities have evolved and as new accounting pronouncements have been issued. Accounting decisions generally involve an interpretation of existing accounting principles and the use of judgment in applying those principles to the specific circumstances existing in our business. We make every effort to comply with all applicable accounting principles and believe the proper implementation and consistent application of these principles is critical. However, not all situations we encounter are specifically addressed in the accounting literature. In such cases, we must use our best judgment to implement accounting policies that clearly and accurately present the substance of these situations. We accomplish this by analyzing similar situations and the accounting guidance governing them and consulting with experts about the appropriate interpretation and application of the accounting literature to these situations.
In addition to the above, certain amounts included in or affecting our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures must be estimated, requiring us to make certain assumptions with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures with respect to contingent assets and liabilities. The basis for our estimates is historical experience, consultation with experts and other sources we believe to be reliable. While we believe our estimates are appropriate, actual results can and often do differ from these estimates. Any effect on our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows resulting from revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known.
We believe our critical accounting policies and estimates discussed in the following paragraphs address the more significant judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Each of these areas involve complex situations and a high degree of judgment either in the application and interpretation of existing accounting literature or in the development of estimates that affect our consolidated financial statements. Our management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting policies and estimates related to the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosure of contingent liabilities with the Audit Committee of the board of directors of our general partner.
The following discussion relates to the critical accounting policies and estimates for USD Partners LP. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates based on the best available information at the time. The following accounting policies are considered critical because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and involve a higher degree of complexity and judgment on the part of management. Actual results may differ based on the accuracy of the information utilized and subsequent events, some over which we may have little or no control. Significant estimates by management include the estimated lives of depreciable property and equipment, recoverability of long-lived assets and provision or benefit for income taxes.
Revenue
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers by applying the provisions of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We recognize revenue under the core principle to depict the transfer of control to our customers of goods or services in an amount reflecting the consideration for which we expect to be entitled. In order to achieve the core principle, we apply the following five step approach:
(1) identify the contract with a customer;
(2) identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) determine the transaction price;
(4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
We define a performance obligation as a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, which also represents the unit of account under ASC 606. We allocate the transaction price in a contract to each distinct performance obligation, which we recognize as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price in the contract to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price for each distinct good or service in the contract, utilizing market-based and cost-plus margin inputs. We have elected to account for sales taxes received from customers on a net basis.
We apply the right-to-invoice practical expedient to contracts for which we recognize revenue at the amount to which we have the right to invoice for services performed.
Terminalling Services Revenues
We derive a majority of our revenues from contracts to provide terminalling services, which include pipeline transportation, storage, loading and unloading of crude oil and related products from and into railcars and trucks, as well as the transloading of biofuels from railcars into trucks. Our terminalling services agreements for crude oil and related products are generally established under multi-year, take-or-pay provisions that require monthly payments from our customers for their minimum monthly volume commitments in exchange for our performance of the terminalling services enumerated above. Our terminalling services for biofuels typically require monthly payments for actual volumes handled. Variable consideration, such as volume-based pricing, included in our agreements is typically resolved within the applicable accounting period.
We recognize revenue for the terminalling services we provide based upon the contractual rates set forth in our agreements related to throughput volumes. We recognize revenue over time as we render services based on the throughput delivered as this best represents the value we provide to customers for our services. All of the contracted capacity at our Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal is contracted under multi-year agreements that contain “take-or-pay” provisions where we are entitled to the payment of minimum monthly commitment fees from our customers, regardless of whether the specified throughput volumes to which the customer committed is achieved.
Our terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal generally grant our customers make-up rights that allow them to load volumes in excess of their minimum monthly commitment in future periods, without additional charge, to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. The make-up rights typically expire, if unused, in subsequent periods up to 12 months following the period for which the volumes were originally committed. We currently recognize substantially all of the amounts we receive for minimum
commitment fees as revenue when collected, since breakage associated with these make-up rights options has varied between 97% and 100% based on our experience and expectations around usage of these options. Breakage rates are regularly evaluated and modified as necessary to reflect our current expectations and experience. If we do not expect to be entitled to a breakage amount, we defer the recognition of revenue associated with volumes that are below the minimum monthly commitment until we determine that the likelihood that the customer will be able to make up the minimum volume is remote or the make-up right expires. If we expect to be entitled to a breakage amount, we estimate expected breakage and recognize the expected breakage amount as revenue in proportion to the trend of rights exercised by the customer.
Fleet Services Revenues
Our fleet services contracts provide for the sourcing of railcar fleets and related logistics and maintenance services. We allocate revenue between the lease and service components based on the relative standalone values and account for each component under the applicable accounting guidance. We record revenues for fleet leases on a gross basis, since we are deemed the primary obligor for the services.
We recognize revenue for fleet leases and related party administrative services ratably over the contract period as services are consistently provided throughout the period. Revenue for reimbursable costs is recognized on a gross basis on our consolidated statements of operations as “Freight and other reimbursables,” as the costs are incurred. We have deferred revenues for amounts collected in advance from customers in our Fleet services segment, which we will recognize as revenue as the underlying services are performed pursuant to the terms of our contracts.
Capitalization Policies and Depreciation Methods
We record property and equipment at its original cost, which we depreciate on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from three to 30 years. Our determination of the useful lives of property and equipment requires us to make various assumptions when the assets are acquired or placed into service about the expected usage, normal wear and tear and the extent and frequency of maintenance programs. Expenditures for repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred, while improvements that extend the service life or capacity of existing property and equipment are capitalized. Upon the sale or retirement of an asset, the related costs and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is recognized in our operating results.
During construction we capitalize direct costs, such as labor, materials and overhead, as well as interest cost we may incur on indebtedness at our incremental borrowing rate.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
We consider a long-lived asset to be impaired when the sum of the estimated, undiscounted future cash flows from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than the carrying amount of the asset. Factors that we evaluate for potential impairment of an asset include: a significant decrease in the market value of the asset, operating or cash flow losses associated with the use of the asset, or a significant change in the asset’s physical condition or use.
When alternative courses of action to recover the carrying amount of a long-lived asset are under consideration, estimates of future undiscounted cash flows take into account possible outcomes and probabilities of their occurrence. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset is not recoverable based on the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the long-lived asset.
Income Taxes
We are not a taxable entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes or for a majority of the states that impose an income tax. Taxes on our net income or loss are generally borne by our unitholders through the allocation of taxable income or loss, except for USD Rail LP, which, in October 2014, elected to be classified as an entity taxable as a corporation. Our income tax expense is predominantly attributable to Canadian federal and provincial income taxes imposed on our operations based in Canada. Additionally, we are also subject to state franchise tax in the State of Texas, which is treated as an income tax under the applicable accounting guidance. This state income tax is computed on our modified gross margin, which we have determined to be an income tax as set forth in the authoritative accounting guidance. Our current and historical provision for income taxes also reflects income taxes associated with USD Rail LP.
We recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the relevant basis of our assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. We record the impact of changes in tax legislation on deferred income tax assets and liabilities in the period the legislation is enacted.
Pursuant to the authoritative accounting guidance regarding uncertain tax positions, we recognize the tax effects of any uncertain tax position as the largest amount that will more likely than not be realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority having full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts. Under this criterion, we evaluate the most likely resolution of an uncertain tax position based on its technical merits and on the outcome that we expect would likely be sustained under examination.
Our policy is to recognize any interest or penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of income tax expense or benefit. We have not historically incurred any significant interest or penalties for the underpayment of income taxes.
Net income or loss for financial statement purposes may differ significantly from taxable income we allocated to our unitholders as a result of differences between the tax basis and financial reporting basis of assets and liabilities and the taxable income allocation requirements set forth in our partnership agreement. The aggregate difference in the basis of our net assets for financial and tax reporting purposes compared to unitholders cannot be readily determined because information regarding each partner’s tax attributes in us is not available.
Foreign Currency
A substantial portion of our operations are conducted in Canada and are accounted for in the local currency, the Canadian dollar, which we translate into our reporting currency, the U.S. dollar. We translate most Canadian dollar denominated balance sheet accounts at the end of period exchange rate, while most statement of operations accounts are translated monthly based on the average exchange rate for each monthly period. Amounts translated from foreign currencies into our U.S. dollar reporting currency can vary between periods due to fluctuations in the exchange rates between the foreign currency and the U.S. dollar. Refer to Results of Operations - By Segment - Terminalling Services above for further discussion of the estimated impact related to the changes in exchange rates on our Terminalling Services revenues and operating costs.