Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion includes forward-looking statements. Please refer to “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” of this annual report on Form 10-K for important information about these types of statements and “Risk Factors”, above. Additionally, please refer to the “Glossary of Oil and Natural Gas Terms” of this annual report on Form 10-K for oil and natural gas industry terminology used herein.
Summary of The Information Contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Recent Developments. Discussion of recent developments affecting the Company and our operations.
● Plan of Operations and Strategy. Discussion of our strategy moving forward and how we plan to seek to increase stockholder value.
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
● Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. A discussion of our financial condition, including descriptions of balance sheet information and cash flows.
Recent Developments
On January 5, 2022, we closed the acquisitions of assets from three separate Purchase and Sale Agreements entered into by the Company on October 4, 2021, with (i) Lubbock Energy Partners LLC, (ii) Banner Oil & Gas, LLC, Woodford Petroleum, LLC and Llano Energy LLC (collectively, “Banner”), and (iii) Synergy Offshore LLC for approximately $87.3 million. The acquisition has an effective date of January 1, 2022. The purchase price includes payment of $1.3 million in cash and issuance of 19,904,736 shares of our common stock, valued at $64.7 million. In addition, we assumed Banner’s debt of approximately $3.3 million and derivative positions, which were in a loss position of $3.1 million. The assets acquired include certain oil and gas properties representing a diversified, portfolio of primarily operated, producing, oil-weighted assets located across the Rockies, West Texas, Eagle Ford, and Mid-Continent. The acquisition also included certain wells, contracts, technical data, records, personal property and hydrocarbons associated with the acquired assets.
Plan of Operations and Strategy
In 2022 and beyond, we intend to seek additional opportunities in the oil and natural gas sector, including but not limited to further acquisition of assets, participation with current and new industry partners in their exploration and development projects, acquisition of existing companies, and the purchase of oil and natural gas producing assets. In addition, we plan to grow production by performing workovers on operated idle wells acquired in January 2022 to return them back to production.
Key elements of our business strategy include:
● Deploy our Capital in a Conservative and Strategic Manner and Review Opportunities to Bolster our Liquidity. In the current industry environment, maintaining liquidity is critical. Therefore, we will be highly selective in the projects we evaluate and will review opportunities to bolster our liquidity and financial position through various means.
● Evaluate and Pursue Value-Enhancing Transactions. We will continuously evaluate strategic alternative opportunities that we believe will enhance shareholder value.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. A summary of our significant accounting policies is detailed in Note 1 - Organization, Operations and Significant Accounting Policies in