Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such difference include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item IA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and
results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus dated November 16, 2021 and filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on November 17, 2021.
Overview
Our mission is to empower every organization with the breakthrough perspectives they need to deliver truly exceptional customer experiences using human insight.
We have pioneered a video-first, enterprise-grade software-as-a-service (SaaS) platform that enables organizations to see and hear the experiences of real people as they engage with products, designs, apps, processes, concepts, or brands. Our platform captures authentic, credible, and highly contextualized customer perspectives from targeted audiences who have opted in to share their thoughts, whether for digital, real-world, or omnichannel experiences. Using machine learning, our platform analyzes these perspectives and surfaces key moments of insight rapidly and at scale. This helps organizations to free up time and resources and make better customer experience decisions faster using the power of video to drive alignment and action.
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of subscriptions to our platform, which accounted for over 90% of our total revenue in each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and approximately 90% of our total revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019. Our subscription plan includes access to our platform including customer support. The substantial majority of our subscriptions are for a one year, non-cancelable term, with some large, multi-year subscriptions ranging up to three years and some small, short-term subscriptions of less than one year. Our contracts are typically billed annually in advance and we generally recognize subscription revenue ratably over the contract term.
We also generate revenue from professional services. Our professional services include research studies, training services, and strategy workshops. Professional services revenue comprised less than 10% of our total revenue in each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and approximately 10% of our total revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019.
We offer two primary subscription pricing plans - a seat-based subscription plan and a flex-based subscription plan. Each pricing plan provides platform access to our customers for the duration of the contract term and revenue is recognized ratably. Within each pricing plan, we offer specific editions based on varying levels of tools, features, and functionality.
Our seat-based subscription pricing plan varies depending on the platform edition and the number and type of seats. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we launched a flex-based subscription pricing plan and began a roll out to both new and existing customers as an additional pricing option. We did so to ensure that our pricing plans are structured to further facilitate expansion within our customers’ organizations, including making it easier for our customers to add additional users and use cases. Customers utilizing the flex-based subscription pricing plan typically enter into an annual contract that covers access to the platform and the pricing is based on expected annual committed utilization of the platform’s features. Customers who exceed their contractual limits, are able to purchase either additional committed usage or on demand usage. The pricing plan and related utilization is determined based on the activity the customer processes within the platform, including the number and type of CxNs generated, and type of audience targeting used.
Our go-to-market strategy is segmented based on the size and region of our customers. We primarily sell through a direct selling motion, with field sales representatives who focus on enterprise customers and an inside sales organization which sells to mid-market and small and medium-sized business (SMB) customers. We have also started investing in creating channel partnerships and relationships with resellers, distributors, and strategic partners to broaden our reach.
We have achieved significant growth in recent periods. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 our total revenue was $147.4 million, $102.2 million, and $76.6 million, respectively, representing period-over-period growth of 44% and 33%, respectively. As we have grown our business, we have made significant investments in sales and marketing and research and development. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our net loss was $50.7 million, $34.0 million, and $19.6 million, respectively.
Initial Public Offering
In November 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $14.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $124.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $9.8 million and offering costs of $6.1 million. We incurred offering expenses, net of reimbursement received from underwriters, of approximately $6.2 million in connection with the IPO, of which $0.1 million is unpaid as
of December 31, 2021. In connection with the IPO, all the shares of outstanding convertible preferred stock were automatically converted into an equivalent number of shares of common stock.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor and review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. We believe that these key business metrics provide meaningful supplemental information in assessing our operating performance.
Customers
____________
(1)Total customer count is rounded down to the nearest 10 customers.
We measure and track the number of customers, and we believe the number of customers is useful information to investors, because our ability to attract new customers, grow our customer base and retain existing customers helps drive our success and is an important contributor to our revenue growth. We have successfully demonstrated a history of growing our customer base. A customer in a particular period is defined as a customer for whom we recognize subscription revenue in the last month of the measurement period. We define a single customer as the parent entity of the subsidiaries and divisions that contract with us. If a customer has multiple subsidiaries or divisions, then we aggregate subscription revenues from all entities to the parent level. We define our Large Customers as those spending at least $100,000 in ARR. We believe that our ability to increase our Large Customers indicates our progress with a critical segment of our customer base. We expect to increase our Large Customers as more users and teams across organizations and industries realize the value of our platform in today’s digital age. Our use of customer count may have certain limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue or an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. For example, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate the number of customers differently, which could reduce its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Net Dollar-based Retention Rate
_____________
(1)Net dollar-based retention rate figures prior to 2020 are unavailable due to adoption of ASC 606 on a modified retrospective basis effective January 1, 2019.
Our ability to retain and expand subscription revenue from existing customers is an important indicator of the stability of our revenue base, the long-term value of our platform to our customers, and future business opportunities. We calculate net dollar-based retention rate in order to measure our ability to retain and expand subscription revenue from our existing customers. Our net dollar-based retention rate compares the quarterly subscription revenue from the same cohort of customers across comparable periods and reflects customer renewals, expansion, contraction and churn. For each quarter, the cohort of customers are identified based on having subscription revenue at the beginning of the same quarter in the prior year. We calculate our net dollar-based retention rate in a quarter by dividing: (i) the total subscription revenue of the customer cohort in the current quarter, by (ii) the total subscription revenue of those same customers in the same quarter of the prior year. We expect our net dollar-based retention rate to fluctuate in future periods due to a number of factors, including our expected growth, the level of penetration within our customer base, our ability to upsell and cross-sell products to existing customers, and our ability to retain our customers.
Calculated Billings (Non-GAAP)
We believe that calculated billings helps investors better understand our sales activity for a particular period, which is not necessarily reflected in our revenue given that we generally recognize revenue ratably over the subscription term.
We define calculated billings, a non-GAAP financial measure, as total revenue plus the change in contract liabilities from the beginning to the end of the period. We typically invoice our customers annually in advance, and to a lesser extent quarterly in advance, for subscriptions to our platform. Calculated billings in any particular period reflect amounts invoiced to customers.
The following table sets forth our calculated billings and growth rate, and provides a reconciliation of revenue to calculated billings, for the periods presented:
Our use of calculated billings has certain limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue or an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Calculated billings are recognized when a customer is invoiced, while the related revenue is generally recognized ratably over the subscription term. Calculated billings are affected by seasonality in terms of when we enter into agreements with customers; and the mix of billings in each reporting period as we typically invoice customers annually in advance, and to a lesser extent quarterly in advance. Therefore, fluctuations in billings should not be taken as an indication of changes in future revenue. Also, other companies, including companies in our industry, may not use calculated billings, may calculate billings differently, may have different billing frequencies, or may use other financial measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of calculated billings as a comparative measure.
Impact of COVID-19 to our Business
In December 2019, an outbreak of COVID-19 was first identified and by March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. Governments and municipalities across the United States and the world have instituted measures to slow infection rates, including orders to shelter-in-place, travel restrictions, and mandated business closure. The global economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are significant and continue to evolve, as exhibited by, among other things, a rise in unemployment, changes in consumer behavior, and market volatility.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have temporarily required our employees to work remotely, implemented travel restrictions for all non-essential business, and shifted certain of our conferences to virtual-only, and we may similarly alter, postpone, or cancel events in the future. This has resulted in a reduction in certain operating expenses during the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel and entertainment. However, these savings were offset by other investments across the business, such that operating expenses were not materially impacted. We continue to monitor guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization and adhere to federal, state and local government requirements. In addition, our revenue generation has not been significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, as the loss of certain existing customers and the inability of certain existing customers to make payments when due as a result of the adverse impact of COVID-19 on those customers’ businesses was generally offset by new customer acquisition. Driven by the acceleration of digital transformation initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we believe some customers, including those customers with predominantly physical operations, turned to our platform to quickly build out or add sophistication to their digital customer experiences. Additionally, some new customers leveraged our platform to create a more seamless integration between their online and offline presence. Overall, there has not been a material impact to our business as a result of COVID-19.
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business and financial performance may be influenced by a number of factors, many of which we cannot control, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, future spikes of COVID-19 infections resulting in additional preventive measures, the severity of the economic decline attributable to the pandemic, the timing and nature of a potential economic recovery, and the impact on our customers and our sales cycles. See Part I, Item IA, “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of subscription fees from customer agreements to access our platform, as well as additional support services. Our customers do not have the ability to take possession of our software. We recognize revenue for subscription fees and additional support services on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract beginning on the date access to our platform is granted, as the underlying service is a stand-ready performance obligation. Customers may also purchase incremental capacity to our platform, which is an additional stand-ready performance obligation. We recognize incremental capacity as a series of distinct software-based services that are satisfied over the remaining term of the applicable subscription. Certain customer contracts are sold with a contractual maximum of platform usage. Customers who consume their committed capacity will be invoiced for overages on a quarterly basis. We recognize these overage fees as variable consideration. We expect our subscription revenue to increase over the long term, depending on our ability to attract new customers and expand usage with existing customers, which fluctuates from period to period.
Professional Services
Professional services primarily consist of fees from professional services including research studies, training services, and strategy workshops. Professional services are generally considered distinct from access to our platform. We recognize revenue from service engagements that occur over a period of time on a proportional performance basis as the services are delivered. While we expect our professional services revenue to increase in terms of absolute dollars, they will fluctuate from period to period and may not grow consistently with our subscription revenue.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Subscription Cost of Revenue
Subscription cost of revenue consists of three categories of expenses: UserTesting Contributor Network, platform, and support. UserTesting Contributor Network costs consist primarily of participant payments and fees as well as the cost to operate and support those participants. Platform costs consist primarily of the cost to operate our platform, including infrastructure-related, hosting, and personnel-related costs, such as salaries, bonus, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits. Support costs include the personnel-related costs, such as salaries, bonus, stock-based compensation expense, and benefits, of employees who directly support customers of our subscription services and amortization of acquired intangibles.
Professional Services Cost of Revenue
Professional services cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel-related costs associated with professional services personnel, including stock-based compensation, third-party consulting services, and allocated overhead.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is total revenue less cost of revenue and gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may vary from period to period as our mix or cost of revenue fluctuates. Our gross margin on subscription revenue is significantly higher than our gross margin on professional services revenue. In addition, we may experience changes in our professional services gross margin due to a mismatch between when revenue is recognized and when related expenses are incurred. We expect our gross margin may vary from period to period and increase modestly in the long term.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation directly associated with our sales and marketing organization. Other sales and marketing expenses include costs for promotional events to promote our brand, web advertising, trade conferences, and allocated overhead. Sales commissions that are directly related to acquiring customer contracts, as well as associated payroll taxes, are deferred upon execution of a contract with a customer, and subsequently amortized to sales and marketing expense over an estimated period of benefit of four years. We have elected the practical expedient to expense renewal commissions in the period of booking if the period of amortization is one year or less, and we amortize commissions related to renewal contracts that are greater than
one year over the weighted average renewal term. We plan to increase our investment in sales and marketing over the foreseeable future, primarily through increased headcount in our sales and marketing functions and investment in brand- and product-marketing efforts. Although we expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term, we expect that sales and marketing expenses will decline as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation directly associated with our research and development employees and outside services costs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars in the near term as we focus on further developing our platform and infrastructure. Although we expect our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term, we expect that expenses will decline as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation directly associated with our finance, legal and human resources organizations, professional fees for external legal, accounting, and other consulting services, bad debt expense, and allocated overhead. We expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. We also expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance and reporting obligations of reporting companies and increased costs for insurance, investor relations expenses, and professional services. As a result, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future. Although we expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term, we expect that general and administrative expenses will decline as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net consists primarily of income earned on cash equivalents.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of miscellaneous non-operational income and expense, including grant money received from a grant agreement as well as sublease income.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of federal, state and foreign income taxes. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including but not limited to earnings history, projected future outcomes, industry and market trends and the nature of each of the deferred tax assets in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated:
_______________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
In September 2021, we granted RSUs to our employees which will vest based upon the satisfaction of both service-based and liquidity event-based vesting conditions. We recognize stock-based compensation expense associated with these RSUs, using an accelerated attribution method, beginning in November 2021, as the liquidity event-based vesting condition applicable to these RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO in November 2021. We recognized stock-based compensation expense of $5.3 million associated with these RSUs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(2)Includes amortization of acquired intangible assets as follows:
The following table sets forth selected consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $45.2 million, or 44%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the increase in subscription revenue described below.
Subscription revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $43.3 million, or 46%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to net growth with existing customers, as reflected in our net revenue dollar-based retention rate of 118%, and sales to new customers as reflected by the increase in our total customers to 2,350 as of December 31, 2021 compared to 1,710 as of December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue is also due to a $1.1 million reversal of certain sales tax accruals previously recorded as a reduction to revenue. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding sales tax reversal.
Professional services for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1.9 million, or 22%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the amount of professional services engagements sold and the timing of the performance of those services as more customers requested to have services completed in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $7.6 million, or 26%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the increase in subscription cost of revenue described below.
Subscription cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $7.1 million, or 33%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by increased personnel-related costs of $3.4 million, increased payments to contributors of $2.0 million as a result of increased usage of our platform, increased platform and hosting costs of $0.8 million, and to a lesser extent, increased amortization of intangible assets of $0.6 million.
Professional services cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 remained relatively flat as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $31.9 million, or 53%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel-related expenses of $18.2 million due to increased headcount, from 245 as of December 31, 2020 to 360 as of December 31, 2021, to support the growth in our sales force and customer success organization, and partly due to the recognition of $1.8 million in stock-based compensation expense using an accelerated attribution method for RSUs granted prior to our IPO, as the liquidity event-based vesting condition applicable to such RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO in November 2021. The remaining increase in sales and marketing expenses was mainly attributed to an increase in non-personnel costs in demand generation, branding, and product awareness of $6.8 million, as well as an increase in office expenses of $2.7 million and an increase in professional and outside services of $2.4 million to support our sales and marketing team.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $11.9 million, or 43%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expense was primarily attributable to an increase of $8.8 million in personnel-related expenses due to increased headcount for the development of our platform, from 138 as of December 31, 2020 to 191 as of December 31, 2021, and partly due to the recognition of $0.9 million in stock-based compensation expense using an accelerated attribution method for RSUs granted prior to our IPO, as the liquidity event-based vesting condition applicable to such RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO in November 2021. The increase in research and development expense was also due to a $1.9 million increase in office expenses and a $1.7 million increase in professional and outside services to support our research and maintain our platform and infrastructure.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $11.0 million, or 58%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to an increase of $10.2 million in personnel-related expenses due to increased headcount, from 63 as of December 31, 2020 to 77 as of December 31, 2021, to support the growth of our business, and partly due to the recognition of $2.5 million in stock-based compensation expense using an accelerated attribution method for RSUs granted prior to our IPO, as the liquidity event-based vesting condition applicable to such RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO in November 2021 and an incremental stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million recognized in 2021 as a result of an employee stock award modification. The remaining increase in general and administrative expenses was mainly due to a $2.0 million increase in office expenses and a $1.2 million increase in professional and outside services to support our overall business growth. The increase is partially offset by a $3.0 million reversal of sales and use tax accruals including related penalties and interest, previously recognized as general and administrative expense. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding sales tax reversal.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $0.4 million, or 42%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in provision for income taxes was primarily due to a decrease in foreign income tax.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP and calculated billings which is described above, we use the following non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our operating performance and for forecasting purposes: non-GAAP gross profit and gross margin, non-GAAP net loss and net loss margin, and free cash flow. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures may be helpful to investors because they provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance.
Non-GAAP financial measures have limitations in their usefulness to investors and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented under GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures have no standardized meaning prescribed by GAAP and are not prepared under any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. As a result, our non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only. The following tables present certain non-GAAP financial measures for each period presented below:
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Gross Margin
We define non-GAAP gross profit as GAAP gross profit excluding stock-based compensation expense allocated to cost of revenue and amortization of certain acquired intangible assets allocated to cost of revenue. Non-GAAP gross margin is calculated as non-GAAP gross profit divided by total revenue. We expect our non-GAAP gross margin may vary from period to period and increase modestly in the long term as we optimize costs with additional scale.
Non-GAAP Operating Loss and Operating Loss Margin
We define non-GAAP operating loss as operating loss excluding stock-based compensation expense, amortization of certain acquired intangible assets, and reductions to general and administrative expense relating to reversals of sales and use tax accruals and related penalties and interest (as described in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). We use non-GAAP operating loss as a key performance measure because we believe it facilitates operating performance comparisons from period to period by excluding potential differences primarily caused by the impact of stock-based compensation expense, the impact of amortization of intangible assets, and the reversals of prior sales and use tax accruals and related penalties and interest. Non-GAAP operating loss margin is calculated as non-GAAP operating loss divided by total revenue. We use non-GAAP operating loss and non-GAAP operating loss margin in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures to evaluate our financial performance. We plan to continue to invest in growth and expansion, which could impact our non-GAAP operating loss.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash used in operating activities plus cash used for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-used software. We believe that free cash flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors, even if negative, about the amount of cash used in our operations other than that used for investments in property and equipment. We expect to continue to invest in additional headcount as we invest in expanding our operations, which may negatively affect our free cash flow.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $178.4 million and $97.0 million, respectively, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of cash deposited in money market or holding accounts with financial institutions.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through proceeds received from sales of equity securities and payments from our customers. In November 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 10,000,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $14.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $124.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $9.8 million and offering costs of $6.1 million. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 29,914,217 shares of Series F convertible preferred stock for an aggregate amount of $100.0 million. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, we had a revolving line of credit to obtain up to $5.5 million in debt financing. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving line of credit. Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been to fund our operations, invest in research and development, and to purchase investments.
In the short term, we believe that our ability to generate cash and our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient for at least the next 12 months to meet our requirements and plans for cash, including supporting working capital and capital expenditure requirements. In the long term, our ability to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing and research and development efforts, expenses associated with our international expansion, including the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces, any arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, services and technologies, and our ability to obtain equity or debt financing.
The following table summarizes our non-cancelable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Our operating lease obligations relate to our facilities under long-term operating leases, which will expire on varying dates through August 2025. Other contractual obligations relate mainly to third-party cloud infrastructure agreements and online services agreements. The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Contractual obligations that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
We anticipate satisfying our short-term cash requirements, including those set forth in the table above, with our existing cash and cash equivalents, and may satisfy our long-term cash requirements with our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash received from customers or with proceeds from a future equity or debt financing. The sale of additional
equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The occurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. In the event that additional financing is needed from outside sources, we may not be able to raise the necessary capital or raise capital on terms favorable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any commitments or obligations, including contingent obligations, arising from arrangements with unconsolidated entities or persons that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, cash requirements or capital resources.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $41.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to net loss of $50.7 million, partially offset by noncash charges for stock-based compensation of $12.2 million, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $6.8 million, and depreciation and amortization of $2.4 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities decreased cash flows from operations by $12.2 million primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $23.9 million due to increases in subscriptions, an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $13.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $2.6 million, and a decrease in other liabilities of $1.7 million, partially offset by an increase in contract liabilities of $28.1 million from increases in subscriptions, and an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net loss of $34.0 million, partially offset by noncash charges for amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $4.1 million, stock-based compensation of $2.5 million, and depreciation and amortization of $0.9 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities increased cash flows from operations by $12.0 million primarily due to an increase in contract liabilities of $17.1 million from increases in subscriptions, an increase in accrued liabilities of $6.9 million, and an increase in other liabilities of $4.3 million, partially offset by an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $9.0 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $5.1 million due to increases in subscriptions, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $2.1 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to net loss of $19.6 million, partially offset by noncash charges for stock-based compensation of $2.8 million, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $2.1 million, and depreciation and amortization of $0.7 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities increased cash flows from operations by $5.3 million primarily due to an increase in contract liabilities of $13.3 million from increases in subscriptions, an increase in accrued liabilities of $5.0 million, an increase in accounts payable of $0.7 million, and an increase in other liabilities of $0.2 million, partially offset by an increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $6.9 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $6.5 million due to increases in subscriptions, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.4 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to an acquisition of intangible assets for $0.2 million and capital expenditures of $2.7 million to support ongoing operations.
Net cash used in investing activities of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to an acquisition for $8.6 million and capital expenditures of $1.0 million to support ongoing operations.
Net cash used in investing activities of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to purchases of intangible assets of $1.0 million and capital expenditures of $0.5 million to support ongoing operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $125.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to proceeds from our IPO of $124.1 million, net of offering costs and underwriting discounts, and the proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $3.0 million. This was partially offset by the payment of deferred purchase consideration of $1.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $99.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of Series F convertible preferred stock of $99.9 million, and the proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $1.9 million, partially offset by the repayment on our revolving line of credit of $2.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to proceeds from the issuance of Series E convertible preferred stock of $21.9 million, net proceeds of $0.5 million from the drawdown and partial repayment on our revolving line of credit, and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $1.1 million, partially offset by the repurchase of common stock for $0.5 million.
Debt Obligations
In January 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Western Alliance Bank (Western Alliance), which was subsequently amended and restated, and provided us the ability to borrow up to $15.0 million with the requirement that we must maintain unrestricted cash at Western Alliance in an amount equal to at least $15.0 million. Outstanding principal amounts under this credit facility incurred interest on the daily outstanding balance at a per annum rate equal to the greater of 5.50% or prime rate, plus 0.25% (5.75% as of December 31, 2020). The credit facility expired on April 12, 2021.
In June 2021, we entered into a Fifth Loan and Security Modification Agreement with Western Alliance, which provides us the ability to borrow up to $5.5 million, maturing on June 18, 2024 and will accrue interest at a per annum rate equal to the greater of 3.25% and the prime rate as reported in The Wall Street Journal or such other rate of interest publicly announced from time to time by Western Alliance as its prime rate (3.25% as of December 31, 2021). Pursuant to this agreement, we are required to maintain at all times unrestricted cash with Western Alliance in an amount equal to at least $5.5 million.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings pursuant to the above credit facility and were in compliance with the above agreements with Western Alliance.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those accounting policies and estimates that are both the most important to the portrayal of our net assets and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These estimates are developed based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Critical accounting estimates are accounting estimates where the nature of the estimates are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and the impact of the estimates on financial condition or operating performance is material.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers (ASC 606).
We derive our revenues from two sources: (1) subscription fees from customers accessing our platform, and from customers paying for additional support; and (2) professional services and training. Revenue is recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, net of any taxes collected from customers (e.g., sales and other indirect taxes), which are subsequently remitted to government authorities.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of subscription fees from customer agreements to access our platform, as well as additional support services. Our customers do not have the ability to take possession of our software. We recognize revenue for subscription fees and additional support services on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract beginning on the date access to our platform is granted, as the underlying service is a stand-ready performance obligation. Customers may also purchase incremental capacity to our platform, which is an additional stand-ready performance obligation satisfied and recognized as revenue over the remaining term of the applicable subscription. We view our performance obligation as a series of distinct services as the underlying subscription service is made available to the customer on a continuous basis over the contracted period of time, and that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer to the customer, in accordance with ASC 606-10-25-14(b). We have concluded that each distinct service is satisfied over time in accordance with ASC 606-10-25-27(a), specifically, given that the nature of our promise is not the actual delivery of a specified quantity of service but is rather providing a single service over a period of time. Customers who consume their committed usage will be invoiced for overages on a quarterly basis. We recognize the overage fees as variable consideration.
We typically invoice our customers annually. Payment terms generally require that customers pay within 30 days of invoice. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue. We apply the practical expedient in Topic 606 paragraph 10-32-18 and do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component for contracts that are one year or less, and none of our multi-year contracts contain a significant financing component.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenue consists of professional services, such as delivering research studies, training services, and strategy workshops. We recognize revenue from service engagements that occur over a period of time on a proportional performance basis as labor hours are incurred.
Significant Judgments - Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
We regularly enter into contracts with customers that include promises to transfer multiple services. For arrangements with multiple services, we evaluate whether the individual services qualify as distinct performance obligations. In our assessment of whether a service is a distinct performance obligation, we determine whether the customer can benefit from the service on its own or with other readily available resources and whether the service is separately identifiable from other services in the contract. This evaluation requires us to assess the nature of each individual service offering and how the services are provided in the context of the contract, including whether the services are significantly integrated, highly interrelated, or significantly modify each other, which may require judgment based on the facts and circumstances of the contract.
Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations that are considered distinct require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on each performance obligation’s relative standalone selling price (SSP). The SSP is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. In instances where we do not sell a product or service separately, establishing SSP requires significant judgment. We estimate the SSP by considering available information, prioritizing observable inputs such as historical sales, internally approved pricing guidelines and objectives, and the underlying cost of delivering the performance obligation.
Contract Balances
We receive payments from customers based on a billing schedule as established in our customer contracts. Accounts receivable are recorded when we contractually have the right to consideration.
Contract liabilities consist of deferred revenue and customer deposits. Deferred revenue represents billings under noncancellable contracts that have been invoiced in advance of revenue recognition and the balance is recognized as revenue when transfer of control to customers has occurred or services have been provided. Customer deposits consist of
billings for anticipated revenue generating activities in advance of the start of the contractual term or for the portion of a contract term that is subject to cancellation and refund. Revenue is deferred when we have the right to invoice in advance of performance under a customer contract. The current portion of deferred revenue and customer deposits are recognized during the following 12-month period, provided the customers with cancellable contracts do not invoke their termination rights. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our contract liabilities were $91.0 million and $62.8 million, respectively. The amount of revenue recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 that was included in contract liabilities at the beginning of each period was $62.8 million, $45.7 million and $33.0 million, respectively.
Remaining Performance Obligations
The terms of our subscription agreements are primarily annual and, to a lesser extent, multi-year. Our subscription agreements are generally noncancellable. Revenue allocated to remaining performance obligation represents noncancellable contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized and includes deferred revenue and unbilled amounts that will be recognized as revenue in future periods. Unbilled portions of the remaining performance obligation denominated in foreign currencies are revalued each period based on the period-end exchange rates. Cancellable contracted revenue, which includes customer deposits, is not considered a remaining performance obligation. Unbilled portions of the remaining performance obligation are subject to future economic risks including bankruptcies, regulatory changes, and other market factors. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations was $108.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, we expected to recognize the significant majority of our remaining performance obligations as revenue over the subsequent twelve months, and the remainder over twenty-four months. The remaining performance obligations exclude customer deposits and unbilled amounts of cancellable contracted revenue amounting to $6.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
Costs Capitalized to Obtain Revenue Contracts
We capitalize sales commissions and associated payroll taxes paid to internal sales personnel that are incremental costs resulting from obtaining a non-cancelable contract with a customer.
Sales commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a customer contract are amortized on a straight-line basis over an estimated period of benefit of four years, which is typically greater than the contractual terms of the customer contract but reflects the estimated period of benefit. We estimate the period of benefit by taking into consideration the estimated customer life, and the technological life of our platform and related significant features. We have elected the practical expedient to expense renewal commissions in the period of booking if the period of amortization is one year or less, and we recognize renewal commissions over the contract term for renewal contracts greater than one year. Sales commissions on renewal contracts are not considered commensurate with sales commissions on new revenue contracts. Amortization of capitalized contract acquisition costs is included in sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
We periodically review these costs capitalized to obtain revenue contracts to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact the recoverability of the asset. There were no impairment losses recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Business Combination and Valuation of Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
Upon acquiring a business, we measure acquired identifiable tangible and intangible assets, liabilities, and contingent liabilities at their fair values at the date of the acquisition. Goodwill is initially measured at the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date.
The estimation of fair value requires significant judgment and the use of assumptions by management, including estimating future cash flows, selecting discount rates, and selecting valuation methodologies. While we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made have been appropriate, they are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with the business combination as of the acquisition date. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including stock options, restricted stock awards (RSAs), and restricted stock units (RSUs) granted to employees, directors, and non-employees, and stock purchase rights granted under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) to employees, using the fair value recognition and measurement provisions, in accordance with applicable accounting standards, which requires compensation expense for the grant-date fair value of stock-based awards to be recognized over the requisite service period. We account for forfeitures when they occur. We estimate the fair values of each stock option and stock purchase right under the ESPP on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model utilizing the assumptions noted below. The expected term of the stock options is based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding, calculated as the midpoint of the vesting term and the contractual expiration period, as we did not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The expected term for ESPP is the applicable purchase periods within an offering period. The expected stock price volatility for our stock was determined by examining the historical volatilities of our industry peers as we did not have any trading history of our common stock.
The risk-free interest rate was calculated using the average of the published interest rates of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with maturities that approximate the expected term. The dividend yield assumption is zero as we have no history of, nor plans of, dividend payments.
The assumptions used under the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to calculate the estimated fair value of stock options granted to employees are as follows:
Assumptions used in valuing non-employee stock options are generally consistent with those used for employee stock options. The total non-employee stock-based compensation is immaterial.
The following table summarizes the assumptions used to calculate the estimated fair value of stock purchase rights granted under the ESPP for the initial offering period using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model:
We estimate the fair values of each RSA and RSU based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
In September 2021, we granted RSUs which will vest based upon the satisfaction of both a service-based condition and a liquidity event-based condition. The service-based vesting condition for these awards is generally satisfied over four years. The liquidity event-based vesting condition is satisfied upon the occurrence of a qualifying event, which is generally defined as an underwritten initial public offering or a change in control transaction. The fair value of these RSUs is measured based on the fair value of our common stock on the grant date and the related stock-based compensation expense is recognized using an accelerated attribution method from the time it is deemed probable that the liquidity event-based vesting condition will be met through the time the service-based vesting condition has been achieved. We began recognizing stock-based compensation expense for these RSUs in November 2021 when the liquidity event-based vesting condition applicable to these RSUs was satisfied upon the effectiveness of our IPO. As a result of recognizing stock-based compensation expense for these RSUs using the accelerated attribution method, we expect our stock-based compensation expense in 2022 to be higher as compared to 2021.
Prior to our IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock underlying the awards has historically been determined by our board of directors with input from management and third -party valuation specialists, as there was no public market for our common stock. The board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors including: the valuation of comparable companies, our operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of our common stock, transactions in our common stock, and general and industry specific economic outlook, amongst other factors. Subsequent to June 30, 2021 and up to October 2021, we determined the fair value of our common stock in relation to stock-based compensation awards by a linear interpolation between a June 2021 third-party valuation and the midpoint of the preliminary pricing range of our IPO estimated by our board of directors in October 2021. Subsequent to October 2021 and up to November 16, 2021, we determined the fair value of our common stock in relation to stock-based compensation awards by a linear interpolation between the midpoint of the latest preliminary price range of our IPO estimated by our board of directors in November 2021 and the final price of our common stock in the IPO. Following our IPO, we use the quoted closing market price of our common stock as reported on The New York Stock Exchange for the fair value of RSUs, RSAs, stock options and purchase rights under our ESPP.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We intend to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards. Accordingly, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies or that have opted out of using such extended transition period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Summary of Business and Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.