Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section entitled “Selected Financial Data” and our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical technology company focused on developing, manufacturing, and commercializing minimally invasive solutions to meet the distinct uterine healthcare needs of women. We have established a broad product line of commercially available, minimally invasive alternatives to hysterectomy, which are designed to address the most common causes of abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in most uterine anatomies. Our solutions can be used in a variety of medical treatment settings and aim to address the drawbacks associated with alternative treatment methods and to preserve the uterus by avoiding unnecessary hysterectomies.
We offer a broad suite of products for the treatment of structural and non-structural causes of AUB in most uterine anatomies. Our devices are utilized by obstetrician-gynecologists (OB/GYNs) across a variety of medical treatment settings, including hospitals, ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs), and physician offices.
Prior to May 2020, we sold only one product, the Minerva ES Endometrial Ablation System (Minerva ES) for women with AUB attributed to a non-structural cause. In May 2020, we acquired certain assets from Boston Scientific Corporation (BSC), including all rights to the Genesys HTA Endometrial Ablation System (Genesys HTA), Symphion Tissue Removal System (Symphion), and Resectr Tissue Resection (Resectr) product lines. The assets acquired included all future value associated with the developed products and rights of ownership for the products. We did not assume any liabilities associated with BSC’s product activities, except for an immaterial warranty liability for installed Genesys HTA controllers. We expect to be liable for future variable milestone obligations to BSC, in the maximum amount of $15.0 million in total as described in our financial statements and notes based on sales of the BSC products in 2021 and 2022.
We utilize contract manufacturers for a significant portion of our products. This includes all of our controllers and significant subcomponents of our disposable devices. BSC manufactures the Genesys HTA and its ProCerva procedure set at its facility. In connection with the BSC product acquisition, we entered into a supply agreement with BSC relating to the Genesys HTA system and certain of its components. Pursuant to the supply agreement, BSC will supply us with systems and procedure sets until the earlier of March 2022 or such time as we have successfully transferred manufacturing to a third-party manufacturer. The Symphion and Resectr products were previously manufactured for BSC by various third-party manufacturers. We intend to rely on the same manufacturers to supply us with these products and we are in the process of assuming those relationships directly.
We market and sell our products through a direct sales force in the United States. Our target customer base includes approximately 19,000 OB/GYNs practicing in hospitals, ASCs, and physician offices. As December 31, 2021, our commercial team consisted of approximately 90 field-based personnel that call on OB/GYNs in all major U.S. markets. Our sales and marketing programs focus on educating physicians regarding the use of our products and on providing materials to help them educate their patients about our procedures. We also provide online patient-oriented educational materials about AUB and our products and procedures, which patients may use to consider and then discuss treatment options with their physicians.
Since our inception, we have generated significant losses. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of equity securities, debt financing arrangements, and sales of our products. In February, May and November 2019, we raised a total of $21.0 million through the sale and issuance of convertible notes. In May 2020, we raised $15.0 million through the sale and issuance of additional convertible notes. In December 2019, we entered into a Credit Agreement (the Ares Agreement) with Ares Capital Corporation and Ares Direct Finance I LP (collectively, Ares) providing for an aggregate of up to $40.0 million in debt financing, including an initial term loan of $30.0 million (the Ares Loan). We used part of the proceeds from the Ares Loan to repay the principal, interest, and fees due under our previously existing term loan with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB).
On October 8, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the CIBC Agreement) with Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC), which provides for a senior secured term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $40.0 million (the CIBC Loan), the full amount of which was funded at the closing of the CIBC Agreement. Most of the proceeds of the CIBC Loan were used to repay the Company’s entire obligation under its existing loan agreement with Ares. On October 21, 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 6,250,000 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $12.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $75.0 million. We received approximately $69.8 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
In 2021, we generated revenue of $52.1 million, with a gross margin of 58.6% and a net loss of $21.5 million compared to revenue of $37.8 million, with a gross margin of 50.6% and a net loss of $18.3 million in 2020.As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $249.6 million, cash and cash equivalents of $40.6 million and $40.0 million principal outstanding under the CIBC Agreement before debt discount, exit fees and issuance cost.
Factors impacting our performance
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted and that we expect will continue to impact our business and results of operations. These factors include:
Our ability to retain and expand our experienced commercial team and increase its productivity
We have made significant investments in, and will continue to invest in, recruiting, training, and retaining our experienced and specialized direct sales team. Significant education and training are required for our team to achieve the level of technical competency with our products that is expected by clinicians and to gain experience building demand for our products. Upon completion of initial training, our personnel typically require time in the field to grow their network of accounts, build relationships with clinicians and increase their productivity to the levels we expect. We believe successfully training, developing, and retaining additional sales personnel be required to achieve growth. In addition, the loss of any productive sales personnel would have a negative impact on our ability to grow our business.
Physician, patient, and hospital awareness and acceptance of our solutions
In order to grow our business, we will need to continue making significant investments in educating providers, physicians, and patients on the advantages of our products for the treatment of AUB. Our goal is to establish our solutions as the standard of care for AUB. We intend to continue to promote awareness of our products through educating physicians, providers, key opinion leaders, and various medical societies on the proven clinical benefits of our products. In addition, we intend to continue to publish additional clinical data in various industry and scientific journals and to continue presenting at medical conferences. We plan to continue building patient awareness through our direct-to-patient marketing initiatives, which include advertising, social media, and online education. We also intend to continue helping physicians in their outreach to patients and other healthcare providers. These efforts require significant investment by our marketing and sales organization, and vary depending upon the physician’s practice specialization, and personal preferences and geographic location of physicians, surgery centers, and patients.
Integration of our newly acquired products into our existing sales and marketing organization
In May 2020, we entered into a Transition Services Agreement (TSA) with BSC under which we transitioned the operations and activities for sales and marketing, contractual arrangements with third party contract manufacturing relationships, customer service, regulatory and quality affairs, and accounting and finance operations from BSC over the subsequent six months to assume full responsibility for these activities by November 2020. We will continue to transition manufacturing arrangements for internally-manufactured products to new third-party manufacturers over the next 12 months to transfer all FDA licenses to us. Our acquisition of the BSC intrauterine health assets enabled us to offer a broad suite of products for the treatment of non-structural and structural causes of AUB in most uterine anatomies. We believe the following key indicators are contributing to the growth of our business
•new products acquired from BSC expanding our product portfolio;
•cross-selling of Minerva ES into existing BSC accounts;
•cross-selling of the Genesys HTA, Symphion, and Resectr into established Minerva ES accounts;
•a significant increase in physician office accounts with the BSC product acquisition;
•signing agreements with group purchasing organizations (GPOs) and large independent delivery networks (IDNs); and
•hospitals and ASCs reopening to accept patients for elective procedures following the COVID-19 pandemic.
Competition
Our industry is highly competitive and subject to rapid change from the introduction of new products and technologies and the sales and marketing activities of industry participants. Our goal is to establish our solution as the standard of care for AUB. Some of our competitors have competitive advantages, including longer operating histories, significantly greater resources and name recognition, and established relationships with physicians and hospitals that treat patients with AUB. In addition to competing for market share, we also compete against these companies for personnel, including qualified sales and other personnel that are necessary to grow our business. Certain of our competitors may challenge our intellectual property, may develop additional competing or superior technologies and processes and compete more aggressively and sustain that competition over a longer period of time.
Leveraging our manufacturing capacity to further improve our gross margin
With our current operating model and infrastructure, we believe that we have the capacity to significantly increase our manufacturing production. As we grow our revenue and sell more units, our fixed manufacturing costs will be spread over more units, which we believe will reduce our manufacturing costs on a per-unit basis and in turn improve our gross margin. In addition, we intend to continue investing in manufacturing efficiencies in order to reduce our overall manufacturing costs. However, other factors will continue to impact our gross margin such as the cost of materials, inflationary pressure, components and subassemblies, pricing, customer discounts, incentives, support services, geographic sales mix, and potential seasonality.
Investing in research and development to expand our addressable market
We have historically invested and expect to continue to invest in research and development. We intend to continue investing in existing and innovative technologies to further improve our products and clinical outcomes, enhance the patient and provider experience, and broaden the patient population that can be treated with our products. In addition, we are continuing to invest in product enhancements and new features and engineering improvements to our products.
While research and development activities are time-consuming and costly, we believe that a pipeline of product enhancements and new products that improve efficacy, safety, and ease of use is important for supporting increased adoption of our products. In the future, we may seek to acquire or invest in additional businesses, products, or technologies that we believe could complement or enhance our products, enhance our technical capabilities, or otherwise offer growth opportunities, although we currently have no agreements or understandings with respect to any such acquisitions or investments.
Seasonality
We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, revenue seasonality at the end of the year primarily due to the annual cycle around patient medical deductibles and co-payments. We have seen higher procedure volume in the fourth calendar quarter for the past several years as our procedures have an elective element to them, and while the procedures in which our products are used are considered elective by many insurance companies, the procedures are fully reimbursed by virtually all private and government insurance payors.
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
The global COVID-19 pandemic presents significant volatility, uncertainty and risks to us and has had, and continues to have, far reaching impacts on our business, operations, and financial results and condition, directly and indirectly. The access to many hospitals and other customer sites may be or may periodically be, depending on the current COVID-19 infection rates in the applicable location, restricted to essential personnel, which negatively impacts our ability to promote the use of our products with physicians. Additionally, many hospitals and other surgery centers have in the past suspended, and may suspend or continue to suspend in the future, many elective procedures, resulting in a reduced volume of procedures using our products. Our customer behavior is impacted by the prevalence of COVID-19 and changes in the infection rates in the locations where our customers are located.
Quarantines, shelter-in-place and similar government orders have also impacted and may continue to impact, our third-party manufacturers and suppliers, and could in turn adversely impact the availability or cost of materials, which could disrupt our supply chain.
We have taken a variety of steps to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, while attempting to minimize business disruption. Essential staff in manufacturing and limited support functions have continued to work from our Santa Clara headquarters following appropriate hygiene and social distancing protocols. To reduce the risk to our other employees and their families from potential exposure to COVID-19, until recently all other staff in our Santa Clara headquarters were requested to work from home. Certain of these other employees had begun to return to our headquarters full or part-time during the third quarter of 2021, although we are reviewing the impact of COVID-19 on employee safety. We continue to limit non-essential travel to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers.
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and customers and on the markets in which we operate, and will take further actions that we consider prudent to address the COVID-19 pandemic, while ensuring that we can support our customers and continue to develop our products.
We experienced a second wave of slower than expected revenue growth in 2021 when certain state governments responding to a second wave of COVID-19 infection rates, reinstated hospital and ASC closures for elective procedures.
The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us is highly uncertain and subject to change. This impact may result in a material, adverse impact on liquidity, capital resources, supply chain, operations, revenue and may affect third parties on which we rely, and could worsen over time. The extent of the continuing resurgence of COVID-19, the efficacy and extent of distribution of
vaccines, and the impact of mutations of COVID-19 is unpredictable. Most of these developments and factors are outside of our control and could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Key Financial Data
We measure out business using both financial and operating data and use the following metrics and measures to assess the performance of our overall business, including identifying trends affecting our business, formulating business plans, making strategic decisions and assessing operational efficiencies.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
We currently derive substantially all our revenue from the sale of our products to hospitals, ASCs, and physician offices in the United States. We market and sell our products through a direct sales force. Nearly 99.0% of our revenue is point-in-time recognition for single-use (disposable) products and capital equipment. Sale of extended warranties on capital equipment represents less than 1.0% of revenue. Further, more than 98.0% of our total revenue is derived from the sale of single-use (disposable) products and therefore revenue from the sale of capital equipment, associated warranties and miscellaneous revenue is not disaggregated in our financial statements.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs related to materials, components and subassemblies, payroll, and personnel-related expenses for our manufacturing and quality assurance employees, including expenses related to stock-based compensation, manufacturing overhead, charges for excess, obsolete and non-sellable inventories, and royalties. Overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, testing, material procurement, inventory control, operations supervision, and management personnel, an allocation of facilities and information technology expenses, including rent and utilities, and equipment depreciation. We record adjustments to our inventory valuation for estimated excess, obsolete, and non-sellable inventories based on assumptions about future demand, past usage, changes to manufacturing processes, and overall market conditions. We expect cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars as more of our products are sold.
Gross margin
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been, and will continue to be, affected by a variety of factors, including production volumes, the cost of direct materials, product mix, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount, and cost-reduction strategies. We expect our gross margin percentage to increase over the long term to the extent we are successful in increasing our sales volume and are therefore able to leverage our fixed costs. However, we expect our gross margin to fluctuate from period to period based upon the factors described above and seasonality.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing costs, general and administrative costs, and research and development costs. We expect to continue to invest in these activities.
Sales and marketing
We have made significant investments in building our commercial field organization and intend to make significant investments in sales and marketing activities in the future. Sales and marketing expense consist primarily of payroll and personnel-related costs for our sales and marketing personnel, including sales variable compensation, stock-based compensation expense, travel expenses, consulting, direct marketing, customer education, trade shows, and promotional expenses. Sales and marketing expenses also includes expenses related to the amortization of the value of customer relationships acquired from BSC.
We anticipate that our sales and marketing expenses will increase as we strategically invest to expand our business. We expect to hire additional sales personnel and related account management and sales support personnel to capture an increasing amount of our market opportunity. We also expect to continue our brand awareness and targeted marketing campaigns. As we scale our sales and marketing activities, we expect these expenses to increase.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and personnel-related expenses, including salaries, employee benefit costs and stock-based compensation expense, professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting and tax services, allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation, information technology costs and utilities, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses. We also recognize the change in value of the contingent consideration liability due to BSC for the potential future milestone payments in general and administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of being a public company, as a result of increased personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, expanded infrastructure and higher consulting, legal, and accounting services associated with maintaining compliance with stock exchange listing, and requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, investor relations costs, and director and officer insurance premiums associated with being a public company.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses have included clinical studies to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of our products, as well as obtain and retain FDA approval. Current research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our products. These costs consist of engineering and research programs associated with our products under development and improvements to our existing products. These costs include prototype materials, laboratory supplies, regulatory expenses, and an allocation of facility overhead costs. Research and development expenses also include payroll and personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation expense for our research and development employees and consultants and acquisition of technology with no alternative future uses. We also recognize the amortization cost of intangible assets acquired from BSC for developed technology and patents and trademarks in research and development expenses beginning in May 2020. We expense research and development costs as incurred. We intend to continue making significant investments in research and development, clinical studies, and regulatory affairs to support future regulatory submissions for retaining and expanding indications of our products, support continuous improvements to our products, and develop future products that address abnormal uterine bleeding in a minimally invasive manner.
Interest expense and income
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense related to our term loan facilities and convertible notes, including amortization of debt discount and issuance costs. Interest income is predominately derived from investing surplus cash in money market funds.
Other income and expenses
Other income and expenses primarily consist of changes in the fair value of derivative liabilities and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability, gain/loss in loan extinguishment of debt, and bargain purchase gain. Upon exercise or expiration of the warrants, the final fair value of the warrant liability will be reclassified to stockholders’ (equity)/deficit and we will no longer record any related periodic fair value adjustment. We will continue to adjust the derivative liabilities for changes in fair value at each balance sheet date until the convertible notes are converted or repaid, with any changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentage figures):
Revenue
Revenue increased by $14.3 million, or 38.0%, to $52.1 million in 2021, compared to $37.8 million in 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the increase in volume of Genesys HTA and Symphion products. Both products were acquired as part of the set of assets acquired from BSC in May 2020.
For 2021 and 2020, sales of Minerva ES contributed 46.8% and 55.4% of revenue, respectively; sales of the Genesys HTA contributed 31.6% and 28.5% of revenue, respectively; sales of Symphion contributed 20.6% and 15.4% of revenue, respectively; and sales of other products and warranties contributed 1.0% and 0.7% of revenue, respectively.
Revenue was negatively impacted in the latter half of 2020 because elective procedures were restricted at hospitals and ASCs across the country as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These restrictions were lifted in most hospitals and ASCs across the country towards the end of the third quarter of 2020. Revenue growth was slower than expected in 2021 when certain state governments responded to a second wave of COVID infection rates and reinstated hospital and ASC closures for elective procedures.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold increased by $2.9 million, or 15.7%, to $21.6 million in 2021, compared to $18.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in the sales volume of our Genesys HTA and Symphion products. Both products were acquired as part of the set of assets acquired from BSC in May 2020.
Gross margin
Our gross margin increased from 50.6% in 2020 to 58.6% in 2021. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to the sales mix of our product portfolio, as described above. Both products were acquired as part of the set of assets acquired from BSC in May 2020.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $9.2 million, or 40.1%, to $32.2 million in 2021 compared to $23.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $1.7 million increase in intangible amortization expense recorded for customer relationships as a result of the acquisition of BSC’s intrauterine health assets in May 2020, a $3.9 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses due to growth in salesforce, a $0.9 million increase in commission expenses due to an increase in sales volume, a $1.4 million increase in case coverage and travel and entertainment expenses due to increase of in-person sales activities, a $1.0 million increase in marketing costs and website expenses, a $0.2 million increase in recruiting expenses due to increased efforts in expanding the salesforce, a $0.2 million increase in consulting and other services and a $0.2 million increase in use tax expenses related to field assets and insurance expenses, offset by $0.3 million decrease in distribution, customer training, seminar and other expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $14.0 million, or 170.1%, to $22.2 million in 2021, compared to $8.2 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $6.8 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses due to increases in headcount and stock-based compensation expenses, a $3.3 million increase in legal expenses in connection with our patent infringement lawsuit with Hologic, a $1.9 million increase in consulting and other services, a $0.6 million increase in expenses due to the change in value of the contingent consideration liability due to BSC for the milestones, a $0.6 million decrease in common cost allocation, a $1.2 million increase in business and D&O insurance, merchant fees, other tax expenses and dues and subscriptions, offset by a $0.5 million decrease in rent expenses due to the move to our new corporate office in Santa Clara.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $2.0 million, or 59.2%, to $5.3 million in 2021, compared to $3.3 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $1.4 million increase in intangible amortization expense recorded for trademarks and developed technology as a result of the acquisition of BSC’s intrauterine health assets in May 2020, a $0.4 million increase in product development expenses for Genesys HTA and Symphion products, a $0.2 million increase in compensation and personnel related expenses due to an increase in headcount, and stock-based compensation expenses, a $0.1 million increase in consulting and other services, offset by $0.1 million decrease in common cost allocation.
Interest expense and income
Interest expense decreased by $0.4 million, or 3.4%, to $3.6 million in 2021, compared to $3.3 million in 2020, primarily due to conversion of our convertible notes in 2021 in conjunction with the IPO and a lower interest rate on the CIBC loan compared to the Ares Loan. The Ares loan was outstanding until October 2021, when the Company entered into the CIBC loan and repaid the entire obligation under its existing loan agreement with Ares, including the principal, interest, prepayment premium and fees, in a total amount of $35.5 million.
Other income and expenses
Changes in fair value of derivative liabilities increased by $29.7 million, or 355.7%, to $38.0 million of other income in 2021, compared to $8.3 million of other expenses in 2020, primarily due to management’s view on the key assumptions that changed the probabilities of a qualified financing, change of control, non-qualified financing, and all on the change in fair value of $29.7 million.
Additionally, other expense decreased by $0.4 million to $0.4 million in 2021, compared to less than $0.1 million in 2020, primarily due to changes in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability that decreased other expenses by $0.3 million before its conversion to common stock warrants in October 2021.
Further, we recognized $16.9 million loss on extinguishment of convertible notes in 2021 due to the amendment of the 2018 Note Agreements and the 2019 Note Agreements (the Amendment) and $4.4 million loss from Ares loan repayment.
The PPP loan principal and interest amount was forgiven in June 2021, which contributed $3.0 million gain on extinguishment of the PPP loan that we recorded in 2021.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
To provide additional information regarding our financial results, we have disclosed adjusted EBITDA and EBITDA here and elsewhere in this Annual Report. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are key performance measures that our management uses to assess our financial performance and are also used for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors and other interested parties in analyzing our financial performance because they provide a comparable overview of our operations across historical periods. In addition, we believe that providing EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, together with a reconciliation of net loss to each such measure, helps investors make comparisons between our company and other companies that may have different capital structures, different tax rates, and/or different forms of employee compensation.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are used by our management team as an additional measure of our performance for purposes of business decision-making, including managing expenditures, and evaluating potential acquisitions. Period-to-period comparisons of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA help our management identify additional trends in our financial results that may not be shown solely by period-to-period comparisons of net income or income from continuing operations. Each of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA has inherent limitations because of the excluded items, and may not be directly comparable to similarly titled metrics used by other companies.
We calculate EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest expense and income tax benefit. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA by further excluding stock-based compensation expenses, bargain purchase gain, loss on extinguishment of long-term debt and convertible notes, gain on extinguishment of PPP loan, change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability, change in fair value of contingent consideration liability and change in fair value of derivative liabilities. EBITDA margin represents EBITDA as a percentage of revenue. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should be viewed as measures of operating performance that are supplements to, and not substitutes for, operating (income) loss, net (income) loss and other U.S. GAAP measures of income and loss.
The following table provides a reconciliation of these non-GAAP metrics to net loss, which is the nearest GAAP number:
Liquidity and capital resources
Prior to our IPO in October 2021, we financed our operations primarily through private placements of equity securities, debt financing arrangements, and sales of our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $249.6 million, cash and cash equivalents of $40.6 million and $40.0 million outstanding under the CIBC Agreement before debt discount and issuance cost.
Historically, we raised a total of $36 million through the sale and issuance of additional convertible notes. In December 2019, we entered into the Ares Agreement providing for an aggregate of up to $40.0 million in term loans, including an initial $30.0 million term loan. We used part of the proceeds from the Ares Loan to repay the principal, interest, and fees due under the previously existing term loan facility described below. In October 2021, we entered into the CIBC Agreement with CIBC which provides for a senior secured term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $40.0 million. Most of the proceeds of the CIBC Loan were used our entire obligation under its existing loan agreement with Ares, including the principal, interest, prepayment premium and fees, in a total amount of $35.5 million.
Ares credit agreement
On December 30, 2019, we entered into the Ares Agreement that provided for an aggregate of up to $40.0 million in term loans, including an initial $30.0 million term loan. We used a portion of the proceeds from the Ares Loan to repay principal of $5.0 million and fees of $0.4 million due under the outstanding SVB Loan. The Ares Agreement included a two-year interest-only period ending on December 31, 2021, and during such interest-only period, quarterly interest payments were due on the Ares Loan. Quarterly payments of principal of, and interest on, the Ares Loan were payable beginning on December 31, 2021; provided, if we satisfied certain conditions related to an intended sale or merger transaction or received net cash proceeds of at least $10.0 million from certain specified events, in each case before December 31, 2021, then the principal payments would have been deferred until June 2022. In May 2020, we satisfied one of the amortization period extension conditions and the interest-only period was extended to ten quarters. The Ares Loan had a maturity date of December 31, 2022.
Borrowings under the Ares Agreement, including the Ares Loan, bore interest at either the ABR plus 8.5% per annum or the Eurodollar Rate plus 9.5% per annum, as applicable. The ABR equaled the greatest of (a) 3.0%, (b) the prime rate, (c) the federal funds rate plus 0.5% and (d) the three-month Eurodollar Rate plus 1.0%. The Eurodollar Rate equaled the greater of (a) 2.0% and (b) the rate per annum appearing on Bloomberg Professional Service Page BBAM1 offered rate for deposits in U.S. dollars at approximately two business days prior to the first day of such interest period for a three (3) month term; multiplied by the Statutory Reserve Rate. The Statutory Reserve Rate was based on a fraction, the numerator of which is the number one and the denominator of which is the number one minus the applicable reserve percentage for that day.
Payments of interest under the Ares Loan were payable quarterly commencing on March 31, 2020. Through December 31, 2021, we had the option to pay all accrued interest in cash or to pay up to 50.0% of such accrued interest in kind (PIK) by increasing the then-aggregate principal amount of the Ares Loan by the amount of the accrued and unpaid interest in kind. In the event we made such an election, the applicable interest rate would have increased by 0.5%.On each payment date through June 30, 2021, the Company elected
the PIK option, issuing PIK notes totaling $2.9 million. For three months ended September 30, 2021, the Company did not use PIK option and paid all interest in cash. In 2021, the Ares Loan had an annual effective interest rate of 24.9% per year.
Additionally, the Ares Agreement included a prepayment premium on the Ares Loan in an amount equal to the difference, if any, between (x) the principal amount of the prepayment amount multiplied by 1.30 minus (y) the sum of (i) the principal amount of the Ares Loan being prepaid as of the date of such prepayment plus (ii) all interest payments and fees paid on such Ares Loan in cash on or prior to the date of such prepayment (including the exit fee, if applicable).
Furthermore, we were required to pay an exit fee upon the maturity date or the earlier payment (or prepayment) of all remaining balances under the Ares Agreement in an amount ranging from 4.0% to 10.0% of the principal amount of the loans funded under the agreement based on exit fee equity value (as further described in the Ares Agreement). The Ares Agreement also included customary affirmative covenants, restrictive covenants, financial covenants, events of default, and other customary terms and conditions. The financial covenants in the Ares Agreement required us to have revenue for the four consecutive fiscal quarters ending on March 31, 2020, and the last day of each June, September, December, and March thereafter, of not less than the minimum revenue amount specified in the Ares Agreement and maintain a minimum cash and cash equivalents balance of $5.0 million at any time.
In January 2021, we entered into a waiver and amendment to the Ares Agreement providing for, among other things, a waiver of default in connection with our failure to satisfy a covenant relating to delivery of financial statements and a modification of that financial reporting covenant. Additionally, the amendment extended the availability date of the second tranche of funding to June 30, 2021. The amendment was accounted for as a debt modification and no gain or loss was recognized. In March 2021, we entered into a second amendment to the credit agreement, which, among other things, further amended that financial reporting covenant.
In July 2021, we entered into a waiver and amendment to the Ares Agreement providing for, among other things, a waiver of default in connection with our failure to satisfy a covenant relating to delivery of financial statements and a modification of that financial reporting covenant. The timing for delivery of our annual audited financial statements was amended to 210 days from the end of the fiscal year for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amendment also modified the fee due to Ares upon repayment of the loan from a variable amount based on our equity value to a fixed fee of 6.25% of the principal amount of the Loans funded under the Ares Agreement. The amendment was accounted for as a debt modification and no gain or loss was recognized
We were required to make mandatory prepayments of the Ares Loan upon the occurrence of specified prepayment trigger events, including the occurrence of any event of default or the occurrence of a change in control event. Upon the prepayment of all or any of the outstanding principal balance, we were required to pay, in addition to such prepayment, the prepayment premium noted above. As Ares could have exercised the option to require prepayment by us, the prepayment premium is considered to be an embedded derivative which is required to be bifurcated from its host contract and accounted for as a separate financial instrument. The mandatory prepayment derivative liability had a fair value of $4.3 million upon entering into the Ares Agreement, which was accounted for as a debt discount.
On October 8, 2021, most of the proceeds of the CIBC Loan were used to repay the Company’s entire obligation under its existing loan agreement with Ares, including the principal, interest, prepayment premium and fees, in a total amount of $35.5 million.
CIBC
On October 8, 2021, we entered into the CIBC Agreement, which provides for a senior secured term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $40.0 million, the full amount of which was funded at the closing of the CIBC Agreement. Most of the proceeds of the CIBC Loan were used to repay our entire obligation under our existing loan agreement with Ares Capital Corporation, including the principal, interest, prepayment premium and fees, in a total amount of $35.5 million. The remaining proceeds will be used for working capital and general corporate purposes. In connection with issuance of CIBC Agreement, we also entered into a separate Success Fee Agreement with CIBC. In the event of a sale or other disposition by the Company of all or substantially all of its assets, a merger or consolidation, or an initial public offering (a Liquidity Event), before the termination of the agreement, the Company is required to pay a fee to CIBC equal to $0.4 million (Success Fee).
The CIBC Loan provides for 24 months of interest-only payments followed by 36 equal monthly payments of principal, plus accrued and unpaid interest, with the final obligations due and payable in full on October 8, 2026. The CIBC Loan accrues interest at a floating rate equal to 2.50% above the prime rate, and the interest is payable monthly in arrears. We paid CIBC a Success Fee of $0.4 million upon the closing IPO, a certain Liquidity Event defined in the contract.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, we received $3.0 million in connection with our PPP Loan. The PPP Loan bore interest at 1.0% per year on the outstanding principal amount and was scheduled to mature 24 months from the date of the note. No payments were due for the six-month period beginning on the date of the note. Payments of principal and interest are due over the following 18 months. We applied for full forgiveness of the PPP Loan and in June 2021, we received formal notification from the Small Business Administration (SBA) that the Company’s PPP loan and interest had been formally forgiven in the principal amount of $3,000,684 plus interest of $35,091.
Convertible notes
In March and December 2018, we entered into Note Purchase Agreements (the 2018 Note Agreements) with certain investors, for up to $20.0 million and $10.0 million in subordinated secured convertible notes, respectively (collectively, the 2018 Notes). The loans under the 2018 Note Agreements were subordinated to the SVB Loan and collateralized by our assets, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and property and equipment. All loans under the 2018 Note Agreements accrue interest at an annual compound interest rate of 8.0%.
In May and November 2019, we entered into additional Note Purchase Agreements (the 2019 Note Agreements) with certain investors, each for up to $10.5 million in subordinated secured convertible notes, respectively (collectively, the 2019 Notes). With the exception of the date of offering and maturity date, all contractual terms of the 2019 Note Agreements and 2019 Notes are substantially similar to the 2018 Note Agreements and 2018 Notes.
In December 2019, we entered into an amendment to the 2018 Note Agreements and the 2019 Note Agreements (the Amendment), which extended the maturity of the 2018 Notes and 2019 Notes to June 2023. Moreover, the 2018 Notes and 2019 Notes were subordinated to the Ares Loan, and collateralized by assets, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and property and equipment. The Amendment was accounted for as a debt extinguishment, and we recognized a $1.8 million extinguishment gain to additional paid-in capital (APIC), as the transaction was with our stockholders, as well as a $7.7 million loss on extinguishment in the statement of operations.
In May 2020, we entered into another Note Purchase Agreement (the 2020 Note Agreement) with certain investors, for up to $30.0 million in subordinated secured convertible notes, (collectively, the 2020 Notes). The loans under the 2020 Note Agreement were also subordinated to the Ares Loan and collateralized by our assets, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, and property and equipment.
On September 3, 2021, the Company amended the 2018 Note Agreements, 2019 Note Agreements, and 2020 Note Agreement to modify the maturity dates to December 31, 2026 and to add automatic conversion of these convertible notes’ outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of common stock if either (i) the offering price per share of our IPO is greater than $5.61 and the aggregate gross proceeds to the Company from the IPO are greater than $50.0 million or (ii) the Company receives a written request from the holders of at least 66 2/3% of the redeemable convertible preferred stock to convert all outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock to common stock. The Amendment was accounted for as a debt extinguishment, and the Company recognized a $16.9 million extinguishment loss in other income (expense), net in the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
All loans under the 2020 Note Agreement accrue interest at an annual compound interest rate of 8.0%.
We borrowed $29.2 million in 2018, $21.0 million in 2019, and $15.0 million in 2020 under the 2018 Note Purchase Agreements, 2019 Note Purchase Agreements and 2020 Note Purchase Agreement, respectively.
The convertible notes contain embedded features-a Qualified Financing put, Non-Qualified Financing put, and change of control put-that were bifurcated and accounted as a single derivative liability and recorded as a debt discount. Debt discount is reported as a direct deduction to the carrying amount of the convertible notes and amortized using the effective interest rate over the life of the convertible notes as interest expense. The derivative liability is recognized at fair value initially and subsequently measured at fair value with the change in fair value recorded in the statements of operations at each reporting period, and classified as either short-term, or long-term, consistent with their respective host contract.
The outstanding principal amount and all accrued and unpaid interest on the convertible notes automatically converted into shares of Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock, at a price per share equal to $11.31 per share, immediately prior to our IPO.
Upon the conversion of the convertible notes, the fair value of the single derivative liability was measured zero and the change in fair value or the derivative liability has been recorded within Other Income (expenses) in our Statement of Operations in 2021.
Summary statements of cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the periods presented below (in thousands):
Cash flows used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $22.4 million in 2021, primarily attributable to a net loss of $21.5 million, $38.0 million in change in fair value of derivatives liabilities, $21.3 million loss on long-term debt extinguishment, $10.6 million in depreciation and amortization, $6.8 million in stock-based compensation expense, $5.8 million in interest expense from long-term debt and convertible notes, $3.0 million gain on extinguishment of PPP loan, $3.3 million in amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $8.5 million. The net change in our net operating assets and liabilities are mainly driven by the increase in inventory off set by increase in accounts payable. The Company has increased its inventory on hand to be able to respond to an increase in future sales and to reduce the risk of future supply-chain issues.
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.3 million in 2020, primarily attributable to a net loss of $18.3 million, $8.3 million in change in fair value of derivatives liabilities, $7.1 million in depreciation and amortization, $7.0 million in interest expense from long-term debt and convertible notes, $3.3 million in amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $2.9 million. The net changes in our net operating assets and liabilities are mainly driven by the increase in accounts receivables due to growth in business activity, offset by increase in accrued liabilities.
Cash flows used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million in 2021, which was mainly used to purchase property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of $0.5 million used to purchase property and equipment and $15.0 million to acquire net assets as a result of the BSC business combination.
Cash flows provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $46.2 million for 2021, which primarily relates to $69.8 million proceeds from our IPO, net of underwriting discount and commission, $39.0 million proceeds from issuance of convertible notes and lending under term loans, net of lender fees and costs, success fee and debt fees partially offset by $35.4 million related to the Ares loan repayment and $25.0 million payment of delayed purchase obligation and development milestone.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily relates to proceeds of $3.0 million from borrowing under the PPP loan, proceeds of $15.0 million from the issuance of the 2020 Notes, and proceeds of $0.1 million from the issuance of common stock.
Future funding requirements
We expect to incur continued expenditures in the future in support of our commercialization efforts in the United States. In addition, we intend to continue to make investments in clinical studies, development of new products, and other ongoing research and development programs. We expect to incur additional ongoing costs associated with operating as a public company. We may incur additional expenses to expand our commercial organization and efforts, further enhance our research and development efforts, and pursue commercial opportunities outside of the United States.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $40.6 million. Based on our current planned operations, we expect to incur significant operating expenses as we continue to expand product sales and develop and commercialize new products. Our management believes that our operating losses and negative cash flows will continue into the foreseeable future.
We expect our existing capital resources provide sufficient funding to finance our operations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of this Annual Report.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product sales and develop and commercialize new products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the cost, timing and results of our clinical trials and regulatory reviews;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales from our current and potential products;
•the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•the degree of success we experience in commercializing future products;
•the emergence of competing or complementary technologies; and
•the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commitments relate primarily to our CIBC Loan and operating leases. In 2019, we entered into a lease agreement for our corporate headquarters, research and development facilities, and manufacturing and distribution centers, located in Santa Clara, CA. See Note 8, “Debt” and Note 9, “Commitments and contingencies,” to our financial statements for further information.
Critical accounting policies, significant judgments and use of estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our knowledge of current events and actions we may undertake in the future and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our assumptions, estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments, and estimates. For more detail on our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 2 to our audited financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue primarily from the sale of disposable devices and controllers that treat the root causes of abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). We invoice hospitals, ambulatory surgical centers, and physician offices for the disposable products and pay commissions to the sales representatives.
We also provide controllers to customers under evaluation and long-term placement agreements. Under these agreements, we deliver the controller to the customer’s facility without a fee and the customer agrees to purchase disposable products at a stated price over the term of the agreement. We retain title to the controllers. We, in general, do not enforce a minimum purchase requirement under these agreements. Terms range from several months to multiple years and may be extended or terminated upon mutual agreement. These types of agreements include an embedded lease, which is generally an operating lease, for the right to use a controller that is cancellable by either party with 30 days’ notice. We recognize a portion of the revenue allocated to the embedded lease concurrent with the sale of disposable devices. We also offer extended warranty agreements to customers for controller defects, malfunctions, or system failures.
Revenue is recognized when the customer obtains controls of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps as prescribed by ASC 606:
A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into a legally enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the products to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these products, (ii) the contract has commercial substance, and (iii) we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for products that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. We identify performance obligations in contracts with customers, which may include our products and implied promise to provide free controllers. The transaction price is determined based on the amount expected to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the promised product to the customer. We are entitled to the total consideration for the products ordered by customers, net of other transaction price adjustments. Our payment terms to customers are generally net 30 days. Payment terms fall within the one-year guidance for the practical expedient which allows us to forgo adjustment
of the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component. We exclude taxes assessed by governmental authorities on revenue-producing transactions from the measurement of the transaction price.
Assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met, revenue is recognized when control of our products transfers to the customer. For sales in which our sales representative hand-delivers product directly to the hospital or ambulatory surgical center, control transfers to the customer upon this delivery. For sales in which products are shipped, control is transferred either upon shipment of the products to the customer, depending on the shipping terms and conditions. We recognize revenue relating to free controllers concurrent with the sale of disposable devices, as the lease is cancellable by either party with 30 days’ notice. The amounts attributed to the leased controllers are insignificant. As permitted under the practical expedient, we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with an original expected length of one year or less.
We accept product returns at our discretion or if the product is defective as manufactured. Historically, the actual product returns have been insignificant to our financial statements. We elected to treat shipping and handling costs as a fulfillment cost and include them in the cost of goods sold as incurred. In those cases in which we bill shipping and handling costs to customers, we classify the amounts billed within revenue.
Derivative instruments
Embedded derivatives that are required to be bifurcated from their host contract are evaluated and valued separately from the debt instrument. Under the Ares Agreement, upon the occurrence of specified prepayment trigger events, including a default or a change in control, we may be required to make mandatory prepayments of the borrowings. The prepayment premium is considered an embedded derivative, as the holder of the loan may exercise the option to require prepayment by us. The mandatory prepayment derivative liability is recorded at fair value upon entering into the Ares Agreement and is subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date, with any changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations. See Note 8 to our audited financial statements for more information about the Ares Agreement.
The convertible promissory notes (the Notes) contain embedded features, including a Qualified Financing put, Non-Qualified Financing put, and change of control put features that were bifurcated and accounted as derivative liabilities and recorded as a debt discount in 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021 at each issue date. Debt discount is reported as a direct deduction to the carrying amount of the Notes and amortized using the effective interest rate over the life of the Notes as interest expense. The embedded derivative features are recorded at fair value upon entering into the Notes and are subject to remeasurement to fair value at each balance sheet date, with any changes in fair values recognized in the statements of operations. See Note 8 to our audited financial statements for more information about the Notes. The derivative liabilities are classified as either short-term, or long-term, consistent with their respective host contract.
Redeemable convertible preferred stock
We record all shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock at their respective fair values on the dates of issuance, net of issuance costs. The redeemable convertible preferred stock is recorded outside of permanent equity because while it is not mandatorily redeemable, in certain events considered not solely within our control, such as a merger, acquisition, or sale of all or substantially all of our assets (each, a deemed liquidation event), the redeemable convertible preferred stock will become redeemable at the option of the holders of at least a majority of the then outstanding preferred shares.
Redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants
Freestanding preferred stock warrants are accounted for in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (ASC 480) and classified as liabilities on the balance sheet because the underlying preferred stock shares are redeemable upon occurrence of a deemed liquidation event. The warrants are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date with the change in fair value, if any, recognized in other income (expense), net in the statements of operations. We will continue to adjust the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of (i) exercise of the warrants, (ii) conversion into warrants to purchase common stock, or (iii) expiration of the warrants.
Business combination
On May 11, 2020, we completed our acquisition of intrauterine health products consisting of the Genesys HTA, Symphion, and Resectr from BSC. This transaction was accounted for as a business combination. Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method. We recognize the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations on the basis of their fair values at the date of acquisition. Contingent consideration is recorded at fair value as measured on the date of acquisition. The value recorded is based on estimates of future financial projections under various potential scenarios using a Monte Carlo simulation. These cash flow projections are discounted with an appropriate risk-adjusted rate. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability is remeasured at each reporting period with the change in the fair value recorded as a component of operating expenses in the statement of operations
until the underlying contingency is resolved. The estimates used to determine the fair value of the contingent consideration liability are subject to significant judgment and actual results are likely to differ from the amounts originally recorded.
We assess the fair value of assets acquired, including intangible assets, and liabilities assumed using a variety of methods. Each asset acquired and liability assumed is measured at fair value from the perspective of a market participant. The method used to estimate the fair values of intangible assets incorporates significant estimates and assumptions regarding the estimates a market participant would make in order to evaluate an asset, including a market participant’s use of the asset, future cash inflows and outflows, probabilities of success, asset lives, and the appropriate discount rates.
We used the income approach to determine the fair value of developed technology acquired in a business combination. This approach determines fair value by estimating the after-tax cash flows attributable to the respective asset over its useful life and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. We base revenue assumptions on estimates of relevant market sizes, expected market growth rates, expected trends in technology, and expected product introductions by competitors. Developed technology represents patented and unpatented technology and know-how.
We also used the income approach, as described above, to determine the estimated fair value of certain other identifiable intangible assets including customer relationships and trade names. Customer relationships represent established relationships with customers, which provide a ready channel for the sale of additional products and services. Trade names represent acquired company and product names.
Any excess fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired over the purchase price is recorded as bargain purchase gain in the statements of operations at the acquisition closing date. During the measurement period, which extends no later than one year from the acquisition date, we may record certain adjustments to the carrying value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. After the measurement period, all adjustments are recorded in the statements of operations as operating expenses or income. Transaction costs and restructuring costs associated with a business combination are expensed as incurred.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Financial Statements “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for information.
Emerging growth company status
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company,” (EGC) can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an EGC can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for new or revised accounting standards during the period in which we remain an emerging growth company; however, we may adopt certain new or revised accounting standards early.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (ii) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (iv) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our IPO.
JOBS Act accounting election
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of issuers who are required to comply with the effective dates for new or revised accounting standards that are applicable to public companies.