ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
When used in this discussion and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the words or phrases “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “estimate,” “project” or similar expressions are intended to identify “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made, and readers are advised that various factors, including Risk Factors discussed in earlier filings, and other risks could affect our financial performance and could cause our actual results for future periods to differ materially from those anticipated or projected. We do not undertake and specifically disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
General
We are in the business of marketing and distributing safety and security products which are primarily manufactured in the PRC. Our consolidated financial statements detail our sales and other operational results. Accordingly, the following discussion and analysis of the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 relate to the operational results of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries.
In light of shutdowns, quarantines and other restrictions and delays in operations caused by or related to COVID-19 in the PRC and the United States, the Company has experienced delays in shipping and receiving of products. We are not yet able to quantify the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our sales and financial results. While sales increased when compared to sales for the comparable 2021 period, delivery schedules have been delayed and freight costs have increased significantly. Our sales growth has been due primarily to increased sales to electrical distributors reflecting increased housing demand and increased retail sales to large national retailers.
Our overall sales are primarily dependent upon the strength of the U.S. housing market. As stated elsewhere in this report, our USI Electric subsidiary markets our products to the electrical distribution trade (primarily electrical and lighting distributors and manufactured housing companies); every downturn in new home construction and new home sales negatively impacts sales by our USI Electric subsidiary. Our operating results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 continue to be dependent upon the economic conditions of the U.S. housing market.
We further believe that the movement of the smoke and carbon monoxide alarm retail markets toward ten-year sealed alarms to comply with new laws passed in several states will benefit future sales of our line of ten-year sealed battery units, GFCI’s, and other electrical devices. The importation of certain wiring devices, carbon-monoxide alarms, and photo-electric alarms are currently subject to tariffs of 25%.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended March 31, 2022 and 2021
Sales. In fiscal year 2022, our net sales were $19,549,785 compared to sales in the prior year of $17,520,151, an increase of $2,029,634 (11.6%). The increase in sales was primarily due to increased sales to new retail customers reflecting demand attributable to disruptions in the supply chain of those retail customers caused by or related to COVID 19 issues.
Gross Profit. Gross profit percentage is calculated as net sales less cost of goods sold expressed as a percentage of net sales. Our gross profit percentage for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, was 30.9% compared to 32.2% in fiscal 2021. The decrease in 2022 gross margin is attributed to the increase in freight and demurrage charges caused by global supply chain problems.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $5,524,343 in fiscal 2022 from $5,034,380 in fiscal 2021. As a percentage of net sales, these expenses were 28.3% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, and 28.7% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. These expenses decreased as a percentage of net sales as they do not increase in direct proportion to increases in sales. These expenses increased as a dollar amount due primarily due to increases in legal and consulting fees associated with a proposed Merger.
Research and Development. Research and development expense for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, was $438,200. Research and development expense for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, was $471,545. The decrease in overall research and development expense for the 2022 period compared to the 2021 period was due to decreased independent testing of products.
Interest Expense (Net). For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021, the Company incurred net interest expense of $147,840 and $86,841, respectively, related to borrowing costs associated with interest paid on amounts borrowed from our factor and on extended trade payables due to Eyston. The increase in interest expense resulted from increased borrowing from our factor during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, to fund inventory purchases and operating cash requirements.
Income Taxes. For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 our statutory Federal tax rate was 21.0%. The Company has accumulated net operating losses and other income tax credits for which a full valuation allowance has been established. Accordingly, income taxes or deferred income tax benefits indicated by the provision for income taxes as shown on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 varies from the expected statutory rate. Footnote F to the financial statements provides a reconciliation of the amount of tax that would be expected at statutory rates and the amount of tax expense or benefit provided at the effective rate of tax for each fiscal period.
Net (Loss) Income. We reported a net loss of $78,150 for the fiscal year 2022, compared to net income of $268,343 for fiscal 2021, a decrease of $346,493 (129.1%) in net income. The net loss for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, is attributed to decreased gross margins arising from increases in freight, customs, and duty expenditures. In addition, the Company has incurred increased legal and consulting expense associated with a proposed Merger.
Also, contributing to net income for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, is the forgiveness of $221,400 of debt related to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company reported a net loss of $78,150 and net income of $268,343 for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As of March 31, 2022, working capital (computed as the excess of current assets over current liabilities) decreased by $1,112,654 from $5,564,601 on March 31, 2021, to $4,451,947 on March 31, 2022.
Our operating activities used cash of $1,860,051 for the year ended March 31, 2022. Operating activities used cash principally to increase trade accounts receivable and amounts due from factor of $1,506,650, to increase inventories by $1,977,868, a net loss of $78,150, and is partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,669,566, and a decrease in prepaid expenses of $95,357.
Our operating activities provided cash of $1,388,172 for the year ended March 31, 2021. Operating activities provided cash principally from a decrease in inventories of $942,766, an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $751,252, net income of $268,343, plus non-cash depreciation of an operating lease asset of $158,576, and an increase in the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable of $100,000. Operating activities used cash principally from an increase in prepaid expenses of $223,554, a decrease in the operating lease liability of $158,576, an increase in accounts receivable and amounts due from factor of $236,930, less non-cash forgiveness of $221,400 from the Paycheck Protection Program Loan under the CARES Act.
Our investing activities did not provide or use cash during the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, or 2021.
Financing activities provided cash of $2,138,182 reflecting the increase in net borrowing from the Factor. Financing activities used cash of $1,321,362 during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, resulting primarily from the net repayment of amounts due to our Factor.
Our overall sales are primarily dependent upon the strength of the U.S. housing market. As stated elsewhere in this report, our USI Electric subsidiary markets our products to the electrical distribution trade (primarily electrical and lighting distributors and manufactured housing companies); demand in new home construction and new home sales directly impacts sales by our USI Electric subsidiary. Our operating results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 continue to be dependent upon the economic conditions of the U.S. housing market. Management believes that with an improved housing market and sales of our sealed products, the Company will improve profitability.
Management expects our product offerings including sealed battery alarm and ground fault circuit interrupter products will compete on price and functionality with similar products offered by our larger competitors. While we believe there will be market acceptance of our products, we cannot be assured of this. Should our products not achieve the level of acceptance we anticipate, this could have a significant impact on our future operations, and our sales may decline, potentially impacting our ability to continue operating in our current fashion.
Our short-term borrowings to finance operations, trade accounts receivable, and foreign inventory purchases are provided pursuant to the terms of our Factoring Agreement with Merchant Factors Corporation (Merchant or Factor). Borrowings under our Factoring Agreement bear interest at prime plus 2% and are secured by trade accounts receivable and inventory. Advances from Merchant are at the sole discretion of Merchant based on their assessment of the Company’s receivables, inventory and financial condition at the time of each request for an advance. The unused availability of this facility totaled approximately $11,000 on March 31, 2022.
The Company has a history of sales that are insufficient to generate profitable operations and has limited sources of financing. Management’s plan in response to these conditions continues to be to increase sales resulting from the delivery of the Company’s line of sealed battery ionization smoke alarms, carbon monoxide products, and ground fault circuit interrupters. In addition, the Company has a short-term note payable due to its principal supplier (Eyston Company Ltd.) that requires monthly payments beginning April, 2022 of $100,000 per month and until the principal balance of approximately $1,081,000 is repaid. The Company has a long history of working closely with Eyston and believes that forbearance or extension of the payment terms of the short-term note payable can be achieved if required to meet short-term cash flow requirements. Further, the Company’s factor has withheld financing on approximately $560,000 of the Company’s accounts receivable subject to resolution of delivery disputes with a major customer. The resolution of these items has been ongoing and subsequent to March 31, 2022, the customer has been making payments as proof of delivery is confirmed. The Company expects that all amounts in dispute will be resolved satisfactorily and that availability of approximately $560,000 in operating cash flow will become available under the factoring agreement subsequent to March 31, 2022. Finally, the Company has filed requests for refunds of customs payments with US Customs and Border Protection for approximately $300,000 (including interest expected) for overpayments of duty. The Company expects this refund to be available during the second quarter of fiscal year 2023. The Company has seen positive results on this plan as reflected by increased sales of its product offerings. Management expects sales growth to continue going forward. Though no assurances can be given, if management’s plan continues to be successful over the next twelve months, the Company anticipates that it should be able to meet its cash needs for the next twelve months following the issuance date of this report. Cash flows and credit availability is expected to be adequate to fund operations for one year from the issuance date of this report.
Related Party Transactions
Pursuant to its written charter, the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company reviews and approves all transactions with related persons that are required to be disclosed under applicable regulation. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, and 2021, inventory purchases and other company expenses of approximately $1,582,000 and $1,206,000, respectively, were charged to credit card accounts of Harvey B. Grossblatt, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and certain of his immediate family members. The Company subsequently reimbursed these charges in full. Mr. Grossblatt receives travel mileage and other credit card benefits from these charges. The maximum amount outstanding and due to Mr. Grossblatt at any point during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, and 2021 may include amounts submitted for personal expense reimbursement and amounts paid by Mr. Grossblatt for inventory purchases or other company expenses and amounted to approximately $211,000 and $158,000, respectively, and the amount outstanding at March 31, 2022 and 2021 is approximately $44,000 and $51,000, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial statements and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements included as part of this document. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to bad debts, inventories, income taxes, and contingencies and litigation. We base these estimates on historical experiences and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect management’s more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note A to the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty and actual results could differ from these estimates. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, current economic trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. Our critical accounting policies include:
Income Taxes: The Company recognizes a liability or asset for the deferred tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets or liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements. These temporary differences may result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years when the reported amounts of the assets or liabilities are recovered or settled. The deferred tax assets are reviewed periodically for recoverability and a valuation allowance is provided whenever it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. After a review of projected taxable income and the components of the deferred tax asset in accordance with applicable accounting guidance it was determined that it is more likely than not that the tax benefits associated with the remaining components of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This determination was made based on the Company’s history of losses from operations and the uncertainty as to whether the Company will generate sufficient taxable income to use the deferred tax assets prior to their expiration. Accordingly, a valuation allowance was established to fully offset the value of the deferred tax assets. Our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with the deferred tax assets depends primarily upon the timing of future taxable income and the expiration dates of the components of the deferred tax assets. If sufficient future taxable income is generated, we may be able to offset a portion of future tax expenses.
The Company follows ASC 740-10 which provides guidance for tax positions related to the recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return and requires that we recognize in our consolidated financial statements the impact of a tax position, if that position is more likely than not to be sustained upon an examination, based on the technical merits of the position. Interest and penalties, if any, related to income tax matters are recorded as income tax expenses.
Revenue Recognition: The Company’s primary source of revenue is the sale of safety and security products based upon purchase orders or contracts with customers. Revenue is recognized at a point in time once the Company has determined that the customer has obtained control over the product. Control is typically deemed to have been transferred to the customer when the product is shipped or delivered to the customer. Customers may not return, exchange, or refuse acceptance of goods without our approval. Generally, the Company does not grant extended payment terms. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight, after control over a product has transferred to a customer, are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense.
The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for products sold. Revenue is recorded at the transaction price net of estimates of variable consideration. The Company uses the expected value method based on historical data in considering the impact of estimates of variable consideration, which may include trade discounts, allowances, product returns (including rights of return) or warranty replacements. Estimates of variable consideration are included in revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
We have established allowances to cover anticipated doubtful accounts based upon historical experience.
Inventories: Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on the first in/first out method. We evaluate inventories on a quarterly basis and write down inventory that is deemed obsolete or unmarketable in an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated net realizable value based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. We have not created, and are not party to, any special-purpose or off balance sheet entities for the purpose of raising capital, incurring debt or operating parts of our business that are not consolidated into our financial statements and do not have any arrangements or relationships with entities that are not consolidated into our financial statements that are reasonably likely to materially affect our liquidity or the availability of our capital resources.
Concentrations
The Company is primarily a distributor of safety products for use in home and business under both its trade names and private labels for other companies. The Company had no customers in the fiscal year that ended March 31, 2022, that represented greater than 10% of the Company’s net sales. The Company had one customer in the fiscal year that ended March 31, 2022, that represented 13.6% of the Company’s accounts receivable on March 31, 2022. The Company had a different customer during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 that represented 21.9% of the Company’s net sales. The Company acquires all the smoke alarm and carbon monoxide alarm safety products that it sells from Eyston Company, Ltd. Products manufactured for us by Eyston amounted to approximately 83.6% and 77.6% of our purchases for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021, respectively. At March 31, 2022, and 2021, the Company had accounts receivable due from Eyston of $358,958 and $381,401, respectively.
New Accounting Standards
See Note A, Recently issued accounting pronouncements, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently adopted new accounting guidance and new accounting guidance not yet adopted.