Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion includes our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 21, 2020. A discussion of the financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31,2019 is included in Part II., “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021, and is incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation.
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Part I., “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Vapotherm is a global medical technology company focused on the care of patients of all ages suffering from the respiratory distress often associated with complex lung diseases such as COPD, CHF, pneumonia, asthma and COVID-19. Our strategy is to become the world’s preeminent complex lung disease patient management company by combining digital, clinical and device solutions to create a healthcare ecosystem focused on improving the lives of complex lung disease patients while reducing the cost of their care. Our device solutions are focused on High Velocity Therapy, which delivers non-invasive ventilatory support to patients by providing heated, humidified, oxygenated air at high velocities through a small-bore nasal interface, and on closed loop control systems such as our Oxygen Assist Module, designed to automatically maintain SPO2 levels within a specified range for a defined period of time. Our digital solutions are focused on at home patient monitoring, using proprietary algorithms to predict impending respiratory episodes before they occur and coordinate timely intervention, obviating the need for costly hospital admissions and minimizing patient distress. Our clinical solutions include affiliations with leading pulmonologists and other clinicians, offering both in person and virtual care, as well as our own call center staffed by experienced nurses. While these device, digital and clinical solutions function independently, we believe leveraging the three together can create a unique healthcare ecosystem, focused on delivering high quality, efficient respiratory care.
High Velocity Therapy is an advanced form of high flow therapy that is differentiated due to its ability to deliver breathing gases, including oxygen, at a high velocity, for the treatment of spontaneously breathing patients with either Type 1 hypoxic respiratory distress, like that experienced by patients with pneumonia or COVID-19, or Type 2 hypercapnic respiratory distress, like that experienced by patients with COPD. Our Precision Flow systems, which use High Velocity Therapy technology, are clinically validated alternatives to, and address many limitations of, the current standard of care for the treatment of respiratory distress in a hospital setting. Our next generation High Velocity Therapy system, known as HVT 2.0, received 510k clearance from the FDA in 2021 and is currently in limited market release. The HVT 2.0 platform is approved for therapy in multiple settings of care, including the home. As of December 31, 2021, more than 3.3 million patients have been treated with our Precision Flow systems, and we have a global installed base of over 35,200 units, an increase of 22.9% compared to December 31, 2020, and an increase of 112.0 % compared to December 31, 2019.
Our business was significantly transformed during 2020 due to increased demand for our High Velocity Therapy technology for treatment of COVID-19 patients, as evidenced by year over year revenue growth of 161.4% from 2019 to 2020, and a 53.5% compounded annual revenue growth rate from 2019 to 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed to this transformation in at least two primary ways: first, it resulted in increased awareness of the unique efficacy of our High Velocity Therapy for the treatment of COVID-19 patients, and generally, resulting in high global demand for our technology and the concomitant rapid growth of our installed base referred to above. Today, our brand is a recognized and respected name in an ever-increasing number of hospitals around the world. Second, many respiratory distress patients who require ventilatory support are initially treated in a hospital’s ED with the goal of stabilizing these patients with a non-invasive ventilation therapy so their underlying condition can be treated. Our focus on hospital emergency departments as an effective entry point for our products resulted in our systems being in the right place at the right time when the COVID-19 pandemic hit. This exposed a significant number of new physicians to the efficacy of our High Velocity Therapy technology, especially as they were able to see patients moved out of the emergency room and into lower acuity settings in the hospital after receiving our High Velocity Therapy. We expect that increased awareness among physicians of the efficacy of our High Velocity Therapy to treat respiratory distress will result in expanded use of our products to treat all forms of Type 1 and Type 2 respiratory distress in a variety of settings.
In certain countries outside the United States, we currently offer our Oxygen Assist Module, or OAM, which launched in the United Kingdom, select European markets, and Israel in late 2020. The Oxygen Assist Module can be used with most versions of our Precision Flow system as well as the HVT 2.0. The Oxygen Assist Module helps clinicians maintain a patient’s pulse oxygen saturation, or SpO2, within a target SpO2 range over a greater period of time while requiring significantly fewer manual adjustments to the equipment. Maintenance of the prescribed oxygen saturation range may reduce the health risks associated with dosing too much, or too little, oxygen, particularly in neonates. In neonates, these risks include visual or developmental impairment or death.
We sell our Precision Flow systems to hospitals through a direct sales organization in the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany and through distributors in other select countries outside of those countries. Our Oxygen Assist Module is sold through a direct sales organization in the United Kingdom and Germany and through distributors in Europe and the Middle East. We are in the process of seeking FDA approval to market the Oxygen Assist Module in the United States. In addition, we employ field-based clinical educators who focus on medical education and training in the effective use of our products and help facilitate increased adoption and utilization. We focus on physicians, respiratory therapists and nurses who work in acute hospital settings, including the ED and adult, pediatric and neonatal ICUs. Our relationship with these clinicians is particularly important, as it enables our products to follow patients through the care continuum. As of December 31, 2021, we have sold our Precision Flow systems to over 2,200 hospitals across the United States, and in over 40 countries outside of the United States.
Presently, our revenues are derived principally from sales of Precision Flow systems and sales of the single-use disposable vapor transfer cartridges these systems require. We also derive revenue from ancillary products and services related to our Precision Flow systems. Due to demand for our High Velocity Therapy technology during the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020 we generated revenue primarily from sales of our Precision Flow systems. However, historically we have generated revenue primarily from sales of the disposable products utilized with our Precision Flow systems, and in the future, we believe we will generate revenue primarily from the sales of disposable products utilized with our systems. Our revenue grew from $48.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $113.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenue from single-use disposables represented approximately 45.1% and 58.8% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, respectively, and increased 17.5% on a year over year basis. During this time, our international revenue also grew, representing 21.1% of our total revenue in 2020 and 25.7% of our total revenue in 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, we incurred net losses of $51.1 million, $51.5 million, and $59.8 million, respectively.
We believe our anticipated growth will be driven by the following strengths: disruptive High Velocity Therapy technology supported by a compelling body of clinical and economic evidence; the expanded FDA indications we received for our next generation HVT 2.0 platform, enabling use in multiple settings of care; deep expertise in the area of closed loop control, machine learning based respiratory technology, the first example of which is our Oxygen Assist Module; new FDA clearances and/or approvals for our product pipeline, including the Oxygen Assist Module; a recurring revenue model with high visibility on our disposables utilization across a robust global installed base; an expanding digital and clinical footprint we expect will accelerate our strategy to become the world’s preeminent complex lung disease patient management company; dedicated respiratory sales forces in the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany, which we expect to extend to other growing international markets; experienced international distributors; a comprehensive approach to market development with established clinical and digital marketing teams; a robust and growing intellectual property portfolio; and an experienced senior management team and board members with deep industry practice.
On November 13, 2020, we acquired HGE, a company which created a digital disease management solution for ongoing management of chronic respiratory disease. HGE developed a clinical services platform designed to help providers, payors and hospitals improve the quality of life of their COPD patients and reduce their cost of care by remotely monitoring their daily condition and responding early to changes that could signal an impending worsening of their COPD condition (known as an “exacerbation”). COPD exacerbations often result in emergency room visits and hospital admissions. HGE’s platform was built based on clinical protocols and supported by 12 years of research focused on finding a better way to provide care for a geographically and socio-economically diverse COPD patient population. Unlike other disease management solutions, HGE effectively engages both patients and providers on a daily basis. A patient’s symptoms are typically logged daily via a mobile application, quickly establishing a baseline. From there, HGE’s intelligent platform enables clinicians to triage and respond to patients in need with same-day treatment plans that address current symptoms and seek to prevent impending exacerbations. In mid-2021, we re-branded HGE as Vapotherm Access and launched “Vapotherm Access - Post Care” to hospitals, a program dedicated to reducing 30-day readmissions of recently discharged COPD patients. We also launched “Vapotherm Access - 365” to hospitals, providers and payors, extending the 30 days of post care to full year patient monitoring. As part of this initiative, we established a small direct sales force focused exclusively on Vapotherm Access- Post Care and Vapotherm Access - 365. We believe our Vapotherm Access platform can be adapted to address other respiratory conditions and will help us achieve the goal of making our High Velocity Therapy products the standard of care in a variety of clinical settings.
In late 2021, we affiliated with a leading pulmonology practice in Tulsa, Oklahoma known as Pulmonary Care Innovations, PLLC d/b/a RespirCare. RespirCare provides in-person and virtual care to COPD and other respiratory distress patients in Oklahoma (and potentially other states with licensure reciprocity). This affiliation was structured as an acquisition of RespirCare’s management company, PCI, and PCI’s arrangements with RespirCare and its physician shareholder. Our affiliation with RespirCare is an important element of our strategy to become the world’s preeminent complex lung disease patient management company. Operating within established legal safe harbors and applicable regulatory requirements, we may in the future enter into similar arrangements with other participants in the complex lung disease continuum of care.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives, expanding the number of clinical educators internationally along with our international marketing programs and expanding worldwide direct to clinician digital marketing efforts to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospitals. We also expect to continue to make investments in research and development, regulatory affairs, and clinical studies to develop future generations of our High Velocity Therapy products, support regulatory submissions, and demonstrate the clinical efficacy of our new products. In addition, we have continued to make improvements and adjustments to our production capacity in response to high demand for our products and labor shortages, including recently engaging a third-party manufacturer to manufacture and assemble certain of our products at its facility in Tijuana, Mexico and hiring temporary production workers. While these actions put pressure on our gross margins during 2021, we anticipate long-term benefits of these actions. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur net losses for the next several years and we expect to require additional funding, which may include future equity and debt financings.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Our net revenue consists primarily of the sale of products, leases and services.
Product Revenue
We primarily derive our revenue from the sale of our products to hospitals in the United States and United Kingdom and through distributors in select countries outside of the United States. Product sales consist of the following:
•
Capital Revenue - Our capital revenue is derived from the sale of our capital equipment, which consists of the Precision Flow High Velocity technology, Precision Flow Plus, Precision Flow Classic, Precision Flow Heliox, Q50 compressor, HVT 2.0 and the Oxygen Assist Module. Capital equipment sales include a one-year warranty. We offer different options to our hospital customers for acquiring Precision Flow capital units, ranging from the purchase of the Precision Flow capital units with payment in full at the time of purchase, to financed purchases of the Precision Flow capital units, to bundled discounts involving the placement of Precision Flow capital units for use by the customer at no upfront charge in connection with the customer’s ongoing purchase of disposable products.
•
Disposables Revenue - Our disposables revenue is derived from the sale of single-use disposables, nasal interfaces, or cannulas, and adaptors used in conjunction with the Precision Flow capital units.
Lease Revenue
We enter into agreements to lease our capital equipment. We assess and classify these transactions as sales-type or operating leases based on whether the lease transfers ownership of the equipment to the lessee. Equipment included in arrangements which provide for the transfer of title at, or shortly after, the end of the lease term is accounted for as a sales-type lease. We record the present value of future lease payments as a component of prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets and recognize the present value of the lease payments due over the lease term as lease revenue at the inception of the lease. Equipment included in arrangements that do not transfer title are accounted for as operating leases and we recognize lease revenue on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Service Revenue
This revenue consists of service, component part and freight revenue offset by rebates and fees payable to GPOs, IDNs and distributor partners. Service revenue consists of fees associated with routine service of capital units and the sale of extended service contracts and preventative maintenance plans. In addition, we sell small quantities of component parts in the
United States, United Kingdom, and to third-party international service centers who service Precision Flow capital units outside of the United States and United Kingdom. Freight revenue is based upon actual freight costs plus a percentage markup of these costs associated with the shipment of products domestically, and to a lesser extent, internationally.
Our revenue growth during 2021 and 2020 in each case compared to 2019 was driven by increasing revenue from product sales due to our increased installed base of Precision Flow systems and related disposables sales. Our revenue has fluctuated, and we expect it to continue to fluctuate, from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors including seasonality. Prior to COVID-19, we historically experienced seasonality in our first quarter due to the impact of the flu season in the Northern Hemisphere and in our fourth quarter, which coincides with our customers’ fiscal year-end and often drives higher purchases of capital equipment as previously approved but unspent capital budgets typically expire at year-end. We expect COVID-19 to be a permanent part of the respiratory landscape similar to the flu or RSV. While COVID-19 surges are unpredictable, we believe that these surges will be aligned to changes in seasons when individuals spend more time inside. Thus, we believe that COVID-19 will most likely impact the first and fourth quarters of the year. We also expect our future revenue to be dependent upon other factors, such as continued market awareness and acceptance of our High Velocity Therapy technology, our Oxygen Assist Module, and our Vapotherm Access applications and offerings, favorable clinical data and outcomes using our products and services, introduction of new products, and continued international expansion. In addition, we have expanded our sales and marketing infrastructure to help us drive and support revenue growth and we intend to continue this expansion.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs incurred in the production process, including costs of component materials, assembly labor and overhead, warranty, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory, facilities-related expenses, depreciation and freight costs for items sold. Within the overhead costs, we include personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for our procurement, quality control and operations personnel. We provide a one-year warranty on capital equipment, and we establish a reserve for warranty repairs based on historical warranty repair costs incurred. Provisions for warranty obligations, which are included in cost of revenue, are provided for at the time of shipment. Cost of revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been, and we expect it will continue to be, affected by a variety of factors, including manufacturing costs, the average selling prices of our products, the implementation of disposable cost-reduction initiatives, sales volume, inventory obsolescence costs, and seasonality. Sales mix also impacts our gross margins as our average selling prices in the United States are typically higher than for our international sales given our distribution model. In addition, sales of our single-use disposables carry a higher margin than that of our capital equipment sales. Our gross margin may increase over the long-term to the extent our production volumes increase, we launch new products and we continue to experience cost savings derived from supply chain and manufacturing efficiencies.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of product development, engineering, regulatory expenses, testing, laboratory supplies, consulting services and other costs associated with future generations of products using our High Velocity Therapy technology. These expenses include personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for employees in our research and development, regulatory, quality assurance and innovation functions. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we develop future generations of products using our High Velocity Therapy technology and companion products. We expect research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of new product development initiatives.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, commissions and bonuses, travel expenses, benefits and stock-based compensation for employees in our sales and marketing, customer service and medical education functions. Other sales and marketing expenses include consulting services, education, training, tradeshows, digital marketing, medical education and clinical studies. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our sales and marketing organization to both drive and support our future growth initiatives. Over time, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for employees in our finance, administration, human resources, information technology, and legal functions. Other general and administrative expenses include professional services fees, audit fees, travel expenses, insurance costs, change in estimated fair value of contingent consideration and general corporate expenses including facilities-related expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our headcount to support our anticipated future growth and operations as a public company. Over time, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net consists primarily of interest expense related to our credit facilities offset by interest income driven by the interest accruing on cash and cash equivalents. Other expense, net also includes the gain on litigation settlement, loss on the extinguishment of debt, and foreign currency gains or losses arising from transactions denominated in foreign currencies.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The benefit for income taxes represents a benefit for net deferred income tax assets deemed more likely than not to be realized by our United Kingdom subsidiary. We have not recorded any federal or state income tax benefits related to domestic operating losses due to uncertainty about future taxable income.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue decreased $12.4 million, or 9.9%, to $113.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $125.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net revenue was primarily attributable to a $24.5 million decrease in capital equipment revenue and a $1.4 million decrease in capital equipment lease revenue, partially offset by a $9.9 million increase in disposables revenue and a $3.5 million increase in service and other revenue. Capital equipment revenue and capital equipment lease revenue decreased 42.1% and 25.1%, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to decreased sales of our Precision Flow units as a result of decreased COVID-19 related demand. Disposables revenue increased 17.5% during the year December 31, 2021 primarily driven by an increase in the worldwide installed base of Precision Flow units and higher average selling prices. The increase in service and other revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily the result of Vapotherm Access revenue as a result of the HGE acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Revenue information by geography is summarized as follows:
Net revenue generated in the United States decreased $15.0 million, or 15.1%, to $84.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $99.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net revenue generated in our International markets increased $2.6 million, or 9.7%, to $29.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $26.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in United States net revenue was primarily due to a decrease in the number of Precision Flow units sold, partially offset by an increase in single-use disposable sales due to a higher installed base of Precision Flow units. The increase in International net revenue was primarily due to an increase in single-use disposable sales due to a higher installed base of Precision Flow units, partially offset by a decrease in the number of Precision Flow units.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue decreased $2.6 million, or 4.1%, to $60.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $62.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the decrease in sales volumes of our Precision Flow units, partially offset by an increase in sales of disposables due to a higher worldwide installed base of Precision Flow units and higher production and labor costs.
Gross margin decreased to 46.9% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 50.1% during the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit was negatively impacted by temporary production costs associated with higher labor rates for temporary laborers, including travel costs, expedited freight charges, establishing disposables production capacity in Mexico via a third-party manufacturer, and changes in overhead absorption due to lower production volumes in 2021 compared to 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $1.5 million, or 8.6%, to $18.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $17.0 million in during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, research and development expenses increased to 16.3% in 2021 compared to 13.5% in 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was due to increased product development and patent-related costs associated with the development of our future generation High Velocity systems and increased employee-related expenses and stock-based compensation, partially offset by a decrease in prototype costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $4.9 million, or 7.6%, to $60.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $65.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses increased to 53.1% in 2021 compared to 51.7% in 2020. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to decreased sales commissions, partially offset by higher employee-related expenses, increased stock-based compensation, travel expenses and marketing-related costs related to materials, sponsorships and research.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $7.3 million, or 30.5%, to $31.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $24.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses increased to 27.7% in 2021 compared to 19.1% in 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increases in employee-related expenses and stock-based compensation, and increases in legal, insurance, rent, audit and compliance related costs, recruiting, travel and annual event costs, partially offset by a decrease in the estimated fair value of contingent consideration.
Intangible Asset Impairment
We recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to trade names and trademarks no longer in use. There were no impairment charges recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Disposal of Property and Equipment
We recorded a loss on disposal of certain property and equipment totaling $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. There were no such items recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net decreased by $5.8 million, or 68.1%, to $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other expense, net was primarily due a $4.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt during 2020, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in interest expense due to lower average interest rates on outstanding borrowings in each case in 2021 compared to 2020.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The benefit for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $0.1 million and related to a benefit for net deferred income tax assets deemed more likely than not to be realized by our United Kingdom subsidiary. There was no such benefit recorded in 2020. We have not recorded any federal or state income tax benefits related to domestic operating losses due to uncertainty about future taxable income.
Seasonality
Although we did not experience seasonality during 2020 or 2021 due to demand for our High Velocity Therapy technology during the COVID-19 pandemic, prior to COVID-19 we experienced seasonality in our first and fourth quarters. We have experienced higher sales in the fourth quarter as a result of increased sales from hospitals nearing their fiscal year-end that have not fully utilized the funds allocated to purchases of our Precision Flow systems. In the first quarter of each year we have experienced higher sales in direct correlation with the number of patients presenting with respiratory distress due to the severity of the flu season, especially in the Northern Hemisphere. We expect COVID-19 to be a permanent part of the respiratory landscape similar to the flu or RSV. While COVID-19 surges are unpredictable, we believe that these surges will be aligned to changes in seasons when individuals spend more time inside. Thus, we believe that it will most likely impact the first and fourth quarters of the year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $57.3 million, working capital of $66.6 million and an accumulated deficit of $376.7 million. Our primary sources of capital to date have been from sales of our equity securities, sales of our Precision Flow systems and their associated disposables and amounts borrowed under credit facilities. Since inception, we have raised a total of $371.9 million in net proceeds from sales of our equity securities.
We believe that our existing cash resources, including the recent funding under our new credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. If these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity securities or enter into new or restructure existing debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders would experience dilution. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve additional covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any additional debt or equity financing that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all or may be available only in amounts or on terms unacceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products and services.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities was $55.4 million in 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $59.8 million and an increase of $11.5 million in net operating assets, partially offset by $15.9 million in non-cash charges. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization and non-cash lease expense.
The net cash used in operating activities was $39.5 million in 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $51.5 million and an increase of $4.5 million in net operating assets, partially offset by $16.5 million in non-cash charges. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, loss on extinguishment of debt and non-cash lease expense.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2021 and 2020 consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $5.9 million and $9.8 million, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 also included $1.3 million to acquire PCI. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 also included $8.4 million to acquire HGE.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.4 million in 2021 and consisted of proceeds from net borrowings under our credit facility of $1.7 million and proceeds from common stock issuances from stock option exercises and purchases under our employee stock purchase plan of $1.5 million and $1.1 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $99.7 million in 2020 and consisted of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with public and at-the-market offerings of $94.2 million and $9.9 million, respectively and proceeds from common stock issuances in connection with purchases under our employee stock purchase plan and stock option exercises of $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively, partially offset by payments of debt extinguishment costs of $3.8 million, net repayments of $1.1 million under our credit facilities, debt issuance costs of $0.5 million and common stock offering costs of $0.5 million.
Credit Facilities
On October 21, 2020, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “CIBC Loan Agreement”) with Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Innovation Banking (“CIBC”) which provided for a revolving loan facility of $12.0 million (the “CIBC Revolving Facility”) and a term loan facility of $40.0 million (the “CIBC Term Facility” and, together with the Revolving Facility, the “CIBC Facilities”). The proceeds of the CIBC Facilities were used to repay our prior revolving loan facility and term loan facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had $6.6 million and $40.0 million of outstanding borrowings under our CIBC Revolving Facility and CIBC Term Facility, respectively.
The CIBC Revolving Facility was scheduled to mature on October 21, 2022 and could have been renewed on an annual basis thereafter by mutual agreement of us and CIBC. The CIBC Revolving Facility bore interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the Wall Street Journal (“WSJ”) Prime Rate plus 1.0% and was subject to a floor of 3.25%. At December 31, 2021, the interest rate was 4.25%. The outstanding balance under the CIBC Revolving Facility was $6.6 million at December 31, 2021 and there were letters of credit of $0.8 million outstanding at December 31, 2021. Availability under the CIBC Revolving Facility was determined based on eligible receivables reduced by letters of credit outstanding. At December 31, 2021, there were no additional borrowings available under the CIBC Revolving Facility.
The CIBC Term Facility was scheduled to mature on October 21, 2025. Advances under the CIBC Term Facility bore interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the WSJ Prime Rate plus 2.5% and were subject to a floor of 3.25%. At December 31, 2021, the interest rate was 5.75%. The outstanding balance was $40.0 million at December 31, 2021. The CIBC Loan Agreement provided for interest-only payments on the CIBC Term Facility for the first 36 months through October 21, 2023. Thereafter, amortization payments on the CIBC Term Facility were to be payable monthly in 24 equal installments. The CIBC Term Facility could not be prepaid prior to October 21, 2021 without prepaying all of the interest that otherwise would have been payable on the CIBC Term Facility during the period commencing on October 21, 2020 and ending on October 21, 2021, plus a prepayment charge of 2.0%. Thereafter, the CIBC Term Facility could be prepaid in full, subject to a prepayment charge of (i) 2.0%, if such prepayment occurred after October 21, 2021 but on or prior to October 21, 2022, and (ii) 1.0%, if such prepayment occurred after October 21, 2022 but on or prior to October 21, 2023. The CIBC Facilities were secured by a lien on substantially all of our assets, including intellectual property.
The CIBC Loan Agreement contained customary covenants and representations, including, without limitation, a minimum revenue covenant equal to 80% of each year’s annual operating plan (tested on a trailing twelve month basis at the end of each fiscal quarter) and other financial covenants, reporting obligations, and limitations on dispositions, changes in business or ownership, mergers or acquisitions, indebtedness, encumbrances, distributions and investments, transactions with affiliates and capital expenditures.
The events of default under the CIBC Loan Agreement included, without limitation, and subject to customary grace periods, (1) our failure to make any payments of principal or interest under the CIBC Loan Agreement or other loan documents, (2) our breach or default in the performance of any covenant under the CIBC Loan Agreement, (3) the occurrence of a material adverse effect or an event that is reasonably likely to result in a material adverse effect, (4) the existence of an attachment or levy on a material portion of our or our subsidiaries’ funds, (5) our insolvency or bankruptcy, or (6) the occurrence of certain material defaults with respect to any other of our indebtedness in excess of $500,000. If an event of default occurred, CIBC was entitled to take enforcement action, including acceleration of amounts due under the CIBC Loan Agreement. The CIBC Loan Agreement also contained other customary provisions, such as expense reimbursement and confidentiality. CIBC had indemnification rights and the right to assign the CIBC Facilities, subject to customary restrictions.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the CIBC Loan Agreement.
On October 21, 2020, we used $40 million of the CIBC Term Facility, approximately $4.9 million of the CIBC Revolving Facility, and approximately $6.3 million of cash on hand to pay off all obligations owing under the prior revolving loan facility and term loan facility. As a result of such termination, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.2 million, which included the prepayment penalty, exit fees, write-off of the remaining unamortized deferred financing costs, and legal fees, during the fourth quarter of 2020.
On February 18, 2022, we entered into the Loan Agreement with SLR which provides for the Term Loan A Facility of $100.0 million and the Term Loan B Facility of $25.0 million. The Term Loan A Facility was funded to us on the Effective Date. The Term Loan B Facility will be available to us following the Effective Date upon achievement of a certain minimum revenue level as more fully described in the Loan Agreement. The proceeds of Term Loan A Facility were used to repay all indebtedness under the CIBC Loan Agreement.
The Facilities will mature on February 1, 2027. Advances under the Facilities bear interest at a floating rate per annum equal to (a) the greater of (i) 0.10% and (ii) the LIBOR Rate, plus (b) 8.30%. The Loan Agreement provides for interest-only payments for the first forty-eight months following the Effective Date. Thereafter, amortization payments on the Facilities will be payable monthly in twenty-four equal installments; provided that we shall have the option to extend the interest-only period for an additional twelve months upon achievement of a certain minimum revenue level as more fully described in the Loan Agreement. The Facilities are secured by a lien on substantially all of our assets, including intellectual property.
The Loan Agreement contains customary covenants and representations, including, without limitation, a minimum revenue covenant equal to 75% of each month’s forecasted net product revenue (tested on a trailing six month basis at the end of each fiscal month, commencing with the six month period ending on July 31, 2022) and other financial covenants, reporting obligations, and limitations on dispositions, changes in business or ownership, mergers or acquisitions, indebtedness, encumbrances, distributions and investments, transactions with affiliates and capital expenditures.
The events of default under the Loan Agreement include, without limitation, and subject to customary grace periods, (1) our failure to make any payments of principal or interest under the Loan Agreement or other loan documents, (2) our breach or default in the performance of any covenant under the Loan Agreement, (3) the occurrence of a material adverse effect or an event that is reasonably likely to result in a material adverse effect, (4) the existence of an attachment or levy on a material portion of our funds or of our subsidiaries, (5) our insolvency or bankruptcy, or (6) the occurrence of certain material defaults with respect to any other of our indebtedness in excess of $500,000. If an event of default occurs, SLR is entitled to take enforcement action, including acceleration of amounts due under the Loan Agreement.
The Loan Agreement also contains other customary provisions, such as expense reimbursement and confidentiality. SLR has indemnification rights and the right to assign the Facilities, subject to customary restrictions.
On February 18, 2022, we utilized approximately $47.4 million of the Term Loan A Facility to pay off all obligations owing under to pay off all obligations owing under, and to terminate the CIBC Facilities.
At-the-Market Agreement
On December 20, 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sales Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) under which we may offer and sell our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million from time to time through Jefferies as our sales agent. We did not sell any shares of our common stock under the ATM Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021. The ATM Agreement will remain in full force and effect until terminated by either party pursuant to the terms of the agreement or such date that the maximum offering amount has been sold in accordance with the terms of the agreement. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $39.8 million in remaining capacity under this program.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. Information regarding our obligations under contingent consideration, debt, lease and purchase arrangements are provided in the Notes 3, 10 and 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Practices
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that such estimates have been based on reasonable and supportable assumptions and the resulting estimates are reasonable for use in the preparation of the financial statements. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgements and uncertainties, the most important and pervasive accounting policies used and areas most sensitive to material changes from external factors. The critical accounting policies that we believe affect our more significant judgements and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are described in the Notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical accounting estimates that involve a significant level of uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations include the following:
Contingent Consideration
Management is responsible for determining the appropriate valuation model and estimated fair value of contingent consideration. To estimate the fair value, management considers a number of factors, including information provided by a third-party valuation advisor. Contingent consideration liabilities are reported at their estimated fair values based on probability-adjusted present values of the consideration expected to be paid, using significant inputs and estimates. Key assumptions used in these estimates include probability assessments with respect to the likelihood of achieving certain milestones, discount rates consistent with the level of risk of achievement, and volatility rates. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability is remeasured at each reporting period, with changes in the fair value included in current operations. The remeasured liability amount could be significantly different from the amount estimated at the acquisition date, resulting in material charges or credits in future reporting periods. Contingent consideration totaled $9.1 million and $13.2 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in fair value of contingent consideration, recorded within general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of comprehensive loss, for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $1.8 million and was a reduction in fair value and, therefore, a reduction in operating expenses.
Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill represents the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible net assets when accounted for using the purchase method of accounting in a business combination. Goodwill is not amortized but reviewed for impairment. Goodwill is reviewed annually, as of October 1, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the goodwill may not be recoverable. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is a segment or one level below an operating segment (referred to as a component) to which goodwill is assigned when initially recorded. Under U.S. GAAP, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of current events or circumstances would lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of one of our reporting units is greater than its carrying value. If we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying value, no further testing is necessary. However, if we conclude otherwise, then we are required to perform a quantitative impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing the fair value with the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a non-cash impairment charge is recorded in an amount equal to that difference with the loss not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. We have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. For reporting units where we perform the quantitative test, we determine the fair value using a combination of the income approach and the market approach. For a company such as ours, the income and market approaches will generally provide the most reliable indications of fair value because the value of such companies is dependent on their ability to generate earnings. In the income approach, we utilize a discounted cash flow analysis, which involves estimating the expected after-tax cash flows that will be generated by each reporting unit and then discounting those cash flows to present value, reflecting the relevant risks associated with each reporting unit and the time value of money. This approach requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including forecasted revenue growth rates, forecasted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) margins, and discount rates. Our forecasts are based on historical experience, current backlog, expected market demand, and other industry information. In the market approach, we utilize the guideline company method, which involves calculating revenue and EBITDA multiples based on operating data from guideline publicly traded companies. Multiples derived from guideline companies provide an indication of how much a knowledgeable investor in the marketplace would be willing to pay
for a company. These multiples are evaluated and adjusted based on specific characteristics of the reporting units relative to the selected guideline companies and applied to the reporting units' operating data to arrive at an indication of value. Changes in key assumptions utilized in our assessment could significantly impact our fair value calculations which could result in goodwill impairments in future periods.
We compared the fair value of our reporting units to their carrying values as of October 1, 2021 and 2020. Based on our assessment, there was no impairment of goodwill during 2021 or 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.