ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is intended to assist readers in understanding and evaluating the financial condition, changes in financial condition and the results of operations of the Company, consisting of the parent company and its wholly-owned subsidiary, the Bank. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and other financial information contained elsewhere in this report.
Caution About Forward-Looking Statements
In addition to historical information, this report may contain forward-looking statements. For this purpose, any statement, that is not a statement of historical fact may be deemed to be a forward-looking statement. These forward-looking statements may include statements regarding profitability, liquidity, allowance for loan losses, interest rate sensitivity, market risk, growth strategy and financial and other goals. Forward-looking statements often use words such as “believes,” “expects,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “projects,” “contemplates,” “anticipates,” “forecasts,” “intends” or other words of similar meaning. You can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. Forward-looking statements are subject to numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties, and actual results could differ materially from historical results or those anticipated by such statements.
There are many factors that could have a material adverse effect on the operations and future prospects of the Company including, but not limited to:
● changes in assumptions underlying the establishment of allowances for loan losses, and other estimates;
● the risks of changes in interest rates on levels, composition and costs of deposits, loan demand, and the values and liquidity of loan collateral, securities, and interest sensitive assets and liabilities;
● the effects of future economic, business and market conditions;
● legislative and regulatory changes, including the Dodd-Frank Act and other changes in banking, securities, and tax laws and regulations and their application by our regulators, and changes in scope and cost of FDIC insurance and other coverages;
● our inability to maintain our regulatory capital position;
● the Company’s computer systems and infrastructure may be vulnerable to attacks by hackers or breached due to employee error, malfeasance, or other disruptions despite security measures implemented by the Company;
● changes in market conditions, specifically declines in the residential and commercial real estate market, volatility and disruption of the capital and credit markets, soundness of other financial institutions with which we do business;
● risks inherent in making loans such as repayment risks and fluctuating collateral values;
● changes in operations of the Mortgage Company as a result of the activity in the residential real estate market;
● exposure to repurchase loans sold to investors for which borrowers failed to provide full and accurate information on or related to their loan application or for which appraisals have not been acceptable or when the loan was not underwritten in accordance with the loan program specified by the loan investor;
● governmental monetary and fiscal policies;
● changes in accounting policies, rules and practices;
● reliance on our management team, including our ability to attract and retain key personnel;
● competition with other banks and financial institutions, and companies outside of the banking industry, including those companies that have substantially greater access to capital and other resources;
● demand, development and acceptance of new products and services;
● problems with technology utilized by us;
● natural disasters, war, terrorist activities, pandemics, and their effects on economic and business environments in which the Company operates;
● adverse effects due to COVID-19 on the Company and its customers, counterparties, employees, and third-party service providers, and the adverse impacts to our business, financial position, results of operations, and prospects;
● changing trends in customer profiles and behavior; and
● other factors described from time to time in our reports filed with the SEC.
For additional information on factors that could materially influence the forward-looking statements included in this report, see the risk factors in Item 1A - “Risk Factors” in this report. These risks and uncertainties should be considered in evaluating the forward-looking statements contained herein, and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such statements. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which it is made. In addition, past results of operations are not necessarily indicative of future results.
General
The Company’s primary source of earnings is net interest income and income from mortgage banking activities, and its principal market risk exposure is interest rate risk. The Company is not able to predict market interest rate fluctuations and its asset/liability management strategy may not prevent interest rate changes from having a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition.
Although we endeavor to minimize the credit risk inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio, we must necessarily make various assumptions and judgments about the collectability of the loan portfolio based on our experience and evaluation of economic conditions. If such assumptions or judgments prove to be incorrect, the current allowance for loan losses may not be sufficient to cover loan losses and additions to the allowance may be necessary, which would have a negative impact on net income.
Response to COVID-19
We continue to see signs of recovery in both the economy and our customers. All loans that were on deferral as of December 31, 2020 returned to contractual payment terms as of September 30, 2021, and there continued to be no loans on deferral as of December 31, 2021. With the continued uncertainty around the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19, we continue to take the necessary measures to protect the health and wellbeing of our employees and customers. We remain well positioned to weather the economic uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program
Through PPP round one and two our team provided essential funds to over 2,300 businesses and nonprofits and protected more than 28,600 jobs in our community. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $182,373,000 in PPP round one loans and $46,471,000 in PPP round two loans had received SBA approval for forgiveness. PPP loans decreased by $104,073,000, or 76.15%, from December 31, 2020. Our expectations are that most of the remaining PPP loans will receive forgiveness by the end of the first quarter of 2022.
Capital Risk Management
The Bank maintains a strong, well-capitalized position with a common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 14.01%, a Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio of 14.01%, a total risk-based capital ratio of 14.66% and a leverage ratio of 9.86% as of December 31, 2021. The most significant risk to capital because of the COVID-19 pandemic is the risk of default within our loan portfolio
and the potential loan losses as a result of those defaults. The Company has taken several steps to mitigate this risk to our capital by building a diversified loan portfolio over the years to be capable of sustaining through a crisis, working with our customers during this time to defer loan payments, as permitted under the CARES Act, to allow time for economic stabilization, and participating in rounds one and two of the PPP to help provide much needed funds to our borrowers and the community. As of December 31, 2021, credit metrics have improved and all loans that were on deferral have returned to contractual payment terms as a result of improving local and national economic factors. While the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19 virus remain risks to capital, the Company believes the actions we are taking will protect our capital levels.
Results of Operations
The following presents management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition of the Company at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and results of operations for the Company for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Summary
The Company recorded net income of $12,453,000, or $8.48 per fully diluted share, in 2021, compared to net income of $8,554,000, or $5.86 per fully diluted share, in 2020.
Net interest income
Net interest income, which represents the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and interest incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, is the Company’s primary source of earnings. Net interest income can be affected by changes in market interest rates as well as the level and composition of assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity. Net interest spread is the difference between the average rate earned on interest-earning assets and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The net yield on interest-earning assets (“net interest margin”) is calculated by dividing tax equivalent net interest income by average interest-earning assets. Generally, the net interest margin will exceed the net interest spread because a portion of interest-earning assets are funded by various noninterest-bearing sources, principally noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity.
The following are variances of note for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
● NIM expanded by 35 basis points to 3.76% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 3.41% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expansion was driven by the following:
o The yield on average earning assets compressed by four basis points, 4.08% for the year ended December 31, 2021 vs. 4.12% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily because of the impact of the recognition of net deferred income associated with the origination and forgiveness of PPP loans, which was partially offset by the increase in liquid assets.
o The average balance of liquid assets (i.e. interest bearing due from other institutions and investment securities) increased by $45,300,000. The increased level of liquidity was driven by the $104,073,000 reduction in PPP loan balances because of loan forgiveness and the $75,666,000 increase in total deposits during 2021. This increased level of liquidity had a negative 19 basis points impact on net interest margin and will continue to have a negative impact on our net interest margin. However, we believe that through our disciplined risk-based approach to the investment portfolio, deposit pricing, and core loan growth, our balance sheet is well positioned and we will be able to capitalize on the rising rate environment.
o During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Commercial Banking Segment recognized $4,993,000 in PPP fee income, net of deferred costs, through interest income, as a result of normal amortization and the receipt of funds from loans forgiven by the SBA. In addition, the Commercial Banking Segment recognized $1,040,000 in interest income associated with these loans during the year ended December 31, 2021. PPP income of $6,033,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, had a 39 basis points impact on the yield of average earnings assets.
o The cost of interest-bearing liabilities dropped by 51 basis points to 0.54% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 1.05% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of the Commercial Banking Segment’s continued efforts to build low-cost relationship deposits and its disciplined approach to deposit pricing. We were able to decrease the cost of money market deposit accounts by 36 basis points, to 0.26% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 0.62% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and time deposit accounts by 54 basis points, to 1.09% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 1.63% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table illustrates average balances of total interest-earning assets and total interest-bearing liabilities for the periods indicated, showing the average distribution of assets, liabilities, shareholders’ equity and related income, expense and corresponding weighted-average yields and rates (dollars in thousands). The average balances used in these tables and other statistical data were calculated using daily average balances. We have no tax exempt assets for the periods presented.
Average Balance Sheets, Income and Expense, Yields and Rates
Interest income and interest expense are affected by changes in both average interest rates and average volumes of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table analyzes changes in net interest income attributable to changes in the volume of interest-sensitive assets and liabilities compared to changes in interest rates. Nonaccrual loans are included in average loans outstanding. The changes in interest due to both rate and volume have been allocated to changes due to volume and changes due to rate in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the changes in each (dollars in thousands).
Provision for loan losses
The amount of the loan loss provision is determined by an evaluation of the level of loans outstanding, the level of nonperforming loans, historical loan loss experience, delinquency trends, underlying collateral values, the amount of actual losses charged to the reserve in a given period and assessment of present and anticipated economic conditions.
The level of the allowance reflects changes in the size of the portfolio or in any of its components as well as management’s continuing evaluation of industry concentrations, specific credit risks, loan loss experience, current loan portfolio quality, and present economic, political and regulatory conditions. Portions of the allowance may be allocated for specific credits; however, the entire allowance is available for any credit that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off. While management utilizes its best judgment and information available, the ultimate adequacy of the allowance is dependent upon a variety of factors beyond the Company’s control, including the performance of the Company’s loan portfolio, the economy, changes in interest rates and the view of the regulatory authorities toward loan classifications.
The Company recorded a recovery of provision expense of $500,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision for loan losses expense of $950,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The recovery of provision for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulted from a reduction in qualitative factors which was driven by improving economic factors, improved credit metrics, and reductions in loan deferrals. The provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven primarily by an increase in the qualitative factors as a result of the continued economic uncertainty surrounding COVID-19. While the Delta and Omicron variants of the COVID-19 virus remain a risk to credit quality, we believe our current level of allowance for loan losses are adequate to cover incurred losses.
For more financial data and other information about the provision for loan losses refer to section, “Balance Sheet Analysis” under this Item 7 - “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, and Note 4 “Allowance for Loan Losses” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Noninterest income
Noninterest income includes service charges and fees on deposit accounts, fee income related to loan origination, gains and losses on sale of mortgage loans and securities held for sale. The most significant noninterest income item has been mortgage banking income, net of commissions, representing 77% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 79% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● The $279,000 increase in service charges and fees was driven primarily by an increase in interchange fee income as macroeconomic conditions continued to improve and consumer spending picked up during the year ended December 31, 2021.
● The decrease in mortgage banking income, net is a result of decreased loan originations and sales compared to the prior year due to mortgage rates rising slightly during the year ended December 31, 2021, which softened the refinance market; however, the bigger risk to mortgage earnings continues to be the historically low inventory of homes for sale.
● The Company made the decision not to sell any SBA loan guarantee strips after the first quarter of 2020, which resulted in the recognition of $86,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● The increase in other income was driven primarily by the increase in income associated with the cash surrender value of bank owned life insurance.
Noninterest expense
Noninterest expense includes all expenses of the Company with the exception of interest expense on deposits and borrowings, provision for loan losses and income taxes. Some of the primary components of noninterest expense are salaries and benefits, occupancy and equipment costs and professional and outside services. Over the last two years, the most significant noninterest expense item has been salaries and benefits, representing 63% and 62% of noninterest expense in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
● The $1,185,000 increase in salaries and benefits expense was driven primarily by the following:
o The deferral of $1,052,000 in salary and benefits costs during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the deferral of $580,300 during the year ended December 31, 2021, associated with the volume related to the origination of PPP loans during those periods.
o Increased salaries and benefits expenses related to mortgage production.
● Equipment expense increased by $160,000 primarily due to increased investments in technology and in software to support the PPP loan forgiveness process.
● Professional and outside services expenses decreased by $269,000 due to lower expenses associated with data processing.
● Advertising and marketing expense increased by $88,000 as a result of increased marketing efforts during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a reduction in marketing efforts during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
● The increase in foreclosed assets, net expenses was the result of the recognition of a higher gain on sales totaling $175,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gain of $7,800 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
● The loss on debt extinguishment during 2020 was the result of the Company prepaying the $31,000,000 outstanding of its Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta (“FHLB”) advances during the year ended December 31, 2020. This pre-payment resulted in the recognition of approximately $696,000 in prepayment fees. The pre-payment of the advances will save the Company approximately $983,000 in interest expense over the remaining life of those advances, and saved approximately $519,000 in interest expense during 2021.
Income taxes
The Company’s effective tax rate, income tax as a percent of pre-tax income, may vary significantly from the statutory rate due to permanent difference and available tax credits. Income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $3,420,000 and $2,485,000, respectively, resulting in an effective tax rate of 21.5% and 22.5%, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily related to an increase in the permanent deduction associated with the vesting of restricted stock during 2021. The Bank is not subject to Virginia income taxes, and instead is subject to a franchise tax based on bank capital.
The Company has a net deferred tax asset which is included in other assets on the balance sheet. For more financial data and other information about income taxes refer to Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 9 “Income Taxes” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Investment securities
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, all of our investment securities were classified as available for sale.
The following table presents additional information pertaining to the composition of our investment securities portfolio at amortized cost, by maturity (dollars in thousands).
For more financial data and other information about investment securities refer to Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 2 “Investment Securities Available for Sale” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Loans
One of management’s objectives is to improve the quality of the loan portfolio. The Company seeks to achieve this objective by maintaining rigorous underwriting standards coupled with regular evaluation of the creditworthiness of and the designation of lending limits for each borrower. The portfolio strategies include seeking industry, loan type and loan size diversification in order to minimize credit concentration risk. Management also focuses on originating loans in markets with which the Company is familiar.
Approximately 75% of all loans are secured by mortgages on real property located principally in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Approximately 5% of the loan portfolio consists of rehabilitated student loans purchased by the Bank from 2014 to 2017 (see discussion following). The Company’s commercial and industrial loan portfolio represents approximately 19% of all loans. Loans in this category are typically made to individuals and small and medium-sized businesses, and range between $250,000 and $2.5 million. Based on underwriting standards, commercial and industrial loans may be secured in whole or in part by collateral such as liquid assets, accounts receivable, equipment, inventory, and real property. The collateral securing any loan may depend on the type of loan and may vary in value based on market conditions. The remainder of our loan portfolio is in consumer loans which represent less than 1% of the total.
The following tables present the composition of our loan portfolio at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
PPP loans included in commercial and industrial loans in the above table were $32,601,000 and $136,674,000 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
The following table presents the maturity and sensitivity of the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
For more financial data and other information about loans refer to Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 3 “Loans” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Allowance for loan losses
We monitor and maintain an allowance for loan losses to absorb an estimate of probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The following table presents the loan loss experience for the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
For more financial data and other information about loans refer to Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 4 “Allowance for Loan Losses” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Asset quality
The following table summarizes asset quality information at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
(1) All loans 90 days past due and still accruing are rehabilitated student loans which have a 98% guarantee by the DOE.
(2) Loans are net of unearned income and deferred cost.
Nonperforming assets totaled $1,359,000 at December 31, 2021, compared to $1,913,000 at December 31, 2020. Nonperforming assets at December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $1,359,000 in nonaccrual loans, compared to $1,577,000 at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents an analysis of the changes in nonperforming assets for 2021 (in thousands).
Nonperforming restructured loans are included in nonaccrual loans. Until a nonperforming restructured loan has performed in accordance with its restructured terms for a minimum of six months, it will remain on nonaccrual status.
Interest is accrued on outstanding loan principal balances, unless the Company considers collection to be doubtful. Commercial and unsecured consumer loans are designated as nonaccrual when the Company considers collection of expected principal and interest doubtful. Mortgage loans and most other types of consumer loans past due 90 days or more may remain on accrual status if management determines that concern over our ability to collect principal and interest is not significant. When loans are placed in nonaccrual status, previously accrued and unpaid interest is reversed against interest income in the current period and interest is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash is received. Interest
accruals are resumed on such loans only when in the judgment of management, the loans are estimated to be fully collectible as to both principal and interest.
There were no specific allowances associated with the total nonaccrual loans of $1,359,000 and $1,577,000 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, that were considered impaired.
Cumulative interest income that would have been recorded had nonaccrual loans been performing would have been $88,000 and $84,000 for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Student loans totaling $1,961,000 and $2,193,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were past due 90 days or more and interest was still being accrued as principal and interest on such loans have a 98% guarantee by the DOE. The 2% not covered by the DOE guarantee is provided for in the allowance for loan losses.
Deposits
The following table gives the composition of our deposits at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
Total deposits increased by $75,666,000, or 12.86%, from December 31, 2020. Variances of note are as follows:
● Noninterest bearing demand account balances increased $46,499,000 from December 31, 2020, and represented 40.48% of total deposits at December 31, 2021 compared to 37.78% as of December 31, 2020. The increase in noninterest bearing demand accounts is a result of core relationship growth and continued success at converting non-customer PPP loan applicants to customers.
● Low cost relationship deposits (i.e. interest checking, money market, and savings) balances increased $70,496,000, or 26.99%, from December 31, 2020. The increase in these accounts is a result of adding core relationships, continued growth in accounts from non-customer PPP loan applicants and the migration of customer funds from time deposits.
● Time deposits decreased by $41,329,000, or 39.39%, from December 31, 2020. The decrease in time deposits continues to be primarily driven by the migration of customers from time deposits to lower cost deposit products. This decrease continues to allow us to lower our cost of interest-bearing deposits, which decreased 48 basis points to 0.41% as of December 31, 2021, compared to 0.89% as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the average deposits balances and average rate paid for the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
The following table presents the scheduled maturities of time deposits greater than $250,000 (in thousands) which is the maximum FDIC insurance limit.
The variety of deposit accounts that we offer has allowed us to be competitive in obtaining funds and has allowed us to respond with flexibility to, although not to eliminate, the threat of disintermediation (the flow of funds away from depository institutions such as banking institutions into direct investment vehicles such as government and corporate securities). Our ability to attract and retain deposits, and our cost of funds, has been, and is expected to continue to be, significantly affected by money market conditions.
Borrowings
The Company prepaid all $31 million of its outstanding FHLB advances during the year ended December 31, 2020. This pre-payment resulted in the recognition of a loss on debt extinguishment of approximately $696,000. The pre-payment of the advances will save the Company approximately $983,000 in interest expense over the remaining life of those advances, and saved approximately $519,000 in interest expense during 2021.
We utilize borrowings to supplement deposits to address funding or liability duration needs. For more financial data and other information about borrowings refer to Note 8 “Borrowings” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers and to reduce its own exposure to fluctuations in interest rates. For more financial data and other information about loans refer to Note 12 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Capital resources
Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 was $63,401,000, compared to $51,996,000 at December 31, 2020. The $11,405,000 increase in shareholders’ equity during 2021 is primarily due to net income for the year of $12,453,000.
The following table presents the composition of regulatory capital and the capital ratios of the Bank at the dates indicated (dollars in thousands).
For more financial data and other information about capital resources refer to Note 13 “Shareholders’ Equity and Regulatory Matters” and Note 15 “Trust Preferred Securities” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Liquidity
Liquidity represents the ability of a company to convert assets into cash or cash equivalents without significant loss, and the ability to raise additional funds by increasing liabilities. Liquidity management involves monitoring our sources and uses of funds in order to meet our day-to-day cash flow requirements while maximizing profits. Liquidity management is made more complicated because different balance sheet components are subject to varying degrees of management control. For example, the timing of maturities of our investment portfolio is fairly predictable and subject to a high degree of control at the time investment decisions are made. However, net deposit inflows and outflows are far less predictable and are not subject to the same degree of control.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our liquid assets, consisting of cash, cash equivalents and investment securities available for sale, totaled $187,315,000 and $84,295,000, or 25.03% and 11.94% of total assets, respectively. Investment securities traditionally provide a secondary source of liquidity since they can be converted into cash in a timely manner.
Our holdings of liquid assets plus the ability to maintain and expand our deposit base and borrowing capabilities serve as our principal sources of liquidity. We plan to meet our future cash needs through the liquidation of temporary investments,
the generation of deposits, and from additional borrowings. In addition, we will receive cash upon the maturity and sale of loans and the maturity of investment securities. We maintain two federal funds lines of credit with correspondent banks totaling $15 million for which there were no borrowings against at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
We are also a member of the FHLB, from which applications for borrowings can be made. The FHLB requires that securities, qualifying mortgage loans, and stock of the FHLB owned by the Bank be pledged to secure any advances from the FHLB. The unused borrowing capacity currently available from the FHLB at December 31, 2021 was $22.5 million, based on the Bank’s qualifying collateral available to secure any future borrowings. However, we are able to pledge additional collateral to the FHLB in order to increase our available borrowing capacity up to 25% of assets.
Liquidity provides us with the ability to meet normal deposit withdrawals, while also providing for the credit needs of customers. We are committed to maintaining liquidity at a level sufficient to protect depositors, provide for reasonable growth, and fully comply with all regulatory requirements.
At December 31, 2021, we had commitments to originate $126,356,000 of loans. Fixed commitments to incur capital expenditures were less than $100,000 at December 31, 2021. Certificates of deposit scheduled to mature or reprice in the 12-month period ending December 31, 2022 total $41,681,000. We believe that a significant portion of such deposits will remain with us. We further believe that deposit growth, loan repayments and other sources of funds will be adequate to meet our foreseeable short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
An important element of asset/liability management is the monitoring of our sensitivity to interest rate movements. In order to measure the effects of interest rates on our net interest income, management takes into consideration the expected cash flows from the securities and loan portfolios and the expected magnitude of the repricing of specific asset and liability categories. We evaluate interest sensitivity risk and then formulate guidelines to manage this risk based on management’s outlook regarding the economy, forecasted interest rate movements and other business factors. Our goal is to maximize and stabilize the net interest margin by limiting exposure to interest rate changes.
Contractual principal repayments of loans do not necessarily reflect the actual term of our loan portfolio. The average lives of mortgage loans are substantially less than their contractual terms because of loan prepayments and because of enforcement of due-on-sale clauses, which gives us the right to declare a loan immediately due and payable in the event, among other things, the borrower sells the real property subject to the mortgage and the loan is not repaid. In addition, certain borrowers increase their equity in the security property by making payments in excess of those required under the terms of the mortgage.
The sale of fixed rate loans is intended to protect us from precipitous changes in the general level of interest rates. The valuation of adjustable rate mortgage loans is not as directly dependent on the level of interest rates as is the value of fixed rate loans. As with other investments, we regularly monitor the appropriateness of the level of adjustable rate mortgage loans in our portfolio and may decide from time to time to sell such loans and reinvest the proceeds in other adjustable rate investments.
Impact of inflation and changing prices
The Company’s financial statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require the Company to measure financial position and operating results primarily in terms of historical dollars. Changes in the relative value of money due to inflation or recession are generally not considered. The primary effect of inflation on the operations of the Company is reflected in increased operating costs. In management’s opinion, changes in interest rates affect the financial condition of a financial institution to a far greater degree than changes in the inflation rate. While interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation rate. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors that are beyond the control of the Company, including changes in the expected rate of inflation, the influence of general and local economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities.
LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rates
Following the announcement by the U.K.’s Financial Conduct Authority in July 2017 that it will no longer persuade or require banks to submit rates for LIBOR after 2021, central banks and regulators around the world have commissioned working groups to find suitable replacements for Interbank Offered Rates (“IBOR”) and other benchmark rates and to implement financial benchmark reforms more generally. These actions have resulted in uncertainty regarding the use of alternative reference rates (“ARRs”) and could cause disruptions in a variety of markets, as well as adversely impact our business, operations and financial results.
To facilitate an orderly transition from IBORs and other benchmark rates to ARRs, the Company has established a company-wide initiative led by senior management. The objective of this initiative is to identify and assess the Company’s exposure and develop an appropriate action plan to address this exposure prior to transition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
General
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company and the Bank are in accordance with GAAP and conform to general practices within the banking industry. The Company’s financial position and results of operations are affected by management’s application of accounting policies, including estimates, assumptions and judgments made to arrive at the carrying value of assets and liabilities, and amounts reported for revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in the Company’s consolidated financial position and/or results of operations.
The more critical accounting and reporting policies include the Company’s accounting for the allowance for loan losses and income taxes. The Company’s accounting policies are fundamental to understanding the Company’s consolidated financial position and consolidated results of operations. Accordingly, the Company’s significant accounting policies are discussed in detail in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The following is a summary of the Company’s critical accounting policies that are highly dependent on estimates, assumptions, and judgments.
Allowance for loan losses
We monitor and maintain an allowance for loan losses to absorb an estimate of probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. We maintain policies and procedures that address the systems of controls over the following areas of maintenance of the allowance: the systematic methodology used to determine the appropriate level of the allowance to provide assurance they are maintained in accordance with GAAP; the accounting policies for loan charge-offs and recoveries; the assessment and measurement of impairment in the loan portfolio; and the loan grading system.
The allowance reflects management’s best estimate of probable losses within the existing loan portfolio and of the risk inherent in various components of the loan portfolio, including loans identified as impaired as required by Financial Accounting Standards Board Codification Topic 310: Receivables. Loans evaluated individually for impairment include nonperforming loans, such as loans on nonaccrual, loans past due by 90 days or more, restructured loans and other loans selected by management. The evaluations are based upon discounted expected cash flows or collateral valuations. If the evaluation shows that a loan is individually impaired, then a specific reserve is established for the amount of impairment.
Loans are grouped by similar characteristics, including the type of loan, the assigned loan classification and the general collateral type. A loss rate reflecting the expected loss inherent in a group of loans is derived based upon historical net charge-off rates, the predominant collateral type for the group and the terms of the loan. The resulting estimate of losses for groups of loans is adjusted for relevant environmental factors and other conditions of the portfolio of loans and leases, including: borrower and industry concentrations; levels and trends in delinquencies, charge-offs and recoveries; changes
in underwriting standards and risk selection; level of experience, ability and depth of lending management; and national and local economic conditions.
The amounts of estimated impairment for individually evaluated loans and groups of loans are added together for a total estimate of loan losses. This estimate of losses is compared to our allowance for loan losses as of the evaluation date and, if the estimate of losses is greater than the allowance, an additional provision to the allowance would be made. If the estimate of losses is less than the allowance, the degree to which the allowance exceeds the estimate is evaluated to determine whether the allowance falls outside a range of estimates. We recognize the inherent imprecision in estimates of losses due to various uncertainties and variability related to the factors used, and therefore a reasonable range around the estimate of losses is derived and evaluated by management. If different assumptions or conditions were to prevail and it is determined that the allowance is not adequate to absorb the new estimate of probable losses, an additional provision for loan losses would be made, which amount may be material to the financial statements.
Income taxes
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. If current available information raises doubt as to the realization of the deferred tax assets, a valuation allowance may be established. Management considers the determination of this valuation allowance to be a critical accounting policy due to the need to exercise significant judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets, including projections of future taxable income. These judgments and estimates are reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change. A valuation allowance for deferred tax assets may be required if the amounts of taxes recoverable through loss carry forwards decline, or if management projects lower levels of future taxable income.
New accounting standards
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements and their effect on us, see “New Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.