Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of the Company. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing in Item 8 of this Form 10-K “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Executive Summary
Strategic Priorities
Visteon is a global automotive technology company serving the mobility industry, dedicated to creating more enjoyable, connected, and safe driving experiences. Our platforms leverage proven, scalable hardware and software solutions that enable the digital, electric and autonomous evolution of our global automotive customers. The automotive mobility market is expected to grow faster than underlying vehicle production volumes as the vehicle shifts from analog to digital and towards device and cloud connected, electric vehicles, and vehicles with more advanced safety features.
The Company has laid out the following strategic priorities:
•Technology Innovation - The Company is an established global leader in cockpit electronics and is positioned to provide solutions as the industry transitions to the next generation automotive cockpit experience. The cockpit is becoming fully digital, connected, automated, learning, and voice enabled. Visteon's broad portfolio of cockpit electronics technology, the industry's first wireless battery management system, and the development of the DriveCore™ advanced safety platform positions Visteon to support these macro trends in the automotive industry.
•Long-Term Growth - The Company has continued to win business at a rate that exceeds current sales levels by demonstrating product quality, technical and development capability, new product innovation, reliability, timeliness, product design, manufacturing capability, and flexibility, as well as overall customer service.
•Enhance Shareholder Returns While Maintaining a Strong Balance Sheet - The Company has returned approximately $3.3 billion to shareholders since 2015. In addition, the Company has continued to maintain a strong balance sheet to withstand near-term industry volatility while providing a foundation for future growth and shareholder returns.
Financial Results
The pie charts below highlight the sales breakdown for Visteon for the year ended December 31, 2021.
*Regional sales are based on the geographic region where sale originates and not where customer is located (excludes inter-regional eliminations).
Global Automotive Market Conditions and Production Levels
The automotive industry has been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing semiconductor shortage. Throughout 2020, demand for semiconductors changed significantly as a result of the pandemic. Automotive demand dropped sharply in the first half of 2020 due to COVID-related shutdowns. At the same time, demand for consumer electronics increased due to work from home and the proliferation of connected devices. In the second half of 2020, automotive production recovered faster than expected resulting in demand for 200-millimeter wafers exceeding supply and setting the stage for a tight supply environment in 2021.
In the first half of 2021, semiconductor supply was further impacted by a winter storm in Texas and a fire at the facility of a semiconductor supplier in Japan. In addition, COVID outbreaks in the middle of 2021 in Southeast Asia caused several back-end processing facilities that perform assembly and test of semiconductors to be negatively impacted.
Industry vehicle volumes are expected to increase in 2022 due to strong consumer demand and historically low inventory levels at auto dealerships. However, vehicle production volumes will continue to be negatively impacted due to on-going shortages of semiconductors. The magnitude of the impact on the financial statements and results of operations and cash flows will depend on the evolution of the semiconductor supply shortage, related plant production schedules, and supply chain impacts.
Company Highlights
Visteon continued to focus on execution throughout 2021, building a foundation of sustainable growth, margin expansion, and cash flow generation. To address the near-term challenges created from the worldwide semiconductor and supply chain shortages, Visteon implemented a series of proactive initiatives aimed at increasing product availability for our customers while minimizing the impact of incremental costs to the business.
Early in 2021, Visteon set up a cross-functional task force which implemented several actions including the purchase of semiconductors through brokers and distributors, expedited logistics, and engineering redesigns while leading calls with customers and suppliers to minimizing manufacturing downtime. In addition, Visteon worked with our customers to pass along the elevated costs caused by semiconductor shortages.
As a result of these actions, Visteon reported sales of $2,773 million, a year-over-year increase of 7% when excluding the positive impact from currency. This represents a continued out-performance compared to industry and customer production volumes. Adjusted EBITDA was $228 million, or 8.2% of sales. Visteon continued to build the foundation for sustainable growth launching 43 new products during 2021 including the industry's first wireless battery management system ("BMS"). Visteon's next-generation products continue to be featured on our customer's key vehicles and platforms. Additionally, Visteon was awarded $5.1 billion in new business wins with strong performance in all product categories. Wins included our newly introduced MicroZone display product, multiple SmartCore™ domain wins with lifetime revenue in excess of $1 billion, discrete cluster wins of more than $2 billion, and an additional battery management system win, representing Visteon's third BMS customer.
In addition, Visteon developed a proprietary app store, debuted at CES in January 2022. The AllGo branded App Store offers native applications as well as the ability to download popular mobility apps. This solution provides the opportunity for developers to create new and OEM-proprietary applications.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year ended December 31, 2020
The Company's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Net Sales and Cost of Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $2,773 million, which represents an increase of $225 million compared with 2020. Favorable volumes and net new business increased net sales by $185 million. Customer pricing increased net sales by $8 million, primarily due to customer recoveries. Favorable currency increased net sales by $52 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Brazilian real, and Chinese renminbi. Other cost performance, primarily related to design changes, reduced sales by $20 million.
Cost of sales increased $216 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared with 2020. Volume, mix and net new business increased cost of sales by $168 million. Foreign currency increased cost of sales by $41 million, primarily
attributable to the euro, Brazilian real, and Chinese renminbi. Net engineering costs, excluding currency, decreased cost of sales by $20 million. Unfavorable cost performance, design changes and other increased cost of sales by $27 million primarily due supply chain and material cost impacts associated with the worldwide semiconductor supply shortage and the non-recurrence of certain 2020 temporary austerity measures.
A summary of net engineering costs is shown below:
Gross engineering costs relate to forward model program development and advanced engineering activities and exclude contractually reimbursable engineering costs. Net engineering costs of $191 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, including the impacts of currency, were $10 million lower than the same period of 2020. This decrease is primarily related to the benefits of previously announced restructuring actions and ongoing cost reduction efforts, partially offset by the reclassification of expenses in 2021 related to program management from selling, general, and administrative to align with the Company's optimized structure.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $175 million, or 6.3% of net sales, and $193 million, or 7.6% of net sales, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased due to the reclassification of expenses in 2021 related to program management to gross engineering costs to align with the Company's optimized structure and restructuring savings, partially offset by the non-recurrence of 2020 temporary austerity measures.
Restructuring and Impairment
During 2021, the Company approved various global restructuring actions impacting engineering, administrative, and manufacturing functions primarily in South America and Europe to improve efficiency and rationalize the Company's footprint. The Company recorded $4 million of restructuring expense for cash severance, and termination costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to these programs.
During 2020, the Company approved various restructuring programs impacting engineering, administrative, and manufacturing functions to improve efficiency and rationalize the Company’s footprint. The Company recorded $1 million and $76 million of restructuring expense for cash severance, retention, and termination costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively related to these programs.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company identified an impairment of certain long-lived assets in Brazil due to rising costs and deteriorating business conditions. As a result, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $9 million to write-down property and equipment to its fair value as of December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $8 million, representing a decrease of $3 million as compared to 2020. The decrease is primarily due to 2020 interest expense related to borrowings on the Company's $400 million revolving credit facility.
Equity in Net Income of Non-Consolidated Affiliates
Equity in net income of non-consolidated affiliates was $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of the following:
During 2020, the Company transferred a portion of the benefit obligation related to its defined benefit U.S. pension plan to a third-party issuer. The transaction met the criteria for settlement accounting, and accordingly the Company recognized a $5 million pension settlement charge in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company's provision for income taxes was $31 million for year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3 million when compared with 2020. The increase in tax expense reflects $7 million attributable to changes in the year-over-year mix of earnings and differing tax rates between jurisdictions which reflects the overall increase in earnings in jurisdictions where the Company is profitable and withholding taxes, as well as $3 million related to the year-over-year impact of various tax law changes primarily in India and uncertain tax positions. The increases described above were partially offset by the non-recurrence of $7 million related to the reassessment of the valuation allowances in connection with the realization of deferred tax assets in Germany and Brazil. Other changes in the Company’s deferred tax asset valuation allowances did not materially impact net tax expense during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Visteon
Net income attributable to Visteon was $41 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss of $56 million for 2020. The increase of $97 million is primarily related to an increase in gross margin of $9 million, decrease in selling, general, and administrative expense of $18 million, and a decrease in restructuring expense of $71 million. Other one time changes include a 2021 impairment which reduced net income by $9 million partially offset by the non-recurrence of a 2020 pension settlement charge of $5 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $228 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $36 million when compared with Adjusted EBITDA of $192 million for 2020. Favorable volumes and mix increased Adjusted EBITDA by $17 million. Foreign currency increased Adjusted EBITDA by $7 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Brazilian real, and Chinese renminbi. Increased costs, primarily due to supply chain and material cost impacts associated with the worldwide semiconductor supply shortage, partially offset by customer recoveries, decreased Adjusted EBITDA by $13 million. Lower warranty expense and net engineering costs, excluding currency, increased Adjusted EBITDA by $5 million and $20 million, respectively.
The reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to Visteon for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year ended December 31, 2019
The Company's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Net Sales and Cost of Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $2,548 million, which represents a decrease of $397 million compared with 2019. Unfavorable volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, and mix, partially offset by net new business, decreased net sales by $318 million. Customer pricing decreased net sales by $58 million. Unfavorable currency decreased net sales by $13 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Indian rupee. Other cost performance, primarily related to design changes, reduced sales by $8 million.
Cost of sales decreased $318 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared with 2019. Lower volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by unfavorable product mix, decreased cost of sales by $128 million. Engineering costs, excluding currency, decreased cost of sales by $93 million. Foreign currency decreased cost of sales by $5 million primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Indian rupee, Brazilian real, and Bulgarian lev. Favorable cost performance including material design, usage, and economics decreased cost of sales by $92 million.
A summary of net engineering costs is shown below:
Gross engineering includes program development costs and advanced engineering activities, excluding contractually reimbursable engineering costs. Net engineering costs of $201 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, including the impacts of currency, were $99 million lower than 2019, primarily related to short-term and long-term cost reduction initiatives including the benefits of previously announced restructuring actions implemented to optimize the structure while supporting future growth.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $193 million, or 7.6% of net sales, and $221 million, or 7.5% of net sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $28 million is primarily related to temporary austerity measures in 2020, other cost reduction initiatives, and the impacts of previously announced restructuring actions.
Restructuring Expense
Restructuring actions initiated during 2020 include the following:
•In January, the Company approved a plan primarily related to European engineering and administrative functions to improve the Company’s efficiency and rationalize its footprint. The Company incurred $26 million of net restructuring expense for cash severance, retention, and termination costs related to this plan.
•In March, the Company approved a global restructuring plan impacting engineering, administrative and manufacturing functions to improve the Company’s efficiency and rationalize its footprint. The Company incurred $16 million of net restructuring expense for cash severance, retention, and termination costs related to this plan.
•In September, the Company approved a plan to respond to COVID-19 impacts while at the same time improving efficiency and rationalizing the Company’s footprint. The Company has incurred $32 million of net restructuring expense related to this plan.
•In December, the Company approved a plan related to engineering, administrative, and manufacturing functions in Asia to improve the Company's efficiency and rationalize its footprints. The Company has incurred $2 million in restructuring costs relation to this plan.
During 2019, the Company recorded approximately $4 million of net restructuring expenses related to end of life of certain products and the optimization of certain operations.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $11 million, representing an increase of $2 million as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to the first quarter 2020 borrowing of $400 million under the Company's revolving credit facility. The Company fully repaid the amount borrowed during the third quarter of 2020 following stronger than expected industry recovery and improved Company performance.
Equity in Net Income of Non-Consolidated Affiliates
Equity in net income of non-consolidated affiliates was $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of the following:
During 2020, the Company transferred a portion of the benefit obligation related to its defined benefit U.S. pension plan to a third-party issuer. The transaction met the criteria for settlement accounting, and accordingly the Company recognized a $5 million pension settlement charge in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company's provision for income taxes was $28 million for year ended December 31, 2020, a $4 million increase when compared with 2019. The increase in tax expense reflects the reassessment of the 2020 valuation allowances in connection with the realization of deferred tax assets in Germany and Brazil, as well as the non-recurrence of a 2019 discrete income tax valuation allowance release in Germany, resulting in an increase in income tax expense of $19 million. Other changes in the Company’s deferred tax asset valuation allowances did not materially impact net tax expense during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. The increases described above were partially offset by approximately $15 million decrease in income tax expense primarily due to changes in the mix of earnings and differing tax rates between jurisdictions which reflects the overall decrease in earnings in jurisdictions where the Company is profitable and withholding taxes.
Discontinued Operations
During 2019, the Company recorded a $1 million charge for legal expenses related to former employees at a closed plant in Brazil.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Visteon
Net loss attributable to Visteon was $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $70 million for 2019. The decrease of $126 million is related to a decrease in gross margin of $79 million, higher restructuring expense of $72 million, and higher provision for income taxes of $4 million. These decreases were partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expense of $28 million, and lower other income, net of $1 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $192 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $42 million when compared with Adjusted EBITDA of $234 million for 2019. Unfavorable volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, and mix reduced Adjusted EBITDA by $190 million. Foreign currency decreased Adjusted EBITDA by $7 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Japanese yen, partially offset by the Mexican peso and Bulgarian lev. Lower net engineering costs, excluding currency, increased Adjusted EBITDA by $93 million. Favorable cost performance of $128 million, including material, design, and usage economics, lower manufacturing costs, lower selling and general and administrative expenses more than offset annual customer pricing of $58 million.
The reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to Visteon for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Liquidity
Overview
The Company's primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, existing cash balances, and borrowings under available credit facilities. As we continue to evaluate ongoing supply chain impacts associated with the semiconductor supply shortage and other supply chain impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company believes funds generated from these sources will continue to sufficiently sustain ongoing operations and support investment in differentiating technologies. The Company will continue to closely monitor its available liquidity and maintain access to additional liquidity to weather these challenging conditions. The Company's intra-year needs are normally impacted by seasonal effects in the industry, such as mid-year shutdowns, the ramp-up of new model production, and year-end shutdowns at key customers. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related semiconductor supply shortage may exacerbate the intra-year requirements.
A substantial portion of the Company's cash flows from operations are generated by operations located outside of the United States. Accordingly, the Company utilizes a combination of cash repatriation strategies, including dividends and distributions, royalties, and other intercompany arrangements to provide the funds necessary to meet obligations globally. The Company’s ability to access funds from its subsidiaries is subject to, among other things, customary regulatory and statutory requirements and contractual arrangements including joint venture agreements and local credit facilities. Moreover, repatriation efforts may be modified by the Company according to prevailing circumstances.
On March 19, 2020, the Company borrowed the entire $400 million amount available under the revolving credit facility. On September 24, 2020, the Company fully repaid the amount borrowed under the Revolving Credit Facility following stronger than expected industry recovery and improved Company performance in the third quarter of 2020.
Access to additional capital through the debt or equity markets is influenced by the Company's credit ratings. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s corporate credit rating is Ba3 and BB- by Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, respectively. See Note 11, "Debt" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a comprehensive discussion of the Company's debt facilities. Incremental funding requirements of the Company's consolidated foreign entities are primarily accommodated by intercompany cash pooling structures. Affiliate working capital lines, which are utilized by the Company's consolidated joint ventures, had availability of $168 million and the Company had $400 million of available credit under the revolving credit facility, as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Balances
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total cash and equivalents of $455 million, including $3 million of restricted cash. Cash balances totaling $338 million were located in jurisdictions outside of the United States, of which approximately $135 million is considered permanently reinvested for funding ongoing operations outside of the U.S. If such permanently reinvested funds were repatriated to the U.S., no U.S. federal taxes would be imposed on the distribution of such foreign earnings due to U.S. tax reform enacted in December 2017, but the Company would be required to accrue additional tax expense, primarily related to foreign withholding taxes.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash contributions to the Company's U.S. defined benefit pension plans were $12 million and $8 million related to its non-U.S. employee retirement plans. Contributions related to certain non-U.S. plans of approximately $2 million have been deferred until 2024 due to COVID-19 relief measures. Additionally, the Company expects to make contributions to its non-US defined benefit pension plans of $4 million during 2022.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $34 million related to restructuring activities. Additional discussion regarding the Company's restructuring activities is provided in Note 4, "Restructuring Activities" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The Company has committed to make investments totaling $15 million in two entities principally focused on the automotive sector pursuant to limited partnership agreements. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has contributed $9 million toward the aggregate investment commitments. As a limited partner in each entity, the Company will periodically make capital contributions toward this total commitment amount.
Purchase Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has contractual purchase obligations of approximately $71 million through 2024.
Leases
The Company has operating leases primarily for corporate offices, technical and engineering centers, customer centers, vehicles, and certain equipment with future lease obligations ranging from 2022 to 2033. Additional discussion regarding the Company's restructuring activities is provided in Note 9, "Leases" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Taxes
The Company may be required to make significant cash outlays related to its unrecognized tax benefits, including interest and penalties. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had unrecognized tax benefits, including interest and penalties, that would be expected to result in a cash outlay of $8 million. Given the number of years, jurisdictions and positions subject to examination, the Company is unable to estimate the period of cash settlement, if any, with the respective taxing authorities. For further information related to the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits, see Note 14, “Income Taxes,” to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
The Company generated $58 million of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $168 million during 2020 representing a $110 million decrease.
Lower cash flow from operating activities is primarily due to lower working capital outflows partially offset by increased net income. Working capital out flows of $178 million are primarily related to higher inventory levels resulting from the worldwide semiconductor supply shortage and increased accounts receivable due to higher volume and higher than anticipated customer receipts during December 2020 of $40 million. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by higher net income of $98 million and dividends received from non-consolidated affiliates of $18 million.
The Company generated $168 million of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $183 million during 2019, representing a $15 million decrease in cash provided from operations. Favorable changes in accounts receivable, partially attributable to $40 million of higher than anticipated customer receipts during the final month of 2020, were more than offset by unfavorable changes in inventory and accounts payable balances resulting in lower trade working capital of $17 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by lower cash tax payments, higher net recoveries of reimbursable taxes and higher net proceeds received from customers to fund the Company's pre-production design, engineering and tooling costs necessary to support current and future programs.
Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $63 million, as compared to $98 million in 2020, representing a decrease of $35 million. The decrease is primarily due to lower cash paid for capital expenditures of $34 million.
Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $98 million, as compared to $128 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $30 million. This decrease is primarily due to lower capital expenditures of $38 million partially offset by lower loan repayments received from a non-consolidated affiliate of $9 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $29 million, as compared to $58 million for 2020, representing a decrease of $29 million. The decrease is primarily due to 2020 share repurchases of $16 million and debt repayments of $37 million partially offset by higher dividends paid to non-controlling interests of $28 million.
Net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $58 million, as compared to $49 million for 2019, representing an increase of $9 million. Higher net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 is primarily attributable to an increase in short-term debt repayment of $18 million partially offset by lower stock 2020 stock repurchases of $4 million and lower dividends paid to non-controlling interests of $2 million.
Debt and Capital Structure
See "Liquidity" above and also see Note 11, "Debt" and Note 15, "Stockholders' Equity and Non-controlling Interests" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Fair Value Measurements
See Note 17, "Fair Value Measurements" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s significant accounting policies have been disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes under Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. Certain policies relate to estimates that involve matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and different estimates or changes to an estimate could have a material impact on the reported financial position, changes in financial condition or results of operations. Such critical estimates are discussed below. For these, materially different amounts could be reported under varied conditions and assumptions. Other
items in the Company's consolidated financial statements require estimation, however, in our judgment, they are not as critical as those discussed below.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
The Company monitors long-lived assets for impairment indicators on an ongoing basis. If an impairment indicator exists, the Company will test the long-lived asset group for recoverability by comparing the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the long-lived assets compared to the related net book values. If the net book value of the asset group exceeds the undiscounted cash flows, the asset group is written down to its fair value and an impairment loss recognized. Fair value is determined using appraisals, management estimates or discounted cash flow calculations.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recorded an impairment of certain long-lived assets in Brazil due to rising costs and deteriorating business conditions. As a result, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $9 million to write-down property and equipment to its fair value as of December 31, 2021. The Company did not record impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 4, "Restructuring and Impairment” in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is measured based on the transaction price and the quantity of parts specified in a contract with a customer. Discrete price adjustments may occur during the vehicle production period in order for the Company to remain competitive with market prices or based on changes in product specifications. Some of these price adjustments are non-routine in nature and require estimation. In the event the Company concludes that a portion of the revenue for a given part may vary from the purchase order, the Company records consideration at the most likely amount to which the Company expects to be entitled based on historical experience and input from customer negotiations. See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Product Warranty and Recall
The Company accrues for warranty obligations for products sold based on management estimates, with support from the Company’s sales, engineering, quality, and legal functions, of the amount that eventually will be required to settle such obligations. This accrual is based on several factors including contractual arrangements, past experience, current claims, production changes, industry developments, and various other considerations. The Company accrues for product recall claims related to potential financial participation in customer actions to provide remedies as a result of actual or threatened regulatory or court actions or the Company’s determination of the potential for such actions. The Company's accrual for recall claims is based on specific facts and circumstances underlying individual claims with support from the Company’s engineering, quality, and legal functions. Amounts accrued are based upon management’s best estimate of the amount that will ultimately be required to settle such claims. See Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Restructuring
The Company accrues costs in connection with its restructuring of the engineering, administration, and manufacturing organizations. These accruals include estimates primarily related to employee headcount, local statutory benefits, and other employee termination costs. Actual costs may vary from these estimates. These accruals are reviewed on a quarterly basis and changes to restructuring actions are appropriately recognized when identified. See Note 4, “Restructuring and Impairments” in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Pension Plans
Certain Company employees participate in defined benefit pension plans or retirement/termination indemnity plans. The Company has approximately $177 million in unfunded net pension liabilities as of December 31, 2021, of which approximately $136 million and $41 million are attributable to U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans, respectively. The determination of the Company’s obligations and expense for its pension plans is dependent on assumptions set by the Company used by actuaries in calculating such amounts. Assumptions are described in Note 12, “Employee Benefit Plans” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which are incorporated herein by reference, including the discount rate, expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, and rate of increase in compensation.
Actual results that differ from assumptions used are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, accordingly, generally affect recognized expense in future periods. Therefore, assumptions used to calculate benefit obligations as of the annual measurement date directly impact the expense to be recognized in future periods. The primary assumptions affecting the Company’s accounting for employee benefits, as of December 31, 2021, are as follows:
Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets
The expected long-term rate of return is used to calculate net periodic pension cost. The required use of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets may result in recognized returns that are greater or less than the actual returns on those plan assets in any given year. Over time the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is designed to approximate actual returns. The expected long-term rate of return for pension assets has been estimated based on various inputs, including historical returns for the different asset classes held by the Company’s trusts and its asset allocation, as well as inputs from internal and external sources regarding expected capital market returns, inflation, and other variables.
The Company has set the long-term rates of return assumptions for its 2022 pension expense which range from 2.0% to 7.0% outside the U.S. and 6.23% in the U.S.
Discount rate
The Company uses the spot rate method to estimate the service and interest components of net periodic benefit cost for pension benefits for its U.S. and certain non-U.S. plans. The Company has elected to utilize an approach that discounts individual expected cash flows underlying interest and service costs using the applicable spot rates derived from the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash flows. The discount rate assumption is based on market rates for a hypothetical portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds rated Aa or better with maturities closely matched to the timing of projected benefit payments for each plan at its annual measurement date.
While the Company believes that these assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience or significant changes in these assumptions may materially affect the Company’s pension benefit obligations and its future expense. The following table illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions for Company sponsored U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans on its 2021 funded status and 2022 pretax pension expense.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s worldwide provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and valuation allowances recorded against the Company’s net deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In the event our operating performance improves or deteriorates in a filing jurisdiction or entity, future assessments could conclude a smaller or larger valuation allowance will be needed. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may be materially different from the current estimate.
In the ordinary course of the Company’s business, there are many transactions and calculations where the final tax determination is uncertain. The Company is regularly audited by tax authorities. Where appropriate, the Company accrues for contingencies related to income tax risks and non-income tax risks. See Note 14, "Income Taxes" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company uses fair value measurements in the preparation of its financial statements, utilizing various inputs including those that can be readily observable, indirectly observable or are unobservable. The Company utilizes market-based data and valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs. Additionally, the Company applies assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability, including assumptions about risk. See Note 17, "Fair Value Measurements" and Note 7, "Property and Equipment" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company's consolidated financial statements under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained or incorporated in this Annual Report on Form 10-K which are not statements of historical fact constitute “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”). Forward-looking statements give current expectations or forecasts of future events. Words such as “anticipate”, “expect”, “intend”, “plan”, “believe”, “seek”, “estimate” and other words and terms of similar meaning in connection with discussions of future operating or financial performance signify forward-looking statements. These statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and estimates, which are subject to risks and uncertainties including those discussed in Item 1A under the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Accordingly, undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements. Also, these forward-looking statements represent the Company’s estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Form 10-K. The Company does not intend to update any of these forward-looking statements to reflect circumstances or events that occur after the statement is made and qualifies all of its forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
You should understand that various factors, in addition to those discussed elsewhere in this document, could affect the Company’s future results and could cause results to differ materially from those expressed in such forward-looking statements, including:
•Significant or prolonged shortage of critical components from Visteon’s suppliers including, but not limited to semiconductors and those components from suppliers who are sole or primary sources.
•Continued and future impacts of the coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic on the Visteon’s financial condition and business operations including global supply chain disruptions, market downturns, reduced consumer demand, and new government actions or restrictions.
•Significant changes in the competitive environment in the major markets where Visteon procures materials, components, or supplies or where its products are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
•Visteon’s ability to satisfy its future capital and liquidity requirements; Visteon’s ability to access the credit and capital markets at the times and in the amounts needed and on terms acceptable to Visteon; Visteon’s ability to comply with covenants applicable to it; and the continuation of acceptable supplier payment terms.
•Visteon’s ability to access funds generated by its foreign subsidiaries and joint ventures on a timely and cost-effective basis.
•Changes in the operations (including products, product planning and part sourcing), financial condition, results of operations, or market share of Visteon’s customers.
•Changes in vehicle production volume of Visteon’s customers in the markets where it operates.
•Increases in commodity costs or disruptions in the supply of commodities, including resins, copper, fuel, and natural gas.
•Visteon’s ability to generate cost savings to offset or exceed agreed-upon price reductions or price reductions to win additional business and, in general, improve its operating performance; to achieve the benefits of its restructuring actions; and to recover engineering and tooling costs and capital investments.
•Visteon’s ability to compete favorably with automotive parts suppliers with lower cost structures and greater ability to rationalize operations; and to exit non-performing businesses on satisfactory terms, particularly due to limited flexibility under existing labor agreements.
•Restrictions in labor contracts with unions that restrict Visteon’s ability to close plants, divest unprofitable, noncompetitive businesses, change local work rules and practices at a number of facilities, and implement cost-saving measures.
•The costs and timing of facility closures or dispositions, business or product realignments, or similar restructuring actions, including potential asset impairment or other charges related to the implementation of these actions or other adverse industry conditions and contingent liabilities.
•Legal and administrative proceedings, investigations and claims, including shareholder class actions, inquiries by regulatory agencies, product liability, warranty, employee-related, environmental and safety claims, and any recalls of products manufactured or sold by Visteon.
•Changes in economic conditions, currency exchange rates, changes in foreign laws, regulations or trade policies, or political stability in foreign countries where Visteon procures materials, components, or supplies or where its products are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
•Shortages of materials or interruptions in transportation systems, labor strikes, work stoppages, or other interruptions to or difficulties in the employment of labor in the major markets where Visteon purchases materials, components, or supplies to manufacture its products or where its products are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
•Visteon’s ability to satisfy its pension and other postretirement employee benefit obligations, and to retire outstanding debt and satisfy other contractual commitments, all at the levels and times planned by management.
•Changes in laws, regulations, policies, or other activities of governments, agencies and similar organizations, domestic and foreign, that may tax or otherwise increase the cost of, or otherwise affect, the manufacture, licensing, distribution, sale, ownership, or use of Visteon’s products or assets.
•Possible terrorist attacks or acts of war, which could exacerbate other risks such as slowed vehicle production, interruptions in the transportation system, changes in fuel prices, and disruptions of supply.
•The cyclical and seasonal nature of the automotive industry.
•Visteon’s ability to comply with environmental, safety, and other regulations applicable to it and any increase in the requirements, responsibilities and associated expenses and expenditures of these regulations.
•Visteon’s ability to protect its intellectual property rights and to respond to changes in technology and technological risks and to claims by others that Visteon infringes their intellectual property rights.
•Visteon’s ability to quickly and adequately remediate control deficiencies in its internal control over financial reporting.
•Other factors, risks and uncertainties detailed from time to time in Visteon’s Securities and Exchange Commission filings.