Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Safe Harbor Statement under The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
Our reports, filings and other public announcements contain certain statements that describe our management’s beliefs concerning future business conditions, plans and prospects, growth opportunities and the outlook for our business and the biopharmaceutical industry based upon information currently available. Such statements are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Wherever possible, we have identified these forward-looking statements by words such as “will,” “may,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “estimates,” “expects,” “plans,” “projects,” “trends,” “opportunity,” “current,” “intention,” “position,” “assume,” “potential,” “outlook,” “remain,” “continue,” “maintain,” “sustain,” “seek,” “target,” “achieve,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” and similar words or phrases, or future or conditional verbs such as “would,” “should,” “could,” “may,” or similar expressions. These forward-looking statements are based upon assumptions our management believes are reasonable. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties which could cause our actual results, performance and achievements to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these statements, including, among others, the risks and uncertainties listed in this report under “Item 1A Risk Factors” and in our other reports filed with the SEC from time-to-time.
Because our forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual results could be materially different and any or all of our forward-looking statements may turn out to be wrong. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made and can be affected by assumptions we might make or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. Many factors mentioned in our discussion in this report will be important in determining future results. New factors emerge from time-to-time, and it is not possible for us to predict which factors will arise. Consequently, we cannot assure you that our expectations or forecasts expressed in such forward-looking statements will be achieved. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update any of our forward-looking or other statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Overview
Vericel Corporation is a fully-integrated, commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company and is a leader in advanced therapies for sports medicine and severe burn care markets. We currently market two FDA-approved autologous cell therapy products in the U.S. MACI® is an autologous cellularized scaffold product indicated for the repair of symptomatic, single or multiple full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee with or without bone involvement in adults. Epicel® is a permanent skin replacement HUD for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with deep-dermal or full-thickness burns comprising greater than or equal to 30 percent of TBSA. We also hold an exclusive license from MediWound for North American rights to NexoBrid®, a registration-stage biological orphan product for the debridement of severe thermal burns. In 2020, MediWound submitted to the FDA a BLA seeking the approval of NexoBrid for eschar removal (debridement) in adults with deep partial-thickness and/or full-thickness thermal burns. The FDA accepted the BLA for filing and assigned a PDUFA target date of June 29, 2021. Thereafter, on June 29, 2021, MediWound received a complete response letter from the FDA regarding the BLA through which the FDA communicated to MediWound that it had completed its review of the BLA, as amended, and had determined that it could not approve the BLA in its present form. We continue to work with MediWound, BARDA and the FDA to address the issues identified by the FDA, to prepare and submit a BLA resubmission to the FDA, and to seek the potential approval of NexoBrid.
See “Risk Factors - NexoBrid’s approval in the U.S. for the treatment of severe burns may be further delayed, or it may not be approved for use in the U.S. and other North American markets at all.”
COVID-19
The ongoing pandemic caused by the spread of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) has created significant disruptions to the U.S. and global economy and has contributed to significant volatility in financial markets. The global impact of the pandemic has fluctuated since early 2020. At times, many state, local and national governments - including those in Massachusetts and Michigan, where our operations are located - have responded by issuing, extending and supplementing orders requiring quarantines, restrictions on travel, and the mandatory closure of certain non-essential businesses, among other actions. In the U.S., the status and application of these orders have varied on a state-by-state basis since the early days of the pandemic. Many of the restrictions have been periodically updated as infection rates in the U.S. have risen and fallen, as new virus variants have emerged, as vaccines have been distributed and administered, and as world health leaders learn more about
the virus, its transmission pathway and who is most at risk. Because Vericel is deemed an essential business, we were exempted from government orders requiring the closure of workplaces and the cessation of business operations.
Notwithstanding being an essential business, our business and operations at times have been adversely impacted by the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, as a result of periodic restrictions placed on the performance of elective surgical procedures, Vericel experienced a significant increase in cancellations of scheduled MACI procedures, as well as a slowdown in new MACI orders during March and April of 2020. The widespread suspension of surgical procedures impacted our business and operations during the first and second quarters of 2020. The level and degree of restriction on elective surgeries, on the ability of patients to seek treatment and on U.S. business operations generally fluctuated throughout 2020 as COVID-19 infection rates rose and fell during the summer months and into the autumn. By the first quarter of 2021, the pandemic’s effects on our MACI business had largely dissipated. During the summer of 2021, however, the pandemic’s direct and ancillary effects again began to cause some disruption to our MACI business. Following the cessation of COVID-19-related travel restrictions in many parts of the U.S. and the availability of vaccinations in May and June 2021, some MACI patients postponed or delayed treatment - opting instead to take vacation and/or travel. Further, surges of new COVID-19 cases during the second half of 2021 caused by the spread of the “Delta” and “Omicron” variants again caused disruptions to health care networks including restrictions on the performance of elective surgical procedures, the availability of physicians and/or their treatment prioritizations, the level of healthcare facility staffing and, in some instances, the willingness or ability of patients to seek treatment. Consequently, and notwithstanding the widespread distribution of vaccines, these factors contributed to a slowdown of MACI procedures during the third and fourth quarters of 2021. Although hospitals are now better prepared for subsequent surges in COVID-19 patients, the risk remains that regional or local restrictions could again be placed on the performance of elective surgical procedures if the number of COVID-19 infections in the U.S. were to continue to rise, or if new or existing COVID-19 variants render current vaccine treatments ineffective.
Because Epicel is used almost exclusively in an emergent setting by burn centers and surgeons throughout the country, Epicel revenue and procedure volumes have been less affected by the pandemic. Nevertheless, large burns and burn admissions can be affected by restrictions on human activity resulting from more severe government lockdown orders.
At the outset of the pandemic, we put in place a comprehensive workplace protection plan, which instituted protective measures in response to COVID-19. Our workplace protection plan has closely followed guidance issued by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”) and has complied with applicable federal and state law. To date, Vericel has been successful in sustaining its operations and providing MACI and Epicel to patients in need. We continue to review our policies and procedures regularly, including our workplace protection plan, as the pandemic evolves and we may take additional actions to the extent required.
We continue to manufacture MACI and Epicel and we are maintaining a significant safety stock of all key raw materials. We do not expect current supply chain interruptions will impact our ongoing manufacturing operations. With respect to customer delivery, MACI final product has an established shelf life of six (6) days and established shipping shelf life of three (3) days. Currently, MACI is picked up by courier and shipped by commercial air or ground transportation to customer surgical sites. Epicel final product has an established shelf life of 48 hours and is hand carried to customer hospitals by courier. Transportation is primarily by commercial or charter airline. Although we have not experienced material shipping delays or materially increased costs to date, significant disruption of air travel could result in the inability to deliver MACI or Epicel final products to customer sites within appropriate timeframes, which could further adversely impact our business. At this time, we are not aware of COVID-19-related impacts on our distributors, operations or third-party service providers’ ability to manage patient cases.
We believe it is possible that we could continue to experience variable impacts on our business, should the current resurgence of COVID-19 in various areas of the U.S. continue for an extended period, or should a new resurgence occur in the future. Measures taken to limit the impact of COVID-19 at the international, national and local levels, including the availability and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, shelter-in-place orders, social distancing measures, travel bans and restrictions, and business and government shutdowns, may again create significant negative economic impacts on a global basis. Given that uncertainty, we cannot reliably estimate the extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact utilization and revenue of our products in 2022 and beyond.
For a discussion of additional risks associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, please see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”.
Manufacturing
We have a cell-manufacturing facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts which is used for U.S. manufacturing and distribution of MACI and Epicel.
Product Portfolio
Our marketed products include two FDA-approved autologous cell therapies: MACI, a third-generation autologous cellularized scaffold product indicated for the repair of symptomatic, single or multiple full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee with or without bone involvement in adults and Epicel, a permanent skin replacement for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with deep-dermal or full-thickness burns comprising greater than or equal to 30 percent of TBSA. Both products are currently marketed in the U.S. In addition, we have entered into exclusive license and supply agreements with MediWound to commercialize NexoBrid in North America, if approved. As previously mentioned, MediWound has submitted a BLA to the FDA, seeking commercial approval of NexoBrid. On June 29, 2021, we announced that MediWound had received a complete response letter from the FDA regarding the BLA, through which the FDA communicated to MediWound that it had completed its review of the BLA, as amended, and had determined that it could not approve the BLA in its present form. We continue to work with MediWound, BARDA and the FDA to address the issues identified by the FDA, to prepare and submit a BLA resubmission to the FDA, and to seek the potential approval of NexoBrid.
MACI
MACI is a third-generation ACI product indicated for the repair of symptomatic, single or multiple full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee with or without bone involvement in adults.
Our target audience of U.S. physicians is approximately 5,000 orthopedic surgeons and is divided into two segments: a group of orthopedic surgeons who self-identify and/or have a formal specialty as sports medicine physicians, and a subpopulation of general orthopedic surgeons who perform a high volume of cartilage repair procedures. As of the date of this report, we have 76 MACI sales representatives to enable the sales force to reach our target audience. Most private payers have a medical policy that covers treatment with MACI with the top 30 largest commercial payers having a formal medical policy for MACI or ACI in general. With respect to private commercial payers that have not yet approved a medical policy for MACI, we often obtain approval on a case-by-case basis for medically appropriate cases.
Epicel
Epicel is a permanent skin replacement for deep-dermal or full-thickness burns greater than or equal to 30 percent of TBSA. Epicel is regulated by CBER of the FDA under medical device authorities, and is the only FDA-approved cultured epidermal autograft product available for large total surface area burns. Epicel was designated as a HUD in 1998 and an HDE application for the product was submitted in 1999. HUDs are devices that are intended for diseases or conditions that affect fewer than 8,000 individuals annually in the U.S. Under an HDE approval, a HUD cannot be sold for an amount that exceeds the cost of research and development, fabrication and distribution unless certain conditions are met. A HUD is eligible to be sold for profit after receiving HDE approval if the device meets certain eligibility criteria, including where the device is intended for the treatment of a disease or condition that occurs in pediatric patients and such device is labeled for use in pediatric patients. If the FDA determines that a HUD meets the eligibility criteria, the HUD is permitted to be sold for profit so long as the number of devices distributed in any calendar year does not exceed the Annual Distribution Number (“ADN”). The ADN is defined as the number of devices reasonably needed to treat a population of 8,000 individuals per year in the U.S.
On February 18, 2016, the FDA approved our HDE supplement to revise the labeled indications of use for Epicel to specifically include pediatric patients. The revised product label also now specifies that the probable benefit of Epicel, mainly related to survival, was demonstrated in two Epicel clinical experience databases and a physician-sponsored study comparing outcomes in patients with massive burns treated with Epicel relative to standard care. Because of the change in the label to specifically include use in pediatric patients, Epicel is no longer subject to the HDE profit restrictions. In conjunction with adding the pediatric labeling and meeting the pediatric eligibility criteria, the FDA has determined the ADN number for Epicel to be 360,400 which is approximately 30 times larger than the volume of grafts sold in 2021. We currently have a thirteen-person burn field force comprised of seven account managers and six burn clinical specialists, led by a regional and a national sales director.
NexoBrid
Our development portfolio includes NexoBrid, a registration-stage, topically-administered biological product that enzymatically removes nonviable burn tissue, or eschar, in patients with deep partial and full-thickness thermal burns. We have entered into exclusive license and supply agreements with MediWound to commercialize NexoBrid and any improvements to the product in North America, if approved. On September 16, 2020, we announced the acceptance of MediWound’s submission of a BLA for review by the FDA to seek marketing approval for NexoBrid in the U.S. for the treatment of severe burns, and the FDA’s assignment of a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (“PDUFA”) target date for the product of June 29, 2021. Subsequently, on June 29, 2021, we announced that MediWound had received a complete response letter from the FDA regarding the BLA, through which the FDA communicated to MediWound that it had completed its review of the BLA, as amended, and had determined that it could not approve the BLA in its present form. We continue to work with MediWound, BARDA and the FDA to address the issues identified in the agency’s complete response letter, to prepare and submit a BLA resubmission to the FDA and to seek the potential approval of NexoBrid. See also “Risk Factors - NexoBrid’s approval in the U.S. for the treatment of severe burns may be further delayed, or it may not be approved for use in the U.S. and other North American markets at all.”
NexoBrid is approved in the EU and other international markets and has been designated as an orphan biologic in the U.S., EU and other international markets. Pursuant to the terms of our existing license agreement, if the BLA is approved, MediWound will transfer the BLA to us and we will market NexoBrid in the U.S. Both MediWound and Vericel, under the supervision of a Central Steering Committee comprised of members of both companies will continue to guide development of NexoBrid in North America. Under our license agreement with MediWound, NexoBrid is being manufactured for BARDA prior to approval by the FDA under an emergency use authorization.
Results of Operations
The following is a summary of our consolidated results of operations:
Comparison of the Periods Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total Revenue
Revenue by product for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
Total revenue increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, was driven primarily by volume growth for both MACI and Epicel, in addition to $3.1 million, of revenue recognized related to the delivery of NexoBrid to BARDA for emergency response preparedness, compared to $2.2 million in the prior year.
Seasonality. The effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic have disrupted the normal seasonality of our MACI business at times over the past twenty-two months. These effects have included, among others, periodic restrictions on the performance of elective surgical procedures throughout the country, the unavailability of physicians and/or changes to their treatment prioritizations, reductions in the levels of healthcare facility staffing and, in certain instances, the willingness or ability of patients to seek treatment and the inability of our Clinical Account Specialists to call on surgeon customers. Over the last five years, ACI (MACI and Carticel prior to its replacement) sales volumes from the first through the fourth quarter on average represented 19% (16%-21% range), 22% (16%-25% range), 23% (21%-26% range) and 36% (33%-38% range) respectively, of total annual volumes. MACI orders are normally stronger in the fourth quarter due to several factors including the satisfaction by patients of insurance deductible limits and the time of year patients prefer to start rehabilitation. Because of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the MACI business seasonality in 2021 and 2020 did not follow our historical patterns, and seasonality in 2022 could continue to be impacted by COVID-19 related factors, as well - such as patient behavior and vacations and the spread of the COVID-19 “Delta” and “Omicron” variants. Due to the low incidence and variable occurrence of severe burns, Epicel revenue has inherent variability from quarter-to-quarter and does not exhibit significant seasonality.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to continued growth of both products, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, and increased units of procured NexoBrid to BARDA that led to higher revenue related to NexoBrid, compared to 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes research and development expenses, which include license fees, materials, professional fees and an allocation of employee-related salary and fringe benefit costs for our research and development projects:
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $16.3 million, compared to $13.0 million for 2020. The increase is primarily due to an increase of $2.2 million in stock-based compensation expense.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $97.6 million, compared to $68.9 million for 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, is primarily due to a $16.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses, a $2.6 million increase as a result of additional headcount, a $2.3 million increase in marketing activities, and a $1.9 million increase in patient reimbursement support services as a result of higher MACI sales volume.
Total Other Income (Expense)
The change in total other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to the decreasing rates of return on our investments in various marketable debt securities.
Tax Benefit
For the year-ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a state income tax benefit of $0.1 million, as a result of a return to provision adjustment.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
Non-cash stock-based compensation expense is summarized in the following table:
The increase in stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, is due primarily to fluctuations in stock prices which impacts the fair value of the options and restricted stock units awarded and the expense recognized in the period.
Comparison of the Periods Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our acquisition of MACI and Epicel in 2014, our primary focus has been to invest in our existing commercial business with the goal of growing revenue. We have raised significant funds in order to complete our product development programs and to market and commercialize our products, including NexoBrid. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash received through Epicel and MACI sales, debt and public and private sales of our equity securities. We generated $29.0 million in operating cash flows during 2021 and we may finance our commercial business operations through the sales of equity securities or debt financings.
We believe that our current cash on hand, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to support our current operations through at least 12 months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, the continuing effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve and may result in irrecoverable losses from customers.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources related to our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash totaled $68.5 million, short-term investments totaled $35.1 million and long-term investments totaled $25.7 million as of December 31, 2021. The $29.0 million of net cash provided by operations in 2021, was primarily the result of non-cash charges of $34.3 million related to stock compensation expense, $4.4 million in operating lease amortization and $3.0 million in depreciation and amortization expense, offset by a net loss of $7.5 million and a net decrease of $6.2 million related to movements in our working capital accounts. The overall decreases in cash from our working capital accounts were primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales volume, an increase in inventory due to increased production needs and payments on operating leases, offset by an increase of accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments.
Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash totaled $33.8 million, short-term investments totaled $42.2 million and long-term investments totaled $24.1 million as of December 31, 2020. The $17.6 million of net cash provided by operations in 2020, was primarily the result of net income of $2.9 million and non-cash charges of $13.8 million in stock compensation expense, $4.4 million in operating lease amortization and $2.4 million in depreciation and amortization expense, offset by a net decrease of $6.4 million related to movements in our working capital accounts. The overall decreases in cash from our working capital accounts were primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in sales volume, an increase in inventory due to increased production needs, payments on operating leases, offset by an increase of accrued expenses due to timing of payments.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was the result of $64.4 million of investment sales and maturities, offset by $60.0 million in investment purchases and $7.9 million of property and equipment purchases primarily for manufacturing upgrades through December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of $63.1 million in investments purchases offset by $48.5 million of sales and maturities and property and equipment purchases of $2.6 million, primarily for manufacturing upgrades and leasehold improvements through December 31, 2020.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities is the result of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the employee stock purchase plan of $11.2 million, partially offset by the payment of employee withholding taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock units of $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily the result of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $6.6 million.
Sources of Capital
On August 27, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink LLC, as sales agent (“SVB Leerink”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell up to $200.0 million of shares of our common stock, no par value per share (“ATM Shares”). The ATM Shares to be offered and sold under the Sales Agreement will be issued and sold pursuant to an automatically effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR (File No. 333-259119) filed by us on August 27, 2021, which expires three years from the filing date. We also filed a prospectus supplement relating to the offering and sale of the ATM Shares on August 27, 2021. We are not obligated to make any sales of ATM Shares, and SVB Leerink is not required to sell any specific number or dollar amount of the ATM Shares under the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we have sold no shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement.
If revenue declines for a sustained period, we may need to access additional capital; however, we may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms or at all. Market volatility could also adversely impact our ability to access financing when needed. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our shareholders. Actual cash requirements may differ from projections and will depend on many factors, including any future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the level of future research and development, the scope and results of ongoing and potential clinical trials, the costs
involved in filing, prosecuting and enforcing patents, the need for additional manufacturing capacity, competing technological and market developments, costs of possible acquisition or development of complementary business activities, and the cost to market our products.
Contractual Obligations
We lease facilities in Ann Arbor, Michigan and Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Cambridge facilities includes clean rooms, laboratories for MACI and Epicel manufacturing and office space. We also pay for use of an offsite warehouse space and lease various vehicles and computer equipment. In October 2020, we amended our current lease in Cambridge to, among other provisions, extend the term until February 2032. Under the amendment, the landlord will contribute $4.3 million toward the cost of tenant improvements. The previous contributions toward the cost of tenant improvements was recorded as part of the operating lease assets under the leasing guidance, on our consolidated balance sheet. Total remaining obligations related to the operating and finance leases are $66.5 million as of December 31, 2021. In January 2022, we entered into a new lease for approximately 126,000 square feet of to-be-constructed manufacturing, laboratory and office space in Burlington, Massachusetts. See Note 15, “Subsequent Events” in our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Our purchase commitments consist of minimum purchase amounts of materials used in our cell manufacturing process to manufacture our marketed cell therapy products and total $10.1 million as of December 31, 2021, as well as usage of an offsite warehouse space. In February 2021, the terms of the warehouse operating agreement were extended through March 31, 2027, and the total remaining contractual obligations related to the warehouse agreement are $8.3 million as of December 31, 2021. See Note 14, “Commitments and Contingencies” in our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that could materially impact the consolidated financial statements and disclosures based on varying assumptions. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, actual results and the timing of the recognition of such amounts could differ from these estimates.
The following is a list of accounting policies that are most significant to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and/or that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition and Net Product Sales
Revenue from sales to a customer (distributor, hospital or other party) is recognized in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue Recognition. We recognize product revenue from sales to a customer (distributor or hospital) following the five step model in ASC 606: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. Under this revenue standard, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of the promised goods, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods.
MACI Implants
We have engaged a third-party services provider to provide the patient support program to manage patient cases and to ensure complete and accurate billing information is provided to the insurers and hospitals, to facilitate reimbursement.
Prior authorization and confirmation of coverage level by the patient’s private insurance plan, hospital or government payer is a prerequisite to the shipment of product to a patient. We recognize product revenues from sales of all MACI implants upon delivery at which time the customer obtains control of the implant and the claim is billable. The total consideration which we expect to collect in exchange for MACI implants (the transaction price) may be fixed or variable. Direct sales to hospitals or distributors are recorded at a contracted price, there are typically no forms of variable consideration.
When we sell MACI the patient is responsible for payment; however, we are typically reimbursed by a third-party insurer or government payer, subject to a patient co-pay amount. Reimbursements from third-party insurers and government payers vary by patient and payer and are based on either contracted rates, publicly available rates or a fee schedule. Net product revenue is recognized net of estimated contractual allowances, which considers historical collection experience from both the payer and patient, denial rates and the terms of our contractual arrangements. We estimate expected collections for these transactions using the portfolio approach. We record a reduction to revenue at the time of sale for the estimate of the amount of consideration that will not be collected. In addition, potential credit risk exposure has been evaluated for our accounts receivable in accordance with ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. We assess risk and determine a loss percentage by pooling account receivables based on similar risk characteristics. The loss percentage is calculated through the use of forecasts that are based on current and historical economic and financial information.
Changes in estimates of the transaction price are recorded through revenue in the period in which such change occurs. Changes to the estimate of the amount of consideration that will not be collected could have a material impact to the revenue recognized. A 50 basis points change to the estimated uncollectible percentage could result in approximately $0.3 million decrease or increase in the revenue recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception, in accordance with ASC Topic 842, Leases. All operating lease commitments with a lease term greater than 12 months are recognized as right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and liabilities, on a discounted basis on the balance sheet. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet. We primarily enter into lease agreements for manufacturing and office space, warehouses space, vehicle and computer equipment. The leases have varying terms, some of which may include options to extend. Certain of our lease agreements include lease payments that are adjusted periodically for an index or rate. The leases are initially measured using the present value of the projected payments adjusted for the index or rate in effect at the commencement date. Our lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
ROU assets represent our right to control the use of an explicitly or implicitly identified fixed asset for a period of time and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Control of an underlying asset is conveyed to us if we obtain the rights to direct the use of and to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from using the underlying asset.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability are comprised of fixed payments. Our leases contain non-lease components and activities that do not transfer a good or service to us which were not considered to be components of the contract and therefore were not included in the net ROU assets or lease liabilities.
The lease term for all of our leases include the non-cancellable period of the lease plus any additional periods covered by either an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease that is reasonably certain to exercise, or an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease controlled by the lessor.
Stock-Based Compensation
The accounting for stock-based compensation requires us to determine the fair value of common stock issued in the form of stock option awards and restricted stock units. The fair value of restricted stock units held by the employees is determined based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of the grant. We use the value of our common stock at the date of the grant in the calculation of the fair value of our share-based awards. The fair value of stock options held by our employees is determined using a Black-Scholes option valuation method, which is a valuation technique that is acceptable for share-based payment accounting. Key assumptions in determining fair value include volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield and expected term. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options represent our best estimates; however, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and different assumptions are used, the stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those stock options expected to vest over the service period. We estimate the forfeiture rate considering the historical experience of our stock-based awards. If the actual forfeiture rate is different from the estimate, we adjust the expense accordingly.
Tax Valuation Allowance
A valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized based on the weight of available evidence, both positive and negative. Due to our three-year cumulative loss position and history of operating losses, a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets was considered necessary. We will continue to monitor our cumulative loss position and forecasts and reevaluate the need for a valuation allowance as it could be reversed in future periods.
This summary of significant accounting policies should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and this discussion of our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the accompanying consolidated financial statements located under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently issued accounting standards that may have a significant impact on our business.