Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are the leading vacation rental management platform in North America with over five million Nights Sold in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. Our integrated technology and operations platform optimizes vacation rental income and home care for homeowners, offers guests a seamless, reliable and high-quality experience with exceptional service, and provides distribution partners with valuable and high-performing home listings.
Since our inception, we have focused primarily on the supply side of the marketplace and on homeowners, who we believe hold the keys to unlocking the next wave of expansion as demand for vacation rentals continues to grow. Our technology and operations allow homeowners to solve critical challenges such as listing creation and merchandising, pricing optimization, multi-channel distribution and demand generation, seamless home care, insights and analytics, smart home enablement and customer support. We help homeowners drive significant incremental income on one of their most valuable assets and turn
their vacation homes into high performing vacation rentals. Our marketplace aggregates our homeowners’ listings and enables guests to search, discover and book properties on vacasa.com, our Guest app and on the booking sites of over 100 distribution partners including Airbnb, Booking.com and Vrbo. Guests staying in Vacasa-listed properties benefit from the peace of mind that their experience will meet high standards of safety, cleanliness, comfort and support.
Our business has experienced strong growth and margin expansion. In fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated revenue of $889.1 million, $491.8 million, and $299.3 million, respectively, representing a growth rate of 81% from 2020 to 2021 and 64% from 2019 to 2020. In fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated net losses of $(154.6) million, $(92.3) million, and $(84.9) million, respectively, representing a net margin of (17)%, (19)%, and (28)%, respectively. In fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, we generated Adjusted EBITDA of $(28.5) million, $(35.0) million, and $(66.4) million, respectively, representing (3)%, (7)%, and (22)% of revenue, respectively.
Our Business Model
We operate a vertically-integrated vacation rental management platform. We are primarily focused on the supply side of the vacation rentals sector and cultivating an expansive collection of homes in leading vacation rental destinations, allowing homeowners to earn income from their vacation homes and guests to book and experience the high quality supply we bring online. We manage all aspects of the vacation rental experience for homeowners, from listing creation and multi-channel distribution to pricing, marketing optimization and end-to-end property care. We collect nightly rent on behalf of homeowners and earn the majority of our revenue from commissions on rent and from additional reservation-related fees paid by guests when a vacation rental is booked directly through our website or app or through our distribution partners. We also earn revenue from home care solutions offered directly to our homeowners such as home improvement and repair services for a separately agreed upon fee and from providing real estate brokerage services and residential management services to community and homeowner associations.
We have a multi-pronged supply acquisition strategy, which includes expanding the number of vacation rental properties listed on our platform through individual additions, portfolio transactions and strategic acquisitions. Our individual approach onboards individual vacation rental properties through our direct sales force. We utilize our wealth of proprietary and industry data, along with marketing and advertising strategies, to maintain a continuously-updated homeowner lead database and strategically deploy our outbound sales representatives to target these new homeowner leads. We engage in portfolio transactions and strategic acquisitions to onboard multiple homes in a single transaction. Our portfolio approach identifies, targets and onboards portfolios of homes already being professionally managed by local property managers. We have also completed strategic acquisitions consisting of our acquisitions of Wyndham Vacation Rentals and TurnKey, both of which contributed to our supply growth. Portfolio transactions and strategic acquisitions are accounted for as business combinations.
Homeowners on our platform typically enter into standardized, evergreen contractual arrangements with Vacasa and pay us a commission rate on rent to support the services we provide for them. The homes on our platform are generally exclusive to Vacasa, meaning that every booking for these homes must be coordinated through the Vacasa platform.
We generate bookings by distributing our vacation rental home listings to guests through our direct channel, which includes vacasa.com and our mobile app, and across over 100 online distribution channels, including Airbnb, Booking.com and Vrbo. In fiscal years 2021 and 2020, we generated approximately 30% and 35%, respectively, of our GBV through our direct channels (including our vacasa.com website and mobile app) and 70% and 65%, respectively, of our GBV through our distribution partners. Our guest acquisition strategy for our direct channel is focused on attracting high intent visitors to our platform through search engine optimization, direct traffic, email, and performance marketing channels. As we continue to create supply density across the destinations in which we operate, we expect to see increased bookings from repeat guests, increasing the overall efficiency of our marketplace. When bookings occur through our distribution partners, we pay listing fees for demand generated through these channels. As a marketplace, we do not own the homes that are listed on our platform. As a result, our business model is asset-light and highly capital efficient, as we have lower working capital and cash needs compared to non-marketplace providers and, due to our exclusive relationships, we are able to control the calendar and optimize monetization as if we did own the home.
We deploy local operations teams across the over 100 operating markets in which we operate. In some cases, an operating market encompasses more than one destination. These operations teams are critical to our vertically-integrated business model and our ability to attract and onboard new homeowners, deliver a differentiated experience to homeowners and guests, including managing home care, maintenance and support through a single team.
Recent Developments
Reverse Recapitalization
On July 28, 2021, we entered into an agreement to become a publicly traded company through a business combination with TPG Pace Solutions Corporation, a special purpose acquisition company. On December 6, 2021, we consummated the business combination contemplated by the business combination agreement. The transactions set forth in the business combination agreement are further described in Note 3, Reverse Recapitalization to our consolidated financial statements.
TurnKey Acquisition
On April 1, 2021, we acquired the operations of TurnKey, a provider of property management and marketing services for residential real estate owners in the United States. The acquisition of TurnKey advanced our strategy to create a premium standard for vacation rentals. The acquisition also increased our market density in regions where we have existing operations and expands our footprint into several other top vacation rental destinations. See Note 4, Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
Since early 2020, the world has been, and continues to be, impacted by COVID-19 and its strains and variants. In certain markets, vacation homes on our platform and attractions within the local market have been subject to shifting government mandates or guidance regarding COVID-19 restrictions. COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have continued to impact our business in a number of ways. Our priority has continued to be the health, safety, and support of our employees, homeowners, and guests. We have also taken measures to manage the financial impact of the pandemic to our business. Impacts of COVID-19 on our business include, but are not limited to, the following:
Health and Safety of our Employees, Homeowners, and Guests
•We have implemented new safety protocols and policies to protect our field team employees. For example, homeowners and guests must agree to follow COVID-19-related safety practices when coming into contact with our employees, such as social distancing.
•We have embraced greater adoption of remote work, particularly among our central team employees. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted that we are able to maintain most of our central business operations outside of traditional office space.
•We launched enhanced cleaning and safety practices that are intended to help prevent transmission of COVID-19. We provide substantial additional resources and use best practices communicated by the Centers for Disease Control and other public health authorities to drive our cleaning practices. Our employees are trained and expected to follow an enhanced cleaning protocol, checklists, and other written and visual materials.
Support for our Guests
•In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we began issuing future stay credits to guests who chose to cancel within our enhanced cancellation policy. Subsequently, we began issuing future stay credits in response to a more broad variety of events that led to cancellations. As of December 31, 2021, we accrued approximately $31.0 million of value of unused future stay credits.
•While COVID-19 and its variants have affected certain segments of the global travel industry over the past year, our whole home offering has resonated with guests, providing them with more control over their environment as compared to traditional accommodations.
Direct Labor Costs
•As part of our initial response to the pandemic in the first half of 2020, we initiated an internal reorganization and reduction of our workforce, primarily in North America, resulting in the elimination of approximately 850 positions. The charges recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of these reductions were $5.0 million, of which $1.5 million was recorded to operations and support, $1.2 million to sales & marketing, $1.1 million to general and administrative expenses, $1.0 million to technology and development, and $0.2 million to cost of revenue in the consolidated statement of operations.
•The Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy (CEWS) was announced on March 27, 2020. Under this program, qualifying businesses can receive a subsidy for up to 75% of their employees’ wages, subject to certain limitations. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company received $2.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively, of wage
subsidy from the Canadian government as part of the CEWS, which is included in operating costs and expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
•The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act allows for deferred payment of the employer-paid portion of social security taxes through the end of 2020, with 50% due on December 31, 2021 and the remainder due on December 31, 2022. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company deferred approximately $7.6 million of the employer-paid portion of social security taxes. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining current portion of $3.8 million is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
•As the pandemic has progressed, we have experienced an increase in our labor costs driven by a decline in the labor force participation rate in many of our markets. We have managed these labor supply challenges through multiple measures, including rebalancing the mix of our labor force between contractors and employees and changes to our compensation structure.
Growth of Our Business
•Our additions of new homes were significantly muted in 2020 due to the reduction in sales staff and portfolio spend associated with the COVID-19 furloughs, layoffs and cash preservation strategies described above. As a result, we did not grow the number of vacation homes on our platform in 2020 as we have historically, which adversely impacted our revenue growth in 2021.
•We also saw an increase in homeowner terminations in 2020 due to COVID-19, which contributed toward this adverse revenue impact. For the year ended December 31, 2021, homeowner terminations directly attributable to COVID-19 began to normalize and were less than half of the rate observed during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Subsequent to the initial phase of the pandemic in the first half of 2020, we have benefited from a strong trend in the demand from guests, which has led to an increase in the GBV per Night Sold on our platform and enabled us to recover the labor cost increases discussed above through higher commissions and fees earned.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact us over the longer term remains uncertain and dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of COVID-19, potential new strains and variants of the virus, the extent and effectiveness of containment actions taken, including mobility restrictions, the timing, availability, and effectiveness of vaccines, and the impact of these and other factors on travel behavior in general and on our business. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs to address government regulations and the safety of our employees and guests.
Exit from European and Most Latin American Operations
In the second half of the year ended December 31, 2020, management made the decision to realign its business and strategic priorities based on our core operating strengths, as well as the impact COVID-19 had on our international businesses, which resulted in the wind-down of a significant portion of our operations in Europe and most of Latin America by December 31, 2020. These markets accounted for 1% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. In connection with the wind-down, we recorded restructuring costs of $1.8 million, which primarily consisted of severance costs of $1.3 million and contract termination costs of $0.5 million. Of the total, $1.4 million was recorded to general and administrative expenses, $0.3 million to cost of revenue, and $0.2 million to operations and support in the consolidated statements of operations. While some of these activities were completed during 2021, the majority of these actions were completed by December 31, 2020.
For the actions taken related to COVID-19 and for our exit from European and most Latin American operations, as of December 31, 2020, we had accrued restructuring charges related to the internal reorganization and restructuring actions of $2.2 million, primarily consisting of accrued severance included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021, accrued restructuring charges were not material.
Seasonality
Our overall business is seasonal, reflecting typical travel behavior patterns over the course of the calendar year. In addition, each market where we operate has unique seasonality, events, and weather that can increase or decrease demand for our offerings. Certain holidays can have an impact on our revenue by increasing Nights Sold on the holiday itself or during the preceding and subsequent weekends. Typically, our second and third quarters have higher revenue due to increased Nights Sold. Our GBV typically follows the seasonality patterns of Nights Sold. Our operations and support costs also increase in the second and third quarters as we increase our hourly staffing to handle increased activity on our platform in those periods. See additional information about GBV and Nights Sold under the "Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures" heading below.
In 2020, we saw COVID-19 affect the historical seasonality pattern in our revenue as well as in our key business metrics of Nights Sold, GBV, and GBV per Night Sold, and our non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EBITDA. These changes were primarily the result of shelter-in-place orders and changing travel preferences relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect this impact on typical seasonality to continue as long as COVID-19 continues to impact travel restrictions and customer preferences globally.
Components of Results of Operations
Sources of Revenue
Our revenue is primarily generated from our vacation rental platform in which we act as the exclusive agent on the homeowners’ behalf to facilitate the reservation transaction between guests and owners. We collect nightly rent on behalf of homeowners and earn the majority of our revenue from commissions on rent and from additional reservation-related fees paid by guests when a vacation rental is booked directly through our website or Guest app or through our distribution partners. In the event a booked reservation made through our website or app is cancelled, we may offer a refund or a future stay credit up to the value of the booked reservation. In certain instances, we may also offer a refund related to a completed stay. We account for refunds as a reduction of revenue. Future stay credits are recognized as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets. Revenue from future stay credits is recognized when redeemed by customers, net of the portion of the booking attributable to funds payable to owners and hospitality and sales taxes payable. Through December 31, 2021, we have not recognized any breakage revenue associated with future stay credits, and no future stay credits have yet reached their expiration date. A material amount of future stay credits may expire unused beginning in the first quarter of 2022 and be recognized as revenue.
We also earn revenue from home care solutions provided directly to our homeowners such as home maintenance and improvement services, linen and towel supply programs, supplemental housekeeping services, and other related services, for a separately agreed-upon fee.
In addition to our vacation rental platform, we provide other offerings such as real estate brokerage services and residential management services to community and homeowner associations. The purpose of these services is to attract and retain homeowners as customers of our vacation rental platform.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, consists primarily of employee compensation costs, which includes wages, benefits, and payroll taxes, and outside service costs for housekeeping, home maintenance, payment processing fees for merchant fees and chargebacks, laundry expenses, housekeeping supplies, as well as fixed rent payments on certain owner contracts.
We expect that the cost of revenue will increase on an absolute dollar basis for the foreseeable future to the extent our business continues to grow. We expect that cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue will vary from period to period over the short term and decrease over the long term as we continue to invest in order management and our platform to achieve greater scale and operational efficiency.
Operations and support
Operations and support costs consist primarily of compensation costs, which includes wages, benefits, payroll taxes, and equity-based compensation, for employees that support our local operations teams in the field. Also included is the cost of call center customer support, both employees and vendors, and the allocation of facilities and certain corporate costs.
We expect that operations and support costs will continue to increase on an absolute dollar basis for the foreseeable future to the extent our business continues to grow and we continue to invest in our local operations teams to service homeowners and guests. We are investing in near-term initiatives to reduce customer contact rates and improve the operational efficiency of our operations and support organization, which we expect will decrease operations and support costs as a percentage of revenue over the longer term.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, which includes wages, benefits, payroll taxes, and equity-based compensation, for salaried employees and payments to contractors, net of capitalized expenses, engaged in
the design, development, maintenance and testing of our platform, including our websites, mobile applications, and other products. Costs qualifying for capitalization are recorded as a reduction of our technology and development expenses and are capitalized as internal-use software within property and equipment on the consolidated balance sheets. These assets are depreciated over their estimated useful lives and are reported in depreciation on our consolidated statements of operations. Also included within technology and development are information technology costs to support infrastructure, applications and overall monitoring and security of networks, and other costs including for cloud, licensing and maintenance.
We expect technology and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we hire more software developers and expand the capabilities and scope of our platform. We anticipate technology and development expenses as a percentage of revenue to stay constant or increase over time as we continue to invest in product features, automation, and efficiency.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, which includes wages, sales commissions, benefits, payroll taxes, and equity-based compensation, for our sales force and marketing personnel, payments to distribution partners for guest reservations, digital and mail-based advertising costs for homeowners, advertising costs for search engine marketing and other digital guest advertising, and brand marketing.
We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we invest to grow our customer base and enhance our brand awareness. However, we expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as our business grows, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on fluctuations in the timing and extent of our sales and marketing expenses and business seasonality.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel related compensation costs, including equity-based compensation, for executive management and administrative employees, including finance and accounting, human resources, communications, and legal, as well as general corporate and director and officer insurance. General and administrative costs also include professional services fees, including accounting, legal and consulting expenses, rent expense for corporate facilities and storage, office supplies, and travel and entertainment expenses.
We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due to the anticipated growth of our business and to meet the increased compliance and reporting requirements associated with our operation as a public company following the transaction, including in compliance, legal, investor relations, insurance, and professional services. We anticipate general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation on capitalized internally developed software costs, furniture and fixtures, buildings and improvements, leasehold improvements, technology software and computer equipment.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible asset expense consists of non-cash amortization expense of the acquired intangible assets, primarily homeowner contracts, which are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives.
We expect that depreciation and amortization expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis as we invest in property and equipment and continue to complete individual additions, portfolio transactions and strategic acquisitions to support the growth in our business. We expect depreciation and amortization expenses as a percentage of revenue over the short term will vary from period to period and decrease over the long term.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payable and the amortization of deferred financing costs related to our outstanding debt arrangements. In May 2020, we issued the D-1 Convertible Notes. We accrued cash interest and paid-in-kind
interest (PIK interest) at 3% and 7% per annum, respectively. In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, the D-1 Convertible Notes converted into approximately $140.4 million Series D-1 preferred units as of the closing on December 6, 2021. See Note 3, Reverse Recapitalization to our consolidated financial statements.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of the change in fair value of the contingent earnout share consideration represented by our Class G Common Stock, the change in fair value of our warrant derivative liabilities, and foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our revenue for these periods. The period to period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of our results that may be expected in the future.
(1) Includes equity-based compensation as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Revenue
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Revenue increased by $397.3 million, or 81%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase of $980.1 million, or 105%, in GBV for Nights Sold on our platform. Nights Sold increased 72% primarily due to the addition of new homes to our platform during fiscal year 2021, including our strategic acquisition of TurnKey. This was partially offset by a $3.6 million reduction in international revenue for 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 due to the closure of certain international operations in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Revenue increased by $192.5 million, or 64%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily driven by an increase of $144.2 million in revenue arising from an increase of $346.9 million, or 59%, in GBV for Nights Sold on our platform. Nights Sold increased 46% primarily due to our acquisition of the Wyndham Vacation Rentals business. Additionally, revenue increased by $27.7 million from the expansion of our real estate and community association management services as part of our acquisition of the Wyndham Vacation Rentals business.
Cost of revenue
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Cost of revenue increased by $184.7 million, or 72%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to a $121.6 million increase in personnel-related costs and cleaning supplies, a $29.7 million increase in costs for our home care solutions, a $12.1 million increase in payment processing costs, including chargebacks, and a $12.0 million increase in costs related to our real estate brokerage services and community association management services.
Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue decreased 250 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a 430 basis point decrease in costs for our home care solutions and other costs driven by improved operating leverage, as well as increased density and scale of our business, and a 120 basis point decrease in payment processing costs, including chargebacks. These decreases in costs as a percentage of revenue were partially offset by a 280 basis point increase in personnel costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and competition in the industry for labor.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Cost of revenue increased by $91.6 million, or 56%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $38.9 million increase in personnel-related costs and cleaning supplies, a $24.0 million increase in costs related to our real estate brokerage services and community association management services, a $15.3 million increase in costs for our home care solutions, and a $14.5 million increase in payment processing costs, including chargebacks.
Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue decreased 290 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due a 440 basis point decrease in costs for our vacation rental platform and a 240 basis point decrease in costs for our home care solutions provided to our homeowners and community associations under management, both driven by product and operational improvements which improved the efficiency of our local operations teams, as well as increased density and scale of our business. The decrease in costs as a percentage of revenue were partially offset by a 390 basis point increase in other costs, including costs to support our real estate services and community association management services, as the result of expansion of these product offerings from the purchase of the Wyndham Vacation Rentals business.
Operations and support
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Operations and support costs increased by $70.8 million, or 61%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $66.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses in our field operations, central operations, and customer experience teams to support the increase in Nights Sold.
Operations and support costs as a percentage of revenue decreased 260 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to a 180 basis point decrease in facility-related expenses and a 80 basis point decrease in personnel-related expenses, both as a percentage of revenue, driven by operational improvements which improved the efficiency of our local operations and support teams, as well as increased density and scale of our business resulting in improved operating leverage.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Operations and support costs increased by $37.4 million, or 47%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to $28.8 million increase in personnel-related expenses in our field and central operations support teams and our customer experience teams, and a $7.8 million increase in facility related expenses.
Operations and support costs as a percentage of revenue decreased 270 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a 240 basis point decrease in personnel-related expenses for our operations and support teams driven by improved operating leverage as our business scales.
Technology and development
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Technology and development expenses increased by $21.7 million, or 80%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to a $12.3 million increase in software license and maintenance costs and a $9.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses driven by lower headcount in 2020 as part of our response to the pandemic’s impact on our industry and business.
Technology and development expenses as a percentage of revenue was unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, in line with the increasing scale of our business.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Technology and development expenses increased by $10.1 million, or 60%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $6.3 million increase in personnel-related expenses driven by lower capitalization of internally developed software and a $4.0 million increase in software license and maintenance costs as the result of investments in our IT infrastructure.
Sales and marketing
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $107.9 million, or 135%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to a $30.6 million increase in listing fees paid to our distribution partners driven by a 105% increase in GBV, a $40.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses mostly driven by increased headcount primarily among our sales force, and a $33.8 million increase in our homeowner and brand advertising.
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue increased 480 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased advertising to attract homeowners and guests to our platform.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $9.4 million, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $12.4 million increase in listing fees from our distribution partners, partially offset by a $2.8 million decrease in homeowner and brand advertising costs and other sales and marketing related expenses.
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 730 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to increased operating leverage of our marketing teams as well as increased efficiency in our homeowner and guest acquisition efforts.
General and administrative
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
General and administrative expenses increased by $31.2 million, or 54%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to a $21.5 million increase in personnel-related and professional services costs to support the increasing scale of our business, $7.7 million of costs related to the acquisition of TurnKey, a $3.3 million increase in facilities expenses, and a $1.6 million increase in third-party expenses incurred to prepare for the requirements of being a public company. These increases were partially offset by a $1.7 million decrease in bad debt expense.
General and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 170 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to an 80 basis point decrease in bad debt expense.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
General and administrative expenses increased by $21.3 million, or 59%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a $7.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses and a $3.0 million increase in facilities-related expenses, both driven by the acquisition of the Wyndham Vacation Rentals business in the fourth quarter of 2019, a $5.1 million increase in bad debt expense, a $3.0 million increase in tax reserves, and a $1.2 million increase in third-party expenses incurred to prepare for the requirements of being a public company.
Depreciation and Amortization of intangible assets
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Depreciation expense increased by $1.6 million, or 11%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to continued investment in our platform, including capitalized software to support our products and services.
Amortization of intangible assets increased by $25.3 million, or 135%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the strategic acquisition of TurnKey Vacation Rentals Inc. and portfolio additions completed during fiscal year 2021.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Depreciation expense increased by $9.8 million, or 171%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to continued growth through portfolio transactions and strategic acquisitions, including Wyndham Vacation Rentals, and the development of capitalized software to support our products and services.
Amortization of intangible assets increased by $10.8 million, or 136%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the amortization of intangible assets acquired through the strategic acquisition of the Wyndham Vacation Rentals business.
Interest income, Interest expense and Other income (expense), net
Fiscal year 2021 Compared with the Same Period in 2020
Interest income decreased by $0.3 million, or 91%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the decrease in cash and cash equivalents held in income-generating accounts prior to the Reverse Recapitalization.
Interest expense increased by $23.8 million, or 301%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the $19.6 million of interest expense recorded in connection with the conversion of the D-1 Convertible Notes to Series D-1 preferred units immediately prior to the Reverse Recapitalization in December 2021, and an increase in total borrowings outstanding prior to this conversion. The D-1 Convertible Notes were issued in May 2020 and also contributed to the increase because they were outstanding for a longer period of time in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Other income (expense), net increased by $9.0 million, or 157%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to the $14.3 million decline in the fair value of contingent earnout share consideration represented by our Class G Common Stock and a $4.8 million increase in the fair value of our warrant derivative liabilities that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Fiscal year 2020 Compared with the Same Period in 2019
Interest income decreased by $0.7 million, or 63%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to a significant decrease in yield after interest rates fell in the first quarter of 2020.
Interest expense increased by $6.7 million, or 567%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the increase in total borrowings outstanding during the period. In May 2020, we issued the D-1 Convertible Notes, which contributed to the overall increase year over year.
Other income (expense), net increased by $2.4 million, or 71%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the increase in the fair value of our warrant derivative liabilities.
Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We track the following key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. Accordingly, we believe that these key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of
operations in the same manner as our management team. These key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled metrics or measures presented by other companies.
Gross Booking Value
GBV represents the dollar value of bookings from our distribution partners as well as those booked directly on our platform related to Nights Sold during the period and cancellation fees for bookings cancelled during the period (which may relate to bookings made during prior periods). GBV is inclusive of amounts charged to guests for rent, fees, and the estimated taxes a guest pays when we are responsible for collecting tax.
Growth in GBV reflects our ability to attract homeowners, either through means of individual additions, portfolio transactions or strategic acquisitions, retain homeowners and guests, optimize the availability and sale throughput of nights, and reflects growth in Nights Sold and the pricing of rents, fees, and estimated taxes a guest pays.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, GBV increased to $1,915.6 million, a 105% increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases were primarily driven by growth of new homes on our platform and Nights Sold.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, GBV increased to $935.4 million, a 59% increase compared to the year ended December 31. 2019. This increase was primarily driven by our acquisition of Wyndham Vacation Rentals in October 2019.
We experience seasonality in our GBV that is consistent with the seasonality of Nights Sold as described below. As we continue to add new homes to our platform, optimize their pricing and distribution, retain homeowners and guests, and grow Nights Sold, we expect GBV to continue to grow.
Nights Sold
We define Nights Sold as the total number of nights stayed by guests on our platform in a given period. Nights Sold is a key measure of the scale and quality of homes on our platform and our ability to generate demand and manage yield on behalf of our homeowners. We experience seasonality in the number of Nights Sold. Typically, the second and third quarters of the year each have higher Nights Sold than the first and fourth quarters, as guests tend to travel during the peak travel season.
In the year ended December 31. 2021, Nights Sold increased to 5.2 million, or 72% growth compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Nights Sold was driven by growth of new homes, continued improvements to our yield management tools, and increased guest demand for travel due to relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions in some of our markets. However, the increase in guest demand in those markets was partially offset by key markets where COVID-19 restrictions remained in place. We believe the circumstances that partially offset the increase in Nights Sold due to the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to diminish in the future.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Nights Sold increased to 3.0 million, a 46% increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in Nights Sold was driven primarily by the acquisition of Wyndham Vacation Rentals in October 2019 and continued improvements to our yield management tools, and was partially offset by a reduction in guest demand for travel due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which decreased demand in the second quarter of 2020 compared to the second quarter of 2019 before demand outpaced expected growth in the third quarter of 2020 as restrictions relaxed.
As we continue to add new homes to our platform in existing and new markets and optimize their availability, pricing occupancy, and distribution, we expect Nights Sold to continue to grow.
Gross Booking Value per Night Sold
GBV per Night Sold represents the dollar value of each night stayed by guests on our platform in a given period. GBV per Night Sold reflects the pricing of rents, fees, and estimated taxes a guest pays.
Growth in GBV per Night Sold reflects our ability to optimize pricing and throughput of the homes on our platform, which helps to create higher performing vacation rental homes.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, GBV per Night Sold increased to $371, a 19% increase compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in GBV per Night Sold was primarily driven by higher demand from guests, increased fees charged to guests in response to higher labor costs, and the mix of homes on our platform.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, GBV per Night Sold increased to $311 per Night Sold, an 8% increase compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in GBV per Night Sold was primarily driven by yield management optimization.
We continue to optimize existing supply, drive platform innovation, and add new features to expand our technological advantage to help improve our yield management.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss excluding: (1) depreciation and acquisition-related items consisting of amortization of intangible assets and impairments of goodwill and intangible assets, if applicable; (2) interest income and expense; (3) any other income or expense not earned or incurred during our normal course of business; (4) any income tax benefit or expense; (5) equity-based compensation costs; (6) one-time costs related to strategic business combinations; and (7) restructuring costs. We believe this measure is useful for analysts and investors as this measure allows a more meaningful comparison between our performance and that of our competitors. The above items are excluded from our Adjusted EBITDA measure because these items are non-cash in nature or the amount and timing of these items is unpredictable or one-time in nature, not driven by the performance of our core business operations and renders comparisons with prior periods and competitors less meaningful. Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Revenue is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA for a period by Revenue for the same period.
Adjusted EBITDA is not defined by or presented in accordance with GAAP, has significant limitations as an analytical tool, should be considered as supplemental in nature, and is not meant as a substitute for net loss or any other financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations, is frequently used by these parties in evaluating companies in our industry, and provides a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business performance. Moreover, we present Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measurement used by our management internally to make operating decisions, including those related to analyzing operating expenses, evaluating performance, and performing strategic planning and annual budgeting.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA increased to $(28.5) million, compared to $(35.0) million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases in Adjusted EBITDA are primarily driven by our continued investment in the growth of our platform and offering for both homeowners and guests. In the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Revenue increased to (3)%, compared to (7)% in the same period in 2020.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA increased to $(35.0) million, compared to $(66.4) million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to improvements in cost of revenue as a percentage of Revenue, driven by operational efficiencies and increased density in markets, as well as controlled operating expense growth as a percentage of Revenue. In the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Revenue increased to (7)%, compared to (22)% in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Seasonal trends in our Nights Sold impact Adjusted EBITDA for any given quarter. Typically, the second and third quarters of the year have higher Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Revenue, as fixed costs are allocated across a larger number of guest reservations. We expect Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Revenue to fluctuate in the near term due to this seasonality and as we continue to invest in our supply growth engine and technology platform, and improve over the medium to long term as we achieve operating leverage from scale and density.
Although we use Adjusted EBITDA as described above, Adjusted EBITDA has significant limitations as an analytical tool, including that it:
•does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash required to service interest or principal payments, on our debt;
•does not reflect our tax expense or the cash required to pay our taxes; and
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future and such measure does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Due to these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. In addition, other companies in our industry may calculate this measure differently than we do, thereby further limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only on a supplemental basis.
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA.
(1) Represents third party costs associated with the strategic acquisition of TurnKey and third party costs associated with our Reverse Recapitalization in 2021, and third party costs associated with the strategic acquisition of Wyndham Vacation Rentals in 2019.
(2) Represents costs associated with an internal reorganization and workforce reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and costs associated with the wind-down of a significant portion of our international operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our founding, our principal sources of liquidity have been from proceeds we have received through the issuance of equity and debt financing. We have incurred significant operating losses and generated negative cash flows from operations as we have invested to support the growth of our business. To execute on our strategic initiatives to continue to grow our business, we may incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations in the future, and as a result, we may require additional capital resources.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $353.8 million on hand. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, $105.0 million was available for borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below). Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to finance working capital requirements, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes. In addition, following the Reverse Recapitalization, we will need cash to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. We expect our operations will continue to be financed primarily by equity offerings, debt financing, and cash and cash equivalents. We believe our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund operations, working capital requirements, capital expenditures, and debt service obligations for at least the next twelve months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our growth both organic and inorganic, our ability to attract and retain new homeowners and guests that utilize our services, the continuing market acceptance of our offerings, the timing and extent of spending to enhance our technology, and the expansion of sales and marketing activities. Further, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in businesses, products, services, and technologies. We have incurred significant operating losses and generated negative cash flows from operations as we have invested to support the growth of our business. To execute on our strategic initiatives to continue to grow our business, we may incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations in the future, and as a result, we may require additional capital resources. These capital resources may be obtained through additional equity offerings, which will dilute our existing unitholders, or debt financing, which may contain covenants that restrict the operations of our business. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition, and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Reverse Recapitalization
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, we received net proceeds of $302.6 million, which included (i) cash of $144.0 million that was held in TPG Pace's trust account from its initial public offering and TPG Pace's operating cash account, after giving effect to redemptions of TPG Pace's Class A Ordinary Shares held by TPG Pace's public shareholders prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, (ii) proceeds of $77.5 million from the PIPE Financing, and (iii) proceeds of $122.5 million from the FPA Financing, offset by (iv) the payment of underwriting commissions, advisory fees, and other transaction costs paid directly from proceeds of $41.4 million. We used these proceeds to pay additional transaction costs of $7.9 million, and the remaining $294.7 million of cash proceeds were contributed to our balance sheet. Reverse Recapitalization costs incurred but unpaid as of December 31, 2021 were not material. See Note 3, Reverse Recapitalization to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Senior Secured Convertible Notes
In May 2020, we entered into a note purchase agreement with certain of our existing investors pursuant to which we issued $108.1 million in aggregate principal amount of D-1 Convertible Notes. The D-1 Convertible Notes accrued cash interest daily at 3% per annum, payable annually in arrears on the anniversary date of the initial closing date. Additionally, the D-1 Convertible Notes accrued payment in kind (PIK) interest equal to 7% per annum, capitalized by adding the full amount of PIK interest to the principal balance on each anniversary date of the initial closing. In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, the D-1 Convertible Notes converted into equity interests in the Company and are no longer outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Revolving Credit Facility
In October 2021, we entered into a credit agreement, which, as subsequently amended in December 2021 (as amended, the Credit Agreement), provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $105.0 million (the Revolving Credit Facility). The Revolving Credit Facility includes a sub-facility for letters of credit in an aggregate face amount of $40.0 million which reduces borrowing availability under the Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility are subject to interest, determined as follows:
•Alternate Base Rate (ABR) borrowings accrue interest at a rate per annum equal to the ABR plus a margin of 1.50%. The ABR is equal to the greatest of (i) the Prime Rate, (ii) the NYFRB Rate plus 0.50%, and (iii) the Adjusted LIBO Rate for a one-month interest period plus 1.0%, subject to a 1.0% floor.
•Eurocurrency borrowings accrue interest at a rate per annum equal to the Adjusted LIBO Rate plus a margin of 2.50%. The Adjusted LIBO Rate is calculated based on the applicable LIBOR for U.S. dollar deposits, subject to a 0.0% floor, multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of which is one minus the maximum effective reserve percentage for Eurocurrency funding.
In addition to paying interest on the principal amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, we are required to pay a commitment fee on unused amounts at a rate of 0.25% per annum. We are also required to pay customary letter of credit and agency fees.
The Credit Agreement contains customary covenants. In addition, beginning on the last day of the second full fiscal quarter ending after the effective date of the Revolving Credit Facility, we are required to maintain a minimum amount of consolidated revenue, measured on a trailing four-quarter basis, as of the last date of each fiscal quarter, provided that such covenant will only apply if, on such date, the aggregate principal amount of outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and
letters of credit (excluding undrawn amounts under any letters of credit in an aggregate face amount of up to $20.0 million and letters of credit that have been cash collateralized) exceeds 35% of the then-outstanding revolving commitments. We will also be required to maintain liquidity of at least $15.0 million as of the last date of each fiscal quarter beginning with the second full fiscal quarter ending after the effective date of the December 2021 amendment to the Credit Agreement.
See Note 10, Debt to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $63.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to a net loss of $154.6 million, offset by $117.6 million of non-cash items related to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, fair value adjustment on derivative liabilities, non-cash interest expense, and equity-based compensation expense. Additional sources of cash flows resulted from changes in working capital, including a $40.2 million increase in funds payable to owners and $11.1 million increase in hospitality and sales taxes payable as a result of increased bookings on our platform, partially offset by a $3.6 million decrease in deferred revenue and future stay credits driven by the usage of future stay credits during the period.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to a net loss of $92.3 million, offset by $55.2 million of non-cash items related to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, fair value adjustment on warrant derivative liabilities, PIK interest related to our D-1 Convertible Notes and equity-based compensation. Additional sources of cash flows resulted from changes in working capital, including an $25.0 million increase in deferred revenue and future stay credits, $4.0 million increase in hospitality and sales taxes payable offset by a decrease of $17.3 million in funds payable to owners as a result of booking activity on our platform and timing of stays completed by our guests.
Net cash used in operating activities was $35.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily attributable to a net loss of $84.9 million, offset by $18.9 million of non-cash items related to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, and loss on debt extinguishment. Additional sources of cash resulted from changes in working capital including an increase of $31.7 million in funds payable to owners, $19.4 million increase in deferred revenue and future stay credits and $12.4 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities offset by a decrease of $10.8 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, $16.7 million decrease in accounts payable and $7.2 million decrease in accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities include cash paid for business combinations, capitalized internally developed software, and purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $114.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to $103.4 million of net cash paid to purchase businesses acquired, $5.9 million of cash paid for purchases of property and equipment, and $5.4 million of cash paid for capitalized internally developed software costs.
Net cash used in investing activities was $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to $7.9 million of cash paid for capitalized internally developed software and $3.5 million of net cash paid for businesses acquired.
Net cash used in investing activities was $134.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to $115.0 million of net cash paid to purchase Wyndham Vacation Rentals, Inc. and other business combinations and $16.9 million of cash paid for capitalized internally developed software costs.
Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities have come from the proceeds from our Reverse Recapitalization in 2021, issuance of senior secured convertible notes in 2020, and issuance of redeemable convertible preferred units in 2019. These proceeds were partially offset by cash payments for contingent consideration and deferred payments to sellers in connection with business combinations to grow the number of homes under management in new and adjacent markets served.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $279.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to $302.6 million of proceeds received from the Reverse Recapitalization, partially offset by $7.9 million of payments for transaction-related costs. In addition, we made financing-related cash payments of $13.6 million for business combinations.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $96.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting proceeds of $115.9 million from the issuance of the long-term debt, partially offset by $10.2 million of payments of long-term debt and $9.5 million of payments for business combinations.
Net cash provided by financing activities as $298.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily reflecting proceeds of $313.0 million from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred units, net of issuance costs, partially offset by cash paid for business combinations of $9.1 million and payments of long-term debt of $5.1 million.
Material Cash Requirements from Contractual and Other Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, our material cash requirements for our known contractual and other obligations were as follows:
•Operating Leases - We enter into various non-cancelable lease agreements primarily related to certain field and corporate office facilities. Future minimum lease payments to be made under non-cancelable operating leases with an initial or remaining term greater than one year were $43.9 million, with $13.8 million payable within 12 months. See Note 8, Leases to our consolidated financial statements for further detail of our obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
•Acquisition Liabilities - In connection with our portfolio transactions, accounted for as business combinations, we record acquisition-related liabilities, if applicable, for any contingent consideration or deferred payments to the seller. Our total acquisition liabilities were $64.7 million, with $31.4 million payable within 12 months.
•Information Technology Service Agreements - Information technology service agreements represent outsourced services and licensing costs pursuant to our information technology agreements. We had contractual payments for these agreements of $23.6 million, with $9.8 million payable within 12 months.
•Revolving Credit Facility - In October 2021, we entered into the Revolving Credit Facility, which, as subsequently amended in December 2021, provides for borrowings in an aggregate principal amount of up to $105.0 million, which amount may be borrowed and repaid from time to time. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Revolving Credit Facility.” We had no amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
•Tax Receivable Agreement - The payments that we may be required to make under the Tax Receivable Agreement that we entered into may be significant but we are currently unable to estimate the amounts and timing of the payments that may be due thereunder. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements for further details about the Tax Receivable agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Homeowner Contracts
Description
When we engage in a strategic acquisition or portfolio transaction accounted for as a business combination, we estimate the fair value of acquired assets, assumed liabilities, and purchase consideration transferred as of the acquisition date of each business combination. In every acquisition, homeowner contracts are the most significant intangible asset that we acquire. In valuing these homeowner contracts, we may engage a third-party valuation expert to estimate the fair value of these assets using a version of the income approach known as the "multi-period excess earnings method." This method uses a discounted cash flow approach that is derived from assumptions that include revenue growth rates, homeowner retention rates, operating profit margins, and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. We consider this approach the most appropriate valuation technique because the inherent value of our homeowner contracts is their ability to generate current and future income.
Judgments and Uncertainties
Revenue growth rates, homeowner retention rates, operating profit margins, and the discount rate applied are the significant estimates used in the multi-period excess earnings method to determine the fair value of homeowner contracts. These estimates are influenced by many factors, including historical financial information and management's expectations for future growth.
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
We have not made any changes in the accounting methodology used to determine the fair value of homeowner contracts during the last three years. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we acquired homeowner contracts valued at $172.6 million. A 10% increase in the calculated fair value of these homeowner contracts would increase amortization expense by $2.1 million during fiscal year 2021 and by $3.5 million annually during each full year remaining in their useful life.
Valuation of Equity Units
Description
Prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, given the absence of a public trading market for our equity units, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide: Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our management and board of directors determined the best estimate of fair value of our common units and redeemable convertible preferred units.
To determine the fair value of our equity units, we engaged a third-party valuation expert. We first determined our business enterprise value (BEV) and then allocated that equity fair value to our redeemable convertible preferred units, common units and common unit equivalents. We estimated our BEV primarily using a market approach, which is a generally accepted valuation approach. The market approach measures the value of a business through an analysis of recent sales or offerings of comparable investments or assets, and in our case, focused on comparing our business to a group of its peer companies. In applying this method, valuation multiples are derived from historical and forecasted operating data of the peer company group. We then apply the multiples to our operating data (i.e. revenue and EBITDA) to arrive at a range of indicated values of our Company.
At each valuation date, once the BEV for the business was determined, the equity value was allocated to each of our redeemable convertible preferred units, common units and common unit equivalents, using one of the following methods: (1) the option pricing method (OPM); and (2) a probability weighted expected return method (PWERM); or the hybrid method, which is a hybrid between the OPM and PWERM methods.
The OPM treats common units and redeemable convertible preferred units as call options on a business, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preference of the redeemable convertible preferred units. Therefore, the common unit only has value if the funds available for distribution to the holders of common units exceed the value of the liquidation preference of the redeemable convertible preferred units at the time of a liquidity event, such as a merger, sale, or initial public offering, assuming the business has funds available to make a liquidation preference meaningful and collectible by unit holders. The common unit is modeled as a call option with a claim on the business at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after the redeemable convertible preferred units are liquidated.
The PWERM utilizes discrete future exit scenarios to determine the value of our equity units. For each of the various scenarios, an equity value is estimated and the rights and preferences for each unit holder class are considered to allocate the equity value to common units. The equity unit values are then multiplied by a discount factor reflecting the calculated discount rate and the timing of the event. Lastly, the equity unit value is multiplied by an estimated probability for each scenario. Our board of directors and management team evaluated the probability and timing of the discrete future exit scenarios at each valuation date.
Judgments and Uncertainties
Prior to the Reverse Recapitalization, factors used to determine the value of our equity units included:
•the prices at which others have purchased our redeemable convertible preferred units in arms’ length transactions;
•the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred units relative to those of our common units;
•our operating and financial performance;
•our estimates of future financial performance;
•lack of marketability of our equity units;
•the valuation of comparable companies;
•the industry outlook;
•the likelihood and timing of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of our Company given prevailing market conditions;
•the U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions and outlook; and
•additional objective and subjective factors relating to our business.
On July 28, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement (the BCA) to become a publicly traded company through a business combination with TPG Pace Solutions Corporation, a special purpose acquisition company. The BCA provided management with a Company-specific indication of fair value of our equity units. This substantially reduced our need to rely on many of the subjective factors described above.
On December 6, 2021, the Company consummated the Reverse Recapitalization (see Note 3, Reverse Recapitalization to our consolidated financial statements), and the Company's Class A Common Stock began to trade publicly on December 7, 2021.
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
During fiscal year 2021, the valuation of our equity units impacted the following:
•The loss attributable to remeasurement of our redeemable convertible preferred units was $426.1 million during fiscal year 2021. These units were no longer remeasured at fair value subsequent to April 1, 2021. A 10% increase in the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred units as of April 1, 2021 would have increased their remeasurement loss by $119.8 million.
•Remeasurement of our common unit warrant derivative liabilities was $11.5 million during fiscal year 2021. These warrants were remeasured at fair value until the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization on December 6, 2021. As of this date, the warrants were remeasured using the valuation indicated by the BCA. As such, there was not significant judgment or uncertainty in their remeasurement.
•Equity-based compensation expense was $27.0 million during fiscal year 2021. A greater degree of subjectivity was required to determine the grant-date fair value of equity-based compensation awards granted prior to the execution of the BCA. Awards granted during fiscal year 2021 prior to the execution of the BCA had a total grant-date fair value of $18.8 million. A 10% increase in the grant-date fair value of these awards would increase equity-based compensation expense by $0.4 million in 2021 and by $0.5 million annually during each full year remaining in their vesting period.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We meet the definition of an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act, which permits us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.