Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the “Company,” “Victory,” or in the first-person notations of “we,” “us,” and “our” shall mean Victory Capital Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its wholly-owned subsidiaries.
Objective
The objective of this section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K is to provide a discussion and analysis, from management’s perspective, of the key performance indicators and material information necessary to assess our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, we also discuss the Company’s contractual obligations and off-balance sheet arrangements. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, which could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Please refer to the sections of this report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Our Business - Victory is a diversified global asset management firm with $183.7 billion in AUM as of December 31, 2021. The Company operates a next-generation business model combining boutique investment qualities with the benefits of an integrated, centralized operating and distribution platform.
The Company provides specialized investment strategies to institutions, intermediaries, retirement platforms and individual investors. With 12 autonomous Investment Franchises and a Solutions Platform, Victory offers a wide array of investment products, including actively and passively managed mutual funds, rules-based and active ETFs, institutional separate accounts, VIPs, ESG and impact investment strategies, alternative investments, private closed end funds, and a 529 Education Savings Plan. Victory Capital’s strategies are also offered through third-party investment products, including mutual funds, third-party ETF model strategies, retail SMAs and UMAs through wrap account programs, CITs, and UCITs. As of December 31, 2021, our Franchises and our Solutions Platform collectively managed a diversified set of 130 investment strategies for a wide range of institutional and retail clients and direct investors.
Franchises - Our Franchises are largely operationally integrated, but are separately branded and make investment decisions independently from one another within guidelines established by their respective investment mandates. Our largely integrated model creates a supportive environment in which our investment professionals, largely unencumbered by administrative and operational responsibilities, can focus on their pursuit of investment excellence. VCM employs all of our U.S. investment professionals across our Franchises, which are not separate legal entities.
Solutions - Our Solutions Platform consists of multi-asset, multi-manager, quantitative, rules-based, factor-based, and customized portfolios. These strategies are designed to achieve specific return characteristics, with products that include values-based and thematic outcomes and exposures. We offer our Solutions Platform through a variety of vehicles, including separate accounts, mutual funds, UMA accounts, rules-based and active ETFs under our VictoryShares ETF brand. Like our Franchises, our Solutions Platform is operationally integrated and supported by our centralized distribution, marketing and operational support functions.
Professionals within our institutional and retail distribution channels, direct investor business and marketing organization sell our products through our centralized distribution model. Our institutional sales team focuses on cultivating relationships with institutional consultants, who account for the majority of the institutional market, as well as asset allocators seeking sub-advisers. Our retail sales team offers intermediary and retirement platform clients, including broker-dealers, retirement platforms and RIA networks, mutual funds and ETFs as well as SMAs through wrap fee programs and access to our investment models through UMAs. Our direct
investor business serves the investment needs of clients including USAA members, the military community, and other individual clients.
We have grown our AUM from $17.9 billion following the management-led buyout with Crestview GP in August 2013 to $183.7 billion at December 31, 2021. We attribute this growth to our success in sourcing acquisitions and evolving them into organic growers, generating strong investment returns, and developing institutional, retail, and direct investor channels with deep penetration.
WestEnd Acquisition (the “WestEnd Acquisition”) - On December 31, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of 100% of the equity interests of WestEnd pursuant to the WestEnd purchase agreement (as amended, the “WestEnd Purchase Agreement”), resulting in WestEnd becoming the Company’s 12th investment franchise. Founded in 2004, and headquartered in Charlotte, NC, WestEnd provides financial advisors with a turnkey, core model allocation strategies serving as holistic solutions and complementary sources of alpha. The firm offers four primary ETF strategies and one large cap core strategy, all in tax efficient SMA structures. At December 31, 2021, the WestEnd acquired assets totaled $19.3 billion. The WestEnd acquired assets had no economic impact on operations in 2021 and no effect on asset flows, average assets, revenues or earnings in the full-year period ended December 31, 2021.
The aggregate purchase price (the “WestEnd Purchase Price”) for the WestEnd Acquisition is estimated at $716.1 million, net of cash acquired, which includes (i) $475.8 million in cash paid at closing (the “WestEnd Closing”) net of cash acquired plus the acquisition date value of contingent payments due to sellers of $239.7 million plus an estimated $0.6 million payable in cash in the first half of 2022 for net working capital adjustments. The contingent earn-out payments are based on net revenue of the WestEnd business during each of the first four years following the WestEnd Closing, subject to certain “catch-up” provisions over a five and one half year period following the WestEnd Closing. A maximum of $320.0 million ($80.0 million per year) in earn-out payments may be paid. The WestEnd Purchase Price is subject to adjustments based on the level of client consents received, net working capital, debt, cash and unpaid transaction expenses. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the WestEnd Acquisition.
NEC Acquisition (the “NEC Acquisition”) - On November 1, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of 100% of the equity interests in NEC, resulting in NEC becoming the Company’s 11th investment franchise. Founded in 2004 and based in Hanover, NH, NEC is an alternative asset management firm focused on debt and equity investments in clean energy infrastructure projects and companies. At November 1, 2021, the NEC AUM that was acquired totaled $795.0 million.
The estimated purchase price for the NEC Acquisition is $63.1 million, which includes $62.8 million in cash paid at closing, net of cash acquired, and $0.3 million of net working capital adjustments to be settled in the first quarter of 2022. Under the terms of the purchase agreement, the Company will pay up to an additional $35.0 million in cash based on net revenue growth over a six year period following the closing date. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the NEC Acquisition.
THB Acquisition (the “THB Acquisition”) - On March 1, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of certain assets of THB, resulting in THB becoming the Company’s 10th investment franchise. The acquisition expanded and diversified our investment platform, adding capacity constrained asset classes. The team manages strategies in U.S. micro-cap, small-cap and mid-cap assets classes as well as international small cap and global small cap portfolios; all of which are asset classes in which active management is an important part of a well-diversified portfolio. At March 1, 2021, the THB AUM that was acquired totaled $547 million.
In addition to servicing clients in the U.S., THB has a footprint in Australia and Europe which provides us with expanded distribution opportunities in regions in which we have a limited presence today. This will benefit all of our Franchises as we look to leverage THB’s distribution footprint to sell more of our investment strategies outside the U.S.
Aligning with the Company’s responsible investing initiatives, all of THB’s strategies have ESG considerations integrated into their investment processes. THB was an early adopter of responsible investment practices and has been managing responsible investment portfolios for decades.
Nominal consideration was paid for the assets of THB. The THB investment team will share in the revenue generated on their products and benefit from our centralized operational, marketing and distribution platforms.
THB has significant room for AUM growth across its product set, which we think will significantly accelerate with our distribution support. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the THB Acquisition.
USAA AMCO Acquisition - On July 1, 2019, the Company completed the acquisition (the “USAA AMCO Acquisition”) of USAA Asset Management (“USAA Adviser”) and VCTA, formally known as the USAA Transfer Agency Company. The acquisition expanded and diversified the Company’s investment platform and increased the Company’s size and scale. The acquisition also provided the Company the rights to offer products and services using the USAA brand and the opportunity to offer its products to USAA members through a direct distribution channel.
A maximum of $150.0 million ($37.5 million per year) in contingent payments is payable to sellers based on the annual revenue of USAA Adviser attributable to all “non-managed money”-related AUM in each of the first four years following the closing date. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we paid $37.5 million in cash to sellers for the first annual contingent payment. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we paid $37.5 million in cash to sellers for the second annual contingent payment.
The estimated fair value of contingent consideration payable to sellers was estimated at $68.8 million at December 31, 2021 as compared to $92.5 million at December 31, 2020 and is included in consideration payable for acquisition of business in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The increase in the liability of $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was recorded in change in value of consideration payable for acquisition of business in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
Alderwood - On September 20, 2020, the Company acquired, through a wholly owned subsidiary, a 15% interest in Alderwood and made a capital contribution of $1.5 million in cash. Alderwood’s operating entity, Alderwood Capital, is a London-based investment advisory firm focused on taking minority stakes in specialist boutique asset management businesses. The Company had commitments to contribute additional capital of $4.5 million to Alderwood and $50 million to a private fund to be launched by Alderwood, upon the satisfaction of certain conditions. On January 31, 2022, the Company signed an amendment to the Alderwood members’ agreement (“Alderwood Amendment”) and made a $1.5 million capital contribution to Alderwood. The Alderwood Amendment reduced the Company’s commitment to contribute additional capital to Alderwood from $4.5 million to $3.0 million. Refer to Note 13, Equity Method Investment, for further discussion regarding the investment.
COVID-19 Pandemic - The global spread of COVID-19 has created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. While COVID-19 did not have a material adverse effect on our business, operations and financial results, the extent to which the pandemic impacts our business, operations and financial results going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the impact of the pandemic on economic activity and actions taken in response; and the effect on our ability to sell and provide our services. We believe that doing our part to maintain the health and welfare of our employees is a critical element for achieving commercial success. As such, the Company has taken a proactive approach to addressing the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on our employees in order to protect their health, encouraging and in some instances requiring working from home, and balancing these steps with a carefully considered return to office policy that complies with respective local guidelines for each of our offices.
Business Highlights in 2021
Assets under management:
•
AUM at December 31, 2021 increased by $36.5 billion, or approximately 24.7%, to $183.7 billion from $147.2 billion at December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the combination of net assets acquired and market appreciation of $20.3 billion and $20.6 billion, respectively, partially offset by net outflows of $4.5 billion. Long-term gross inflows were $27.9 billion and $23.2 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Long-term net outflows were $4.0 billion and $10.9 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We generated $28.3 billion in gross flows and $4.5 billion in net outflows ($4.0 billlion long-term, $0.5 billion
short-term) for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $35.9 billion in gross flows and $19.4 billion in net outflows ($10.9 billlion long-term, $8.4 billion short-term) for the same period in 2020.
Investment performance:
•
43 of our total Victory Capital mutual funds and ETFs had overall Morningstar ratings of four or five stars and 64% of our fund and ETF AUM were rated four or five stars overall by Morningstar. 64% of our strategies by AUM had investment returns in excess of their respective benchmarks over a one-year period, 77% over a three-year period, 82% over a five-year period and 77% over a ten-year period. On an equal-weighted basis, 70% of our strategies have outperformed their respective benchmarks over a one-year period, 60% over a three-year period, 67% over a five-year period and 71% over a ten-year period.
2021 corporate ESG initiatives:
•
In 2021, we published the Company’s inaugural Corporate Social Responsibility (”CSR”) report. This report details our enterprise-level initiatives as well as our approach to integrating ESG considerations into our investment management processes.
•
We improved our corporate governance in 2021 by eliminating the Company’s former dual-class stock structure. As a result, all holders of the Company’s common stock now have identical economic and voting rights where one share equals one vote.
•
We implemented mandatory inclusive culture eLearning and hosted multiple sustained-learning activities designed to enhance awareness of diversity and inclusion in our workplace.
•
The Company formed a strategic alliance with Xavier University of Louisiana (“XULA”) and granted scholarships to XULA students. Additionally, we funded and assisted in establishing a student-led XULA Investment Club.
2021 investing ESG initiatives:
•
We launched three new VictoryShares ESG ETFs.
•
The Company completed the acquisition of certain assets of THB Asset Management. All of THB’s strategies have ESG considerations integrated into their investment processes. THB was an early adopter of responsible investment practices and has been managing responsible investment portfolios for decades.
•
We further enhanced our impact investing capabilities with the completion of the acquisition of 100% of the equity interests in NEC. NEC is an alternative asset management firm focused on debt and equity investments in clean and renewable energy infrastructure projects and companies.
Financial highlights:
•
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $890.3 million compared to $775.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income was $278.4 million and $212.5 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
•
GAAP earnings per diluted share were $3.75 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.88 for the same period in 2020. Adjusted net income with tax benefit per diluted share was $4.82 and $3.87, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Refer to “Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Information” for more information about how we calculate Adjusted Net Income and a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted Net Income.
•
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin was $449.0 million and 50.4%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $377.3 million and 48.7%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to “Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Information” for more information about how we calculate Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA.
•
Adjusted Net Income was $329.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $258.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to “Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Information” for more information about how we calculate Adjusted Net Income and a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted Net Income.
Other:
•
On October 28, 2021, the Company announced it was named in the Top 10 of Fortune’s 100 Fastest-Growing Companies for 2021.
•
On September 24, 2021, the Company filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 on behalf of Crestview, Reverence and their affiliated entities that hold the Company’s stock to permit the sale of up to 44,973,804 shares of the Company’s Common Stock from time to time. On October 13, 2021, the Form S-3 was declared effective.
©2021 Fortune Media IP Limited All rights reserved. Fortune is a registered trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited and is used under license. Fortune and Fortune Media IP Limited are not affiliated with, and do not endorse products or services of, Victory Capital Management, Inc. Fortune’s annual list ranks the top performing, publicly traded companies in revenues, profits and stock returns over the three-year period ended April 30, 2021.
Key Performance Indicators
The following table presents the key performance indicators we focus on when reviewing our results:
(1)
Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income to measure the operating profitability of the business. These measures eliminate the impact of one-time acquisition, restructuring and integration costs and demonstrate the ongoing operating earnings metrics of the business. These measures are explained in more detail and reconciled to net income calculated in accordance with GAAP in “Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Information.”
(2)
Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenue.
(3)
Represents the tax benefits associated with deductions allowed for intangible assets and goodwill generated from prior acquisitions in which we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets and goodwill may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. The tax benefit from amortization on these assets is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for all acquired intangibles with a step-up in tax basis. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets and goodwill provide us with a significant supplemental economic benefit.
Assets Under Management
Our profitability is largely affected by the level and composition of our AUM (including asset class and distribution channel) and the effective fee rates on our products. The amount and composition of our AUM are, and will continue to be, influenced by a number of factors, including; (i) investment performance, including fluctuations in the financial markets and the quality of our investment decisions; (ii) client flows into and out of our various strategies and investment vehicles; (iii) industry trends toward products or strategies that we either do or do not offer; (iv) our ability to attract and retain high quality investment, distribution, marketing and management personnel; (v) our decision to close strategies or limit growth of assets in a strategy when we believe it is in the best interest of our clients or conversely to re-open strategies in part or entirely; and (vi) general investor sentiment and confidence. Our goal is to establish and maintain a client base that is diversified by Franchise and Solutions, asset class, distribution channel and vehicle.
Valuation of Assets Under Management
The fair value of assets under management of the Victory Funds, USAA Funds and VictoryShares is primarily determined using quoted market prices or independent third-party pricing services or broker price quotes. In certain circumstances, a quotation or price evaluation is not readily available from a pricing service. In these cases, pricing is determined by management based on a prescribed valuation process that has been approved by the directors/trustees of the sponsored products. The same prescribed valuation process is used to price securities in separate accounts and the Company’s other non-alternative investment vehicles for which a quotation or price evaluation is not readily available from a pricing service.
For certain alternative investment vehicles, including the NEC funds, AUM represents limited partner capital commitments during the commitment period of the fund. Following the earlier of the termination of the commitment period and the beginning of any commitment period for a successor fund, AUM generally represents, depending on the fund, the lesser of a) the net asset value of the fund and b) the aggregated adjusted cost basis of each unrealized portfolio investment or the limited partner capital commitments reduced by the amount of capital contributions used to make portfolio investments that have been disposed. The fair value of Level III assets held by alternative investment vehicles is determined under the respective valuation policy for each fund. The valuation policies address the fact that substantially all the investments of a fund may not have readily available market information and therefore the fair value for these assets is typically determined using unobservable inputs and models that may include subjective assumptions. AUM reported by the Company for alternative investment vehicles may not necessarily equal the funds’ net asset values or the total fair value of the funds’ portfolio investments as AUM represents the basis for calculating management fees. For the periods presented, less than one percent of the Company’s total AUM were Level III assets priced without using a quoted market price, broker price quote or pricing service quotation.
AUM by Asset Class - the following table presents our AUM by asset class as of the dates indicated:
(1)
Includes the impact of acquired assets from the THB, NEC and WestEnd Acquisitions, which closed on March 1, 2021, November 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively, and increased our AUM by approximately $547 million, $795 million and $19.3 billion, respectively. The WestEnd acquired assets had no economic impact on operations in 2021 and no effect on asset flows, average assets, revenues or earnings in the full-year period ended December 31, 2021.
(2)
Includes the impact of the USAA AMCO Acquisition, which closed on July 1, 2019, increasing our AUM by $81.1 billion inclusive of managed portfolio assets invested through USAA’s brokerage business. We did not acquire the USAA brokerage business.
Asset Flows by Asset Class - the following table summarizes our asset flows by asset class for the periods indicated:
AUM by Distribution Channel - the following table presents our AUM by distribution channel as of the dates indicated:
(1)
The allocation of AUM by distribution channel involves the use of estimates and the exercise of judgment.
Assets Flows by Vehicle - the following table summarizes our asset flows by vehicle for the periods indicated:
(1)
Includes institutional and retail share classes, money market and Variable Insurance Products or VIP funds.
(2)
Represents only ETF assets held by third parties. Excludes ETF assets held by other Victory Capital products.
(3)
Includes collective trust funds, wrap program accounts, UMAs, UCITs, private funds and non-U.S. domiciled pooled vehicles.
(4)
The year ended December 31, 2021 includes acquired assets of $547 million, $795 million and $19.3 billion associated with the THB, NEC and WestEnd acquisitions, which closed on March 1, 2021, November 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively. The WestEnd acquired assets had no economic impact on operations in 2021 and no effect on asset flows, average assets, revenues or earnings in the full-year period ended December 31, 2021.
December 31, 2021 AUM - Our total AUM at December 31, 2021 increased by $36.4 billion, or 24.7%, to $183.7 billion from $147.2 billion at December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the combination of net acquired assets and positive market movement of $20.3 million and $20.6 million, respectively, partially offset by net outflows of $4.5 billion.
The net outflows were driven by $2.2 billion in fixed income strategies, $1.8 billion our U.S. mid cap equity strategies, $1.2 billion in our U.S. large cap equity strategies, $1.1 billion in our U.S. small cap equity strategies and $0.5 billion in money market and short-term strategies, partially offset by $1.9 billion in net inflows into our Solutions Platform and $0.5 billion into our global/non-U.S. equity strategies.
December 31, 2020 AUM - Our total AUM at December 31, 2020 was $147.2 billion, a decrease of $4.6 billion, or 3.0%, compared to $151.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The decrease in AUM during 2020 is due to net outflows of $19.4 billion partially offset by $14.8 billion in positive market movement. Short-term money market assets accounted for $3.5 billion, or 2.4% of the total AUM at December 31, 2020.
The net outflows were driven by $8.4 billion in money market and short-term strategies, $3.5 billion in our U.S. mid cap equity strategies, $2.6 billion in our fixed income strategies, $2.1 billion in our Solutions Platform, $1.9 billion in our U.S. large cap equity strategies and $0.7 billion in our U.S. small cap equity strategies.
December 31, 2019 AUM - Our total AUM at December 31, 2019 was $151.8 billion, an increase of $99.1 billion, or 187.8%, compared to $52.8 billion at December 31, 2018. The change in AUM during 2019 reflects $81.1 billion of acquired assets, $1.9 billion of positive net inflows, as well as $16.1 billion in positive market movement. Short-term money market assets accounted for $11.6 billion, or 7.6% of the total AUM at December 31, 2019.
The net inflows were driven by $2.6 billion in our Solutions Platform and $2.3 billion in our fixed income strategies, partially offset by net outflows of $1.0 billion in our U.S. mid cap equity strategies, $0.9 billion in our U.S. large cap equity strategies, $0.9 billion in our U.S. small cap equity strategies, $0.2 billion in other and $0.1 billion in our global/non-U.S equity strategies.
GAAP Results of Operations
Our GAAP revenues principally consist of: (i) investment management fees, which are based on our overall weighted average fee rate charged to our clients and our level of AUM and (ii) fund administration and distribution fees, which are asset-based fees earned from open-end mutual funds for administration and distribution services. Fund administration and fund distribution fees also include fund transfer agent fees (related to the USAA Funds), which are based on a contractual rate applied to average AUM or the number of accounts in these funds.
The Company has contractual arrangements with third parties to provide certain advisory, administration, transfer agent and distribution services. Management considers whether we are acting as the principal service provider or as an agent to determine whether revenue should be recorded based on the gross amount payable by the customer or net of payments to third-party service providers, respectively. Victory is considered a principal service provider if we control the service that is transferred to the customer. We are considered an agent when we arrange for the service to be provided by another party and do not control the service.
Investment Management Fees - Investment management fees are earned from managing clients’ assets. Our investment management fee revenue fluctuates based on a number of factors, including the total value of our AUM, the composition of AUM across investment strategies and vehicles, changes in the investment management fee rates on our products and the extent to which we enter into fee arrangements that differ from our standard fee schedule as well as the extent to which our fund expenses exceed fund caps. Investment management fees are earned based on a percentage of AUM as delineated in the respective investment management agreements. Our investment management fees are calculated based on daily average AUM, monthly average AUM or point in time AUM.
Fund Administration and Distribution Fees - Fund administration fees are primarily asset-based fees earned from open-end funds for administration services. Fund administration fees fluctuate based on the level of average open-end fund AUM and the fee rates charged for these services.
Fund distribution fees are asset-based fees earned from open-end funds for distribution services. Fund distribution fees fluctuate based on the level of average open-end fund AUM and the composition of those assets across share classes that pay varying levels of fund distribution fees.
The Company has contractual arrangements with a third party to provide certain sub-administration services. We are the primary obligor under the contracts with the Victory Funds, USAA Funds and VictoryShares and have the ability to select the service provider and establish pricing. As a result, fund administration fees and sub-administration expenses are recorded on a gross basis. VCS has contractual arrangements with third parties to provide certain distribution services. VCS is the primary obligor under the contracts with the Victory Funds and USAA Funds and has the ability to select the service provider and establish pricing. Substantially all of VCS’s revenue is recorded gross of payments made to third parties.
Fund transfer agent fees are earned for providing mutual fund shareholder services. Transfer agent fees fluctuate based on the level of average AUM and the number of accounts in the USAA Funds.
The Company has contractual arrangements with a third party to provide certain sub-transfer agent services. We are the primary obligor under the transfer agency contracts with the USAA Funds and have the ability to select the service provider and establish pricing. As a result, fund transfer agent fees and sub-transfer agent expenses are recorded on a gross basis.
GAAP Expenses
Our GAAP expenses principally consist of: (i) personnel compensation and benefits; (ii) distribution and other asset-based expenses; (iii) general and administrative expenses; (iv) depreciation and amortization charges; and (v) acquisition-related expenses comprising of changes in the fair value of contingent acquisition payments and restructuring and acquisition costs.
Personnel Compensation and Benefits - Personnel compensation and benefits is our most significant category of expense. Personnel compensation and benefits consists of (i) salaries, payroll related taxes and employee benefits, (ii) incentive compensation, (iii) sales-based compensation, (iv) compensation expense related to equity awards granted to employees and directors and (v) acquisition-related compensation in the form of cash retention bonuses and certain transaction-related compensatory payment arrangements.
Incentive compensation is the largest component of the total compensation of our employees. The aggregate amount of cash incentive compensation is funded by a pool that is based on a percentage of total Company earnings (before taking into account incentive compensation). This incentive pool is used to pay the investment teams a percentage of the revenue earned by their respective Franchise on a quarterly basis. This incentive pool is also used to pay incentive compensation to senior management and other non-investment employees on an annual basis. Incentive compensation paid to senior management and to other non-investment employees is discretionary and subjectively determined based on Company and individual performance and the total amount of the incentive compensation pool.
Distribution and Other Asset-based Expenses - Distribution and other asset-based expenses consists of: (i) broker-dealer distribution fees and platform distribution fees and (ii) sub-administration, sub-transfer agent, sub-advisory expenses and middle-office expenses.
Broker-dealer distribution fees are paid by VCS as the broker-dealer for the Victory Funds and USAA Funds to third-party distributors. The Victory Funds and USAA Funds pay VCS for distribution services and VCS, in turn, pays third-party distributors.
Platform distribution fees are paid by VCM as the investment adviser to the Victory Funds and USAA Funds. Platform distribution fees are paid to financial advisors, retirement plan providers and intermediaries for servicing and administering accounts invested in shares of the Victory Funds and USAA Funds. Distribution fees typically vary based on the level of AUM and the composition of those assets across share classes.
Sub-administration, sub-transfer agent, sub-advisory and middle-office expenses consist of fees paid to our sub-administrators of the Victory Funds, VictoryShares and USAA Funds, fees paid to our sub-transfer agent for the USAA Funds, fees paid to sub-advisers on certain Victory Funds and USAA Funds and fees paid to vendors to which we outsource middle-office functions.
•
VCM acts as the administrator to the Victory Funds, VictoryShares and USAA Funds. VCM has hired a sub-administrator, the fees for which are captured in sub-administration expense. As administrator, VCM supervises the operations of the Victory Funds, VictoryShares and USAA Funds, including the services provided by the sub-administrators. The sub-administrators are paid through a contractual arrangement based on a percentage of the average fund AUM.
•
VCTA acts as the transfer agent to the USAA Funds. VCTA has hired a sub-transfer agent, the fees for which are captured in sub-administration expense. As transfer agent, VCTA oversees the services provided by the sub-transfer agent. The sub-transfer agent is paid through a contractual arrangement based on a percentage of average fund AUM.
•
VCM, as the investment adviser for the Victory Funds and USAA Funds, has hired unaffiliated sub-advisers to manage funds for which we do not have in-house capabilities. The fees paid to the sub-advisers are contractual based on a percentage of assets that they manage or based upon a percentage of revenue.
•
We have outsourced middle-office operations to achieve a scalable operational infrastructure that utilizes a variable-cost model. We have selected to partner with top-tier vendors who perform trade operations, portfolio accounting and performance measurement with oversight from our operations team. The fees paid to these vendors are variable and structured based on the number of accounts, assets and specific services performed.
General and Administrative Expenses - General and administrative expenses primarily consist of investment research and technology costs, professional and marketing fees, travel, rent and insurance expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization - Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of the depreciation of property and equipment as well as the amortization of acquired intangibles that have a definite life. These intangibles include customer relationships, investment advisory contracts, intellectual property and non-compete clauses acquired in connection with a business or asset acquisition. Both depreciation and amortization are recorded ratably over the assets’ useful lives.
Acquisition-Related Costs - Acquisition-related costs include legal fees, advisory services, mutual fund proxy voting costs and other one-time expenses related to acquisitions.
Restructuring and Integration Costs - Restructuring and integration costs include costs incurred in connection with business combinations, including the increase in the fair value of contingent acquisition payments, asset purchases and changes in business strategy. These include severance expenses related to one-time benefit arrangements, contract termination and other costs to integrate investment platforms, products and personnel into existing systems, processes and service provider arrangements and restructuring the business to capture operating expense synergies.
Other non-operating items of income and expense consist of: (i) interest income and other income (expense); (ii) interest expense and other financing costs; (iii) loss on debt extinguishment; and (iv) income tax expense.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense) - Interest income and other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income, gains (losses) on investments and dividend income on investments.
Interest Expense and Other Financing Costs - Interest expense and other financing costs consists primarily of interest expense attributable to long-term debt. Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for more information.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment - Loss on debt extinguishment consists of the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and unamortized debt discount as a result of debt refinancing, the acceleration of the paydown of debt principal and debt repurchased and retired in open market transactions.
Income Tax Expense - The provision for income taxes includes U.S. federal, state and local taxes, and foreign income taxes payable by certain of our subsidiaries. The effective tax rate is primarily driven by state and local taxes and excess tax benefits on share-based compensation, and for 2019, expense related to recording a liability for uncertain tax positions. The portion of the effective income tax rate attributable to state and local
income taxes varies from year to year depending on amounts of income apportioned to each jurisdiction, whether we file income tax returns on a unitary or separate return basis and with changes in tax laws.
The following table presents our GAAP results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands except per share data).
Investment Management Fees
2021 compared to 2020 - Investment management fees increased $112.5 million, or 20.0%, to $674.5 million in 2021 from $562.0 million in 2020 due to an increase in average AUM year over year, partially offset by a
decrease in revenue realization due to a shift in asset class and product mix. Average AUM was $158.6 billion in 2021 compared to $136.4 billion in 2020, mostly attributable to market appreciation.
2020 compared to 2019 - Investment management fees increased $95.2 million, or 20.4%, to $562.0 million in 2020 from $466.8 million in 2019 due to an increase in average AUM year over year, partially offset by a decrease in the realized fee rate due to a shift in asset mix. Average AUM was $136.4 billion in 2020 compared to $102.7 billion in 2019, mostly attributable to the acquired assets in the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
Fund Administration and Distribution Fees
2021 compared to 2020 - Fund administration and distribution fees were relatively flat, increasing $2.4 million, or 1.1% to $215.7 million in 2021 compared to $213.3 million in 2020. The increase is due to an increase in fund administration fees, partially offset by a decrease in transfer agent fees and a shift in the mix of assets to lower 12b-1 paying share classes.
2020 compared to 2019 - Fund administration and distribution fees totaled $213.3 million in 2020, an increase of $67.7 million, or 46.5%, from $145.6 million in 2019. Fund administration fees increased by $41.0 million, or 57.0%, due to an increase in average AUM year over year, mostly attributable to the USAA AMCO Acquisition and the addition of $74.0 million in transfer agent fees with the USAA Funds, partially offset by a decline in distribution fee realization due to a shift in the mix of assets to lower 12b-1 paying share classes.
Personnel Compensation and Benefits
The following table presents the components of GAAP compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)
Represents sales-based commissions paid to our distribution teams. Sales-based compensation varies based on gross and net client cash flows and revenue earned on sales.
(2)
Share-based compensation typically vests over several years based on service and the achievement of specific business and financial targets. The value of share-based compensation is recognized as compensation expense over the vesting period.
2021 compared to 2020 - Personnel compensation and benefits were $234.8 million in 2021, an increase of $37.7 million, or 19.1%, from $197.2 million in 2020 primarily attributable to an increase in salaries, payroll related taxes and employee benefits, incentive compensation and sales-based compensation due to an increase in headcount and an increase in operating results, resulting in an increase in variable costs such as the incentive compensation pool for employees, sales commissions, and third-party distribution costs. Salaries, payroll related taxes and employee benefits were $87.1 million and $76.3 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Incentive compensation and equity awards granted to employees and directors were $109.0 million and $17.6 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $87.4 million and $18.1 million, respectively, for the same period in 2020.
2020 compared to 2019 - Personnel compensation and benefits were $197.2 million in 2020, an increase of $17.3 million, or 9.6%, from $179.8 million in 2019 primarily attributable to an increase in headcount due to the USAA AMCO Acquisition. Salaries, payroll related taxes and employee benefits were $76.3 million and $62.3 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Incentive compensation and equity awards granted to employees and directors were $87.4 million and $18.1 million, respectively, for the year
ended December 31, 2020, compared to $85.6 million and $16.3 million, respectively, for the same period in 2019.
Distribution and Other Asset-based Expenses
The following table presents the components of distribution and other asset-based expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
2021 compared to 2020 - Distribution and other asset-based expenses are primarily based on AUM. Distribution and other asset-based expenses were relatively flat, increasing $0.7 million, or 0.4%, to $176.4 million in 2021 compared to $175.7 million in 2020, primarily due to an increase in broker dealer distribution fees as a result of higher average AUM over the comparable period offset by a change in asset mix of our underlying retail distribution platforms.
2020 compared to 2019 - Distribution and other asset-based expenses are primarily based on AUM. Distribution and other asset-based expenses were $175.7 million in 2020, an increase of $29.1 million, or 19.8%, from $146.6 million in 2019, primarily due to the USAA AMCO Acquisition which closed on July 1, 2019. The acquisition introduced new operating expenses that the Company did not incur prior to the acquisition, such as platform distribution costs paid to third parties and USAA, sub-transfer agent service costs and USAA 529 Education Savings Plan expenses. Also contributing to the overall change, but to a lesser extent, was the decrease in broker-dealer distribution fees due to the shift in the mix of assets to lower and non 12b-1 paying share classes.
General and Administrative Expenses
2021 compared to 2020 - General and administrative expenses were $53.7 million in 2021 compared to $51.2 million in 2020. The increase of $2.5 million, or 4.9%, was primarily due to increases in technology and professional fees partially offset by a reduction in transition service agreement costs related to the USAA AMCO Acquisition, which ended in the fourth quarter of 2020.
2020 compared to 2019 - General and administrative expenses were $51.2 million in 2020 compared to $46.6 million in 2019. The increase of $4.7 million, or 10.0%, was primarily due to the addition of transition service agreement costs related to the USAA AMCO Acquisition. Also contributing, but to a lesser extent, were increases in facility, technology and professional fees mainly related to the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization
2021 compared to 2020 - Depreciation and amortization increased by $2.5 million, 15.0%, to $18.8 million in 2021, from $16.4 million in 2020, due to the addition of depreciation expense related to the launch of the Company’s direct investor digital platform, which went live in November 2020.
2020 compared to 2019 - Depreciation and amortization decreased by $7.5 million, 31.4%, to $16.4 million in 2020, from $23.9 million in 2019, due to a reduction in amortization expense related to definite-lived intangible assets in connection with the Munder Capital Management acquisition that became fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Change in Value of Consideration Payable for Acquisition of Business
2021 compared to 2020 - The change in value of consideration payable for acquisition of business increased $2.5 million as a result of an increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration associated with the USAA AMCO acquisition of $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an increase of $11.3 million in the prior year. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the fair value of contingent consideration payable.
2020 compared to 2019 - The change in value of consideration payable for acquisition of business decreased $8.6 million as a result of an increase in the fair value of the contingent consideration associated with the USAA AMCO acquisition of $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an increase of $19.9 million in the prior year. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details on the fair value of contingent consideration payable.
Acquisition-Related Costs
2021 compared to 2020 - Acquisition-related costs increased $15.2 million to $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.1 million in the prior year. The increase is primarily due to the NEC and WestEnd acquisitions which closed on November 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, respectively. The 2021 acquisition-related expenses include various transaction costs such as legal and filing fees and other professional fees as well as an estimated liability for potential one-time payments related to a prior acquisition.
2020 compared to 2019 - Acquisition-related costs decreased $21.2 million, or 95%, to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $22.3 million in the prior year. The decrease is due to the USAA AMCO Acquisition which closed on July 1, 2019. The 2019 acquisition-related expenses include various transaction costs such as legal and filing fees and other professional fees.
Restructuring and Integration Costs
2021 compared to 2020 - Restructuring and integration costs decreased $5.2 million, or 66.9%, to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $7.8 million in the prior year. The decrease is due to higher integration and conversion costs associated with the USAA AMCO Acquisition recorded in 2020 compared to personnel restructuring costs within the direct investor business recorded in 2021.
2020 compared to 2019 - Restructuring and integration costs decreased $0.9 million, or 10.3%, to $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.7 million in the prior year. The 2020 and 2019 expenses related to severance costs and integration and conversion costs associated with the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense)
2021 compared to 2020 - Interest income and other income (expense) was income of $6.0 million in 2021, compared to income of $3.7 million in 2020. The increase was due to an increase in dividend income and unrealized gains on deferred compensation plan investments over the comparable period.
2020 compared to 2019 - Interest income and other income (expense) was income of $3.7 million in 2020, compared to income of $6.8 million in 2019. The decrease was due to the combination of a gain on sale of an equity method investment in Cerebellum of $2.9 million and higher yields on our cash invested in money market accounts in 2019.
Interest Expense and Other Financing Costs
2021 compared to 2020 - Interest expense and other financing costs decreased by $12.4 million, or 33.4%, to $24.7 million in 2021, from $37.0 million in 2020. The expense decrease is primarily due to a decrease in interest expense as a result of a lower debt principal balance and a lower average interest rate over the comparable period.
2020 compared to 2019 - Interest expense and other financing costs decreased by $3.9 million, or 9.5%, to $37.0 million in 2020, from $40.9 million in 2019. The expense decrease is primarily due to a decrease in interest expense as a result of a lower debt principal balance over the comparable period.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
2021 compared to 2020 - Loss on debt extinguishment increased by $1.7 million, or 60.1%, to $4.6 million in 2021 compared to $2.9 million in the prior year. The increase is largely due to repayments of term loan principal and entering into the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement in February 2021. Also contributing, but to a lesser extent, were unamortized debt issuance and unamortized debt discount expenses which were partially offset by gains recognized on repurchases and retirement of outstanding debt below par in the open market in 2020.
2020 compared to 2019 - Loss on debt extinguishment decreased $7.0 million, or 70.9%, to $2.9 million in 2020 compared to $9.9 million in the prior year. The decrease is due to the 2019 write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and unamortized debt discount due to (i) the termination of the previous credit agreement, dated February 2018 ($5.5 million) and (ii) accelerating the paydown of debt principal under the 2019 Credit Agreement ($4.4 million).
Income Tax Expense
2021 compared to 2020 - Our effective tax rate decreased 3.1% from 23.7% in 2020 to 20.6% in 2021. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to higher excess tax benefits on share-based compensation. Refer to Note 10, Income Taxes, to the audited financial statements for further details on income taxes.
2020 compared to 2019 - Our effective tax rate was relatively flat increasing 0.4% from 23.4% in 2019 to 23.7% in 2020. Refer to Note 10, Income Taxes, to the audited financial statements for further details on income taxes.
Effects of Inflation
Inflation did not have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations. Inflationary pressures can result in increases to our cost structure. Certain large expense components such as compensation and distribution expenses are predominately variable and move in tandem with revenues. To the degree that these expense increases are not recoverable or cannot be counterbalanced through price increases due to the competitive environment, our profitability could be negatively impacted. In addition, the value of the fixed income assets that we manage may be negatively impacted when inflationary expectations result in a rising interest rate environment. Declines in the values of AUM could lead to reduced revenues as investment management fees are generally earned as a percentage of AUM.
Supplemental Non-GAAP Financial Information
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. Our management uses non-GAAP performance measures to evaluate the underlying operations of our business. Non-GAAP financial measures are used to supplement GAAP results to provide a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business than GAAP results alone. Due to our acquisitive nature, there are a number of acquisition and restructuring related expenses included in GAAP measures that we believe distort the underlying economics of our organization and we believe that many investors use this information when assessing the financial performance of companies in the investment management industry. We have included these non-GAAP measures to provide investors with the same financial metrics used by management to assess the operating performance of our Company.
Non-GAAP measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our non-GAAP measures may differ from similar measures at other companies, even if similar terms are used to identify these measures. Specifically, we make use of the non-GAAP financial measures “Adjusted EBITDA” and “Adjusted Net Income.”
The following table sets forth a reconciliation from GAAP financial measures to non-GAAP measures for the periods indicated:
Adjustments made to GAAP Net Income to calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income, as applicable, are:
(1)
Adding back interest paid on debt and other financing costs, net of interest income.
(2)
Adding back depreciation on property and equipment.
(3)
Adding back other business taxes.
(4)
Adding back amortization expense on acquisition-related intangible assets.
(5)
Adding back share-based compensation associated with equity awards issued from pools created in connection with the management-led buyout and various acquisitions and as a result of equity grants related to the initial public offering (the “IPO”).
(6)
Adding back direct incremental costs of acquisitions, including restructuring costs.
(7)
Adding back debt issuance cost expense.
(8)
Adjusting for losses (earnings) on equity method investments.
(9)
Subtracting an estimate of income tax expense applied to the sum of the adjustments above.
(10)
Represents the tax benefits associated with deductions allowed for intangibles and goodwill generated from acquisitions in which we received a step-up in basis for tax purposes. Acquired intangible assets and goodwill may be amortized for tax purposes, generally over a 15-year period. The tax benefit from amortization on these assets is included to show the full economic benefit of deductions for all acquired intangibles with a step-up in tax basis. Due to our acquisitive nature, tax deductions allowed on acquired intangible assets and goodwill provide us with a significant economic benefit.
The following table presents the components of acquisition, restructuring and exit costs for the periods indicated:
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Contractual Obligations
Sources and Uses of Cash - We generate strong cash flows from operations that allow us to meet our cash requirements. Our primary uses of cash include: (i) repayment of our debt obligations, (ii) funding of acquisitions, (iii) payment of contingent consideration for previous acquisitions, and (iv) working capital needs. Cash flows from operations also allow us to meet certain other cash uses such as quarterly cash dividends and the repurchase of our Common Stock. We believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to continue to paydown our debt obligations as well as to continue focusing on acquisition candidates.
The following table presents our liquidity position as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)
We manage our cash balances in order to fund our day-to-day operations and invest excess cash into money market funds and other short-term investments.
(2)
Our accounts receivables consist primarily of investment management, fund administrative and distribution fees that have been earned but not yet received from clients. We perform a review of our receivables on a monthly basis to assess collectability.
(3)
The balance at December 31, 2021 represents the Company’s undrawn $99.9 million revolving credit facility and a $0.1 million standby letter of credit used as collateral for THB’s real estate location. The revolving credit facility balance of $100.0 million was undrawn at December 31, 2020.
(4)
Accounts and other payables consist primarily of various payables related to operations, transaction costs and interest payable on the term loan, as well as accrued compensation and benefits.
Includes the required prinicipal amortization of 1.00% per annum related to the Company’s term loan.
Excludes $36.6 million and $36.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration that is expected to be paid over the next twelve month period resulting from the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
2019 Credit Agreement, 2020 and 2021 Debt Repricings and 2021 Incremental Term Loans - In conjunction with the USAA AMCO Acquisition, the Company entered into the 2019 Credit Agreement, dated July 1, 2019, and obtained a seven-year term loan in an aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion. All indebtedness outstanding under the previous credit agreement was repaid and terminated as of July 1, 2019. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has repaid or repurchased and retired $453.8 million of the
outstanding term loans under the 2019 Credit Agreement. A total of $142.0 million of the outstanding term loans under the 2019 Credit Agreement was repaid in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our financial performance covenant.
On January 17, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment (the “First Amendment”) to the 2019 Credit Agreement with the other loan parties thereto, Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent, and the Royal Bank of Canada as fronting bank. Pursuant to the First Amendment, the Company refinanced the existing term loans (the “2019 Term Loans”) with replacement term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $952.0 (the “2020 Term Loans”). The 2020 Term Loans provide for substantially the same terms as the 2019 Term Loans, including the same maturity date of July 1, 2026, except that the 2020 Term Loans provide for a reduced applicable margin on LIBOR of 75 basis points. The applicable margin on LIBOR under the 2020 Term Loans is 2.50%, compared to 3.25% under the 2019 Term Loans. The Company incurred costs of $0.9 million in 2020 related to the First Amendment which were recorded in general and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Refer to Note 11, Debt, for further information on the repricing.
In April 2020, the Company established a trading account to opportunistically take advantage of potential short-term trading arbitrage with respect to our term loan. An alternative to principal prepayments, this allows us to buy back our outstanding term loan in the open market and retire the debt. This alternative is preferable to principal prepayments when our debt trades at a discount to par. In 2021, the Company did not utilize the trading account to buy back our outstanding term loan debt in the open market and retire it.
On February 18, 2021, we entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the 2019 Credit Agreement, as amended, with the other loan parties thereto, Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent, and the Royal Bank of Canada as fronting bank. Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the Company refinanced the 2020 Term Loans with replacement term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $755.7 (the “Repriced Term Loans”). The Repriced Term Loans provide for substantially the same terms as the 2020 Term Loans, including the same maturity date of July 1, 2026, except that the Repriced Term Loans provide for a reduced applicable margin on LIBOR of 25 basis points. The applicable margin on LIBOR under the Repriced Term Loans is 2.25%, compared to 2.50% under the First Amendment.
On December 31, 2021, the Company entered into the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”), dated as of July 1, 2019 (as amended by the First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of January 17, 2020, and the Second Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of February 18, 2021) with the guarantors party thereto, Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto from time to time. Pursuant to the Third Amendment, the Company obtained incremental term loans (the “2021 Incremental Term Loans”) in an aggregate principal amount of $505.0 million and used the proceeds to fund the WestEnd Acquisition of 100% of the equity interests of WestEnd and to pay fees and expenses incurred in connection therewith. The 2021 Incremental Term Loans will mature in 2028 and will bear interest at an annual rate equal to, at the option of the Company, either LIBOR (adjusted for reserves and subject to a 50 basis point floor) plus a margin of 2.25% or an alternate base rate plus a margin of 1.25%. The 2021 Incremental Term Loans will amortize at a rate of 1.00% per annum. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, the Company reduced outstanding debt on the 2021 Incremental Term Loans by $65.0 million through prepayments. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, to the consolidated financial statements for further details on the WestEnd Acquisition, as well as Note 11, Debt, for further information on the 2019 Credit Agreement.
2020 Swap Transaction - On March 27, 2020, the Company executed a floating-to-fixed interest rate swap transaction (“Swap”) to effectively fix the interest rate at 3.465% on $450 million of its outstanding Term Loan through the Term Loan maturity date of July 2026. Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the Company lowered the spread on the Term Loan by 0.25% resulting in a new fixed rate of 3.215% on the $450 million of Term Loan subject to the Swap. At December 31, 2021, the $450 million notional value Swap had a fair value of $7.8 million, which was included in other assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company reclassified a loss of $1.0 million and $3.6 million, respectively, from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to interest expense and other financing costs on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a gain, net of tax, of $6.1 million and $13.5 million, respectively, in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Refer to Note 12, Derivatives, for further information on the Swap.
Contingent Consideration & Lease Obligations - At December 31, 2021, the Company had $308.5 million in contingent consideration that is estimated to be payable over the next two and four years resulting from the USAA AMCO and WestEnd Acquisitions, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the estimated fair value of the USAA AMCO Acquisition payments was $68.8 million, and a maximum of $75.0 million ($37.5 million per year) is potentially payable to the sellers. At December 31, 2021, the estimated fair value of the WestEnd Acquisition contingent payments was $239.7 million, and a maximum of $320.0 million ($80.0 million per year) is potentially payable to the sellers.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $19.7 million in future minimum rent commitments under non-cancelable operating leases, net of cash expected to be received under the sub-lease
Capital Requirements - VCS is a registered broker-dealer subject to the Uniform Net Capital requirements under the Exchange Act, which requires maintenance of certain minimum net capital levels. In addition, we have certain non-U.S. subsidiaries that have minimum capital requirements. As a result, such subsidiaries of our Company may be restricted in their ability to transfer cash to their parents. VCS and our non-U.S. subsidiaries were in compliance with these requirements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Cash Flows - the following table is derived from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Operating Activities
2021 compared to 2020 - Cash provided by operating activities was $376.2 million in 2021, compared to $250.6 million in 2020. The $125.6 million net increase in cash provided by operating activities was due to the combination of a $65.9 million increase in net income partially and a $67.2 million net increase in working capital as a result of timing of account payable and accrued expenses. Partially offsetting were adjustments for certain non-cash items totaling $7.5 million.
2020 compared to 2019 - Cash provided by operating activities was $250.6 million in 2020, compared to $227.4 million in 2019. The $23.2 million net increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to a $120.0 million increase in net income partially offset by a $113.4 million net decrease in working capital as a result of timing of accrued expenses and compensation. Also contributing were adjustments for certain non-cash items which contributed $16.6 million to the increase in cash provided by operating activities.
The USAA AMCO Acquisition increased revenue and introduced new operating expenses that the Company did not incur prior to the acquisition, such as distribution costs paid to third parties and USAA, sub-transfer agent service costs, USAA 529 Education Savings Plan expenses, and direct member channel expenses.
Investing Activities
2021 compared to 2020 - Cash used in investing activities increased by $544.3 million to $556.6 million in 2021, from $12.3 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to $539.3 million paid in cash in the fourth quarter of 2021 related to the November 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021 closings of the NEC and WestEnd acquisitions, respectively.
2020 compared to 2019 - Cash used in investing activities decreased by $837.5 million to $12.3 million in 2020, from $849.8 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to $851.3 million paid in cash at the July 1, 2019 closing of the USAA AMCO Acquisition.
Financing Activities
2021 compared to 2020 - Cash provided by financing activities increased $479.9 million to $227.2 million in 2021 compared to cash used in financing activities of $252.7 million in 2020. The increase was due to $502.5 million of net proceeds from the Incremental Term Loans received in 2021, which was partially offset by term loan prepayments, repurchases of our Common Stock, payment of dividends and payment of taxes related to settlement of equity awards and payment of consideration for acquisition of $142.0 million, $31.5 million, $37.2 million, $26.7 million and $37.5 million, respectively, during 2021.
2020 compared to 2019 - Cash used financing activities decreased $860.7 million to $252.7 million in 2020 compared to cash provided of $608.0 million in 2019. The decrease was due to $1,069.0 million of net proceeds from the 2019 Credit Agreement received in 2019, which was partially offset by the repayment and termination of the previous credit agreement (dated February 2018) of $280.0 million. The repurchase of our Class A common stock and payment of dividends contributed $29.9 million and $16.2 million, respectively, in cash used in financing activities during 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP is based on the selection and application of accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates and assumptions that in certain circumstances affect amounts reported in the audited consolidated financial statements. In preparing these financial statements, our estimates and judgements are based on historical experience, information from third-party valuation professionals and various other assumptions, giving due consideration to materiality. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such difference could be material to our consolidated financial statements. Significant accounting policies are described more fully in Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to the audited consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations - We recognize and measure identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations as of the acquisition date at fair value. The process of determining the fair value of identifiable intangible assets at the date of acquisition utilizes an income approach and requires significant estimates and judgment as to expectations for earnings on the related managed assets acquired, redemption rates, growth rates from sales efforts, the effects of market conditions and a discount rate. The process for estimating the fair value of acquired trade names considers comparable royalty rates and projected revenue streams. We typically utilize an independent valuation expert to assist with these valuations.
We recognize and measure contingent consideration liabilities at fair value as of the acquisition date using an option pricing model and Monte Carlo simulation. These valuations require significant estimates and judgments related to projected revenue growth rates, adjustments for market-based risk, volatility and discount rates. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities is remeasured at each reporting period, typically using the same methodology used to determine the acquisition date fair value. Any change in the fair value estimate subsequent to the acquisition date is recorded in the earnings of that period.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets - The accounting for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires significant estimates and judgment in the ongoing evaluation for impairment, and for indefinite-lived intangible assets, reconsideration of an asset’s useful life. Changes in these assumptions or estimates could materially affect the determination of the fair value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets.
The Company tests goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if facts and circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the Company's use of the acquired assets in a business combination or strategy for the Company's overall business, significant negative industry or economic trends and significant decreases in the Company’s market capitalization. The Company conducts the annual impairment assessment as of October 1st and uses a qualitative approach to test for potential impairment of goodwill. If, after considering various factors, management determines that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired, the fair value of the reporting
unit is compared to its carrying amount. A goodwill impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value. The assumptions used to estimate fair value include management's estimates of future growth rates, operating cash flows, discount rates and terminal value. These assumptions and estimates can change in future periods based on market movement and factors impacting the expected business performance. Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the determination of our fair value.
Because the advisory, distribution and transfer agent contracts are with the funds, renewable annually and have a history of being renewed, industry practice under GAAP is to consider the contract lives to be indefinite and, as a result, not amortizable. For these fund contracts as well as the trade name indefinite-lived intangible assets, we consider (i) macroeconomic and entity-specific factors, including changes to legal, regulatory or contractual provisions of the renewable advisory and distribution contracts, (ii) the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition and other economic factors that could impact the funds’ projected performance and (iii) the existence or expectation of significant changes in the level and mix of managed assets.
In addition, for indefinite-lived intangible assets, we consider whether events or circumstances continue to support an indefinite useful life. Indicators monitored by us that may indicate an indefinite useful life is no longer supported generally include (i) changes in the use of the asset, (ii) a significant decline in the level of managed assets and (iii) significant reductions in underlying operating cash flows.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets are combined into a single unit of accounting for purposes of testing impairment if they operate as a single asset and represent as a group the highest and best use of the assets. If actual changes in the underlying managed assets or other conditions, such as redemption rates or changes to contractual provisions, indicate that it is more likely than not that the asset is impaired, or if the estimated useful life is reduced, we perform a quantitative approach to estimate the fair value of the intangible asset. The process of estimating the fair value of the intangible asset requires us to estimate the level and mix of managed assets, considering future redemption rates, growth rates, market appreciation/depreciation and a discount rate. If the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, we recognize an impairment charge equal to that excess.