ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
References to the “company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to 10X Capital Venture Acquisition Corp III. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1.A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
10X Capital Venture Acquisition Corp. III (the “Company”) is a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 10, 2021. The Company was formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (the “Business Combination”). The Company has not selected any specific Business Combination target and the Company has not, nor has anyone on its behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any Business Combination target with respect to the initial Business Combination with the Company.
Our Sponsor is 10X Capital SPAC Sponsor III LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 11, 2022. On January 14, 2022, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including the issuance of 3,900,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s partial exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $20.2 million, of which approximately $14.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions (Note 6).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 1,153,000 units (each, a “Private Placement Unit” and collectively, the “Private Placement Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit to the Sponsor and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), generating proceeds of approximately $11.5 million (Note 4).
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $304.5 million ($10.15 per Unit) of net proceeds, including the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement, was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) and invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to us to pay its taxes, the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Units will not be released from the Trust Account until the earliest of (i) the completion of the initial Business Combination, (ii) the redemption of the Public Shares if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within 12 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 14, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), subject to applicable law, and (iii) the redemption of the Public Shares properly submitted in connection with a shareholder vote to amend our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association to modify the substance or timing of its obligation to redeem 100% of the Public Shares if we have not consummated the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period or with respect to any other material provisions relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-initial Business Combination activity. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of our creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of the Public Shareholders (as defined below).
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be generally applied toward consummating a Business Combination (less deferred underwriting commissions). Our Business Combination must be with one or more target businesses that together have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net balance in the Trust Account (excluding the amount of deferred underwriting discounts held and taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the signing an agreement to enter into a Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-Business Combination company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act. There is no assurance that we will be able to successfully effect a Business Combination.
Liquidity and Going Concern
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover for certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for issuance of Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5), and loan proceeds from the Sponsor of approximately $137,000 under the Note (as defined in Note 5). We fully repaid the Note on January 14, 2022. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, members of our founding team or any of their affiliates may provide us with Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5) as may be required (of which up to $1.5 million may be converted at the lender’s option into warrants).
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our liquidity needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” our management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 14, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern. We plan to complete a business combination prior to the mandatory liquidation date.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or our search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statement. The financial statements does not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In February 2022, the Russian Federation and Belarus commenced a military action with the country of Ukraine. As a result of this action, various nations, including the United States, have instituted economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and Belarus. Further, the impact of this action and related sanctions on the world economy are not determinable as of the date of these financial statements and the specific impact on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows is also not determinable as of the date of these financial statements.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from the Trust Account. We will continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our derivative liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from February 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $45,000, consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Promissory Note - Related Party
The Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 pursuant to a promissory note, dated on February 18, 2021 and was later amended on December 31, 2021, (the “Note”), to be used for a portion of the expenses of the Initial Public Offering. The Note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The Company borrowed approximately $135,000 under the Note as of December 31, 2021, and fully repaid the Note balance on January 14, 2022.
Working Capital Loan
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete the initial Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that the initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Up to $1,500,000 of the Working Capital Loans may be convertible into units of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. As of December 31, 2021, no such Working Capital Loans were outstanding.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Units, private placement shares and private placement warrants and the Class A ordinary shares underlying such private placement warrants and Private Placement Units that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of our securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Cantor may not exercise its demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five (5) and seven (7) years, respectively, after the effective date of the registration statement and may not exercise its demand rights on more than one occasion. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriter a 45-day option from the date of the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to an additional 3,915,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 14, 2022, the underwriter partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase additional 3,900,000 Units.
The underwriter was entitled to a cash underwriting discount of approximately $5.2 million in the aggregate paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee of approximately $14.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commission. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement for the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Deferred Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
The Company complies with the requirements of FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1. Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, and other costs incurred that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs associated with warrants were charged to shareholders’ equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were charged against the carrying value of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, excluding ordinary shares subject to forfeiture. Weighted average shares were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 1,305,000 ordinary shares that are subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option is not exercised by the underwriters. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per ordinary share is the same as basic loss per ordinary share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company’s management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the
PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.