ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties such as our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences in our actual results include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and those discussed elsewhere within this Annual Report, particularly in the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and the Item entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) applications platform developer. Our platform is comprised of a suite of interactive video-based sales enablement business software products marketed on a subscription basis. Our applications, available in both mobile and desktop versions, are offered as a fully integrated suite, as well as on a standalone basis, and include verbCRM, our Customer Relationship Management (“CRM”) application, verbLEARN, our Learning Management System application, verbLIVE, our Live Stream eCommerce application, verbPULSE, our business/augmented intelligence notification and sales coach application, and verbTEAMS, our self-onboarding video-based CRM and content management application for professional sports teams, small business and solopreneurs, with seamless synchronization with Salesforce, that also comes bundled with verbLIVE, and more recently, we introduced verbMAIL, our interactive video-based sales communication tool integrated into Microsoft Outlook.
We use the term “client” and “customer” interchangeably throughout this Annual Report.
Our Technology
Our suite of applications can be distinguished from other sales enablement applications because our applications utilize our proprietary interactive video technology as the primary means of communication between sales and marketing professionals and their customers and prospects. Moreover, the proprietary data collection and analytics capabilities of our applications inform our users on their devices in real time, when and for how long their prospects have watched a video, how many times such prospects watched it, and what they clicked on, which allows our users to focus their time and efforts on ‘hot leads’ or interested prospects rather than on those that have not seen such video or otherwise expressed interest in such content. Users can create their hot lead lists by using familiar, intuitive ‘swipe left/swipe right’ on-screen navigation. Our clients report that these capabilities provide for a much more efficient and effective sales process, resulting in increased sales conversion rates. We developed the proprietary patent-pending interactive video technology, as well as several other patent-issued and patent-pending technologies that serve as the unique foundation for all our platform applications.
Our Products
verbCRM combines the capabilities of CRM lead-generation, content management, and in-video ecommerce capabilities in an intuitive, yet powerful tool for both inexperienced as well as highly skilled sales professionals. verbCRM allows users to quickly and easily create, distribute, and post videos to which they can add a choice of on-screen clickable icons which, when clicked, allow viewers to respond to the user’s call-to-action in real-time, in the video, while the video is playing, without leaving or stopping the video. For example, our technology allows a prospect or customer to click on a product they see featured in a video and impulse buy it, or to click on a calendar icon in the video to make an appointment with a salesperson, among many other features and functionalities designed to eliminate or reduce friction from the sales process for our users. The verbCRM app is designed to be easy to use and navigate and takes little time and training for a user to begin using the app effectively. It usually takes less than four minutes for a novice user to create an interactive video from our app. Users can add interactive icons to pre-existing videos, as well as to newly created videos shot with practically any mobile device. verbCRM interactive videos can be distributed via email, text messaging, chat app, or posted to popular social media directly and easily from our app. No software download is required to view Verb interactive videos on virtually any mobile or desktop device, including smart TVs.
verbLEARN is an interactive, video-based learning management system that incorporates all of the clickable in-video technology featured in our verbCRM application and adapts them for use by educators for video-based education. verbLEARN is used by enterprises seeking to educate a large sales team or a customer base about new products, or elicit feedback about existing products. It also incorporates Verb’s proprietary data collection and analytics capabilities that inform users in real time when and for how long the viewers watched the video, how many times they watched it, and what they clicked on, in addition to adding gamification features that enhance the learning aspects of the application.
verbLIVE builds on popular video-based platforms such as Facebook Live, Zoom, WebEx, and Go2Meeting, among others, by adding Verb’s proprietary interactive in-video ecommerce capabilities - including an in-video Shopify shopping cart integrated for Shopify account holders - to our own live stream video broadcasting application. verbLIVE is a next-generation live stream platform that allows hosts to utilize a variety of novel sales-driving features, including placing interactive icons on-screen that appear on the screens of all viewers, providing in-video click-to-purchase capabilities for products or services featured in the live video broadcast, in real-time, driving friction-free selling. verbLIVE also provides the host with real-time viewer engagement data and interaction analytics. verbLIVE is entirely browser-based, allowing it to function easily and effectively on all devices without requiring the host or the viewers to download software, and is secured through end-to-end encryption.
verbPULSE is a business/augmented intelligence notification-based sales enablement platform feature set that tracks users’ interactions with current and prospective customers and then helps coach users by telling them what to do next in order to close the sale, virtually automating the selling process.
verbTEAMS is our interactive, video-based CRM for professional sports teams, small-and medium-sized businesses and solopreneurs. verbTEAMS also incorporates verbLIVE as a bundled application. verbTEAMS features self-sign-up, self-onboarding, self-configuring, content management system capabilities, user level administrative capabilities, and high-quality analytics capabilities in both mobile and desktop platforms that sync with one another. It also has a built-in one-click sync capability with Salesforce.
We continue to invest in the future of interactive livestreaming. Following are some of our recent initiatives:
MARKET is a centralized online destination where shoppers could explore scores of shoppable livestream events, and over time - thousands, across numerous product and service categories, being hosted by people from all over the world, always on - 24/7 - where shoppers could communicate with the hosts, asking questions about products in real-time - through an on-screen chat visible to all shoppers - that allows shoppers who have invited their friends and family to join them there to share the experience - to communicate directly with each other in real time, and then simply click on a non-intrusive - in-video overlay to place items in an on-screen shopping cart for purchase - all without interrupting the video. Shoppers can visit any number of other shoppable events to meet up and chat with friends, old and new, and together watch, shop and chat with the hosts, discover new products and services, and become part of an immersive entertaining shopping experience. Throughout the experience, the shopping cart follows shoppers seamlessly from event to event, shoppable video to shoppable video, host to host, product to product.
The MARKET business model is a simple but next-level B to B play. It is a multi-vendor platform, with a single follow-me style unified shopping cart, and robust ecommerce capabilities with the tools for consumer brands, big box brick and mortar stores, boutiques, influencers and celebrities to connect with their clients, customers, their fans, followers, and prospects by providing a unique, interactive social shopping experience that we believe could keep them coming back and engaged for hours.
A big differentiator for MARKET is that it also provides an online meeting place for friends and family to meet, chat, shop and enjoy a fun, immersive shopping experience in real time together from anywhere and everywhere in the world. MARKET will provide vendors with extensive business building analytics capabilities not available on, and not shared by many operators of other social media sites who regard that information as valuable proprietary property. All vendors on MARKET will retain this valuable intelligence for their own, unlimited use.
MARKET allows vendors an opportunity to reach not only the shoppers they invite to the site from their own client and contact lists, but also those shoppers who came to the site independently who will discover these vendors as they browse through the many other shoppable events hosted simultaneously on MARKET 24/7, from around the world. We believe our revenue model will be attractive to vendors and will consist of SaaS recurring revenue as well as a share of revenue generated through sales on the platform.
MARKET will also incorporate a modified version of our verbLIVE Attribution technology, allowing vendors who so choose, to leverage extremely powerful, built-in affiliate marketing capabilities. Non-vendor visitors to the site can search for those vendors that have activated the Attribution feature for their events and be compensated when people they referred to that vendor, purchase products or services during that vendor’s shopping event. We expect that this feature, unique to MARKET, will drive many more shoppers who will be referred from all over the world, producing a cross-pollination effect enhancing the revenue opportunities for all MARKET vendors, while also creating an attractive income generating opportunity for non-vendor MARKET patrons.
MARKET is an entirely new platform, built wholly independently and separate from our verbLIVE sales platform, representing what we believe is the state of the art of shoppable video technology. It will utilize an ultra-low latency private global CDN network that we control, allowing us to deliver a high-quality experience and platform performance capabilities. We also believe that MARKET will expose vendors to our entire suite of sales enablement products, such as verbMAIL, among others, that could drive new cross selling revenue opportunities.
verbTV is an online destination for shoppable entertainment. Whereas MARKET is a social shopping experience, verbTV is a destination for those seeking commercial-free television content, such as concerts, game shows, sports, including e-sports, sitcoms, podcasts, special events, news, including live events, and other forms of video entertainment that is all interactive and shoppable. verbTV represents an entirely new distribution channel for all forms of content by a new generation of content creators looking for greater freedom to explore the creative possibilities that a native interactive video platform can provide for their audience. We believe content creators may also enjoy greater revenue opportunities through the native ecommerce capabilities the platform provides to sponsors and advertisers who will enjoy real-time monetization, data collection and analytics. Through verbTV, sponsors and advertisers will be able to accurately measure the ROI from their marketing spend, instead of relying on decades-old, imprecise viewership information.
At launch, verbTV will feature the popular business pitch show “2 Minute Drill” currently shown on Amazon Prime and Bloomberg TV. However, verbTV will host a shoppable version of the 12 episodes of the upcoming Season 3. Each episode is a fast-paced reality show where 5-6 entrepreneurs competing for $50,000 in cash and prizes, have 2 minutes to impress the judges with the best investor pitch. Our CEO is one of the judges on the show. Expected to air in early 2022, verbTV viewers will be able to click on-screen and purchase the products and services of the contestants featured on the show, among other contemplated interactive features. Dave Meltzer, the creator of the show, and Co-founder of Sports 1 Marketing and the former CEO of the renowned Leigh Steinberg Sports & Entertainment agency, has signed-on with Verb to produce other interactive and shoppable entertainment for verbTV. Other such partnerships, as well as a creator program, are currently in progress.
Verb Partnerships and Integrations
verbMAIL for Microsoft Outlook is a product of our partnership with Microsoft and is available as an add-in to Microsoft Outlook for Outlook and Office 365 subscribers. verbMAIL allows users to create interactive videos seamlessly within Outlook by clicking the verbMAIL icon in the Outlook toolbar. The videos are automatically added to an email and can be sent easily through Outlook using the user’s contacts they already have in Outlook. The application allows users to easily track viewer engagement and together with other features represents an effective sales tool available for all Outlook users worldwide. Currently offered without charge, a subscription-based paid version with a suite of enhanced features for sales and marketing professionals is slated for release later this year.
Salesforce Integration. We have completed and deployed the integration of verbLIVE into Salesforce and have launched a joint marketing campaign with Salesforce to introduce the verbLIVE plug-in functionality to current Salesforce users. We have also developed a verbCRM sync application for Salesforce users that is currently being utilized by at least one of our large enterprise clients and the verbLIVE plug-in is now being offered to all Salesforce users on a monthly subscription fee basis while we work to build adoption rates.
Popular Enterprise Back-Office System Integrations. We have integrated verbCRM into systems offered by 19 of the most popular direct sales back-office system providers, such as Direct Scale, Exigo, By Design, Thatcher, Multisoft, Xennsoft, and Party Plan. Direct sales back-office systems provide many of the support functions required for direct sales operations, including payroll, customer genealogy management, statistics, rankings, and earnings, among other direct sales financial tracking capabilities. The integration into these back-office providers, facilitated through our own API development, allows single sign-on convenience for users, as well as enhanced data analytics and reporting capabilities for all users. Our experience confirms that our integration into these back-end platforms accelerates the adoption of verbCRM by large direct sales enterprises that rely on these systems and as such, we believe this represents a competitive advantage.
Non-Digital Products and Services
Historically, we provided certain non-digital services to some of our enterprise clients such as printing and fulfillment services. We designed and printed welcome kits and starter kits for their marketing needs and provided fulfillment services, which consisted of managing the preparation, handling and shipping of our client’s custom-branded merchandise they use for marketing purposes at conferences and other events. We also managed the fulfillment of our clients’ product sample packs that verbCRM users order through the app for automated delivery and tracking to their customers and prospects.
In May 2020, we executed a contract with Range Printing (“Range”), a company in the business of providing enterprise class printing, sample assembly, warehousing, packaging, shipping, and fulfillment services. Pursuant to the contract, through an automated process we have established for this purpose, Range receives orders for samples and merchandise from us as and when we receive them from our clients and users, and print, assemble, store, package and ship such samples and merchandise on our behalf. The Range contract provides for a service fee arrangement based upon the specific services to be provided by Range that is designed to maintain our relationship with our clients by continuing to service their non-digital needs, while eliminating the labor and overhead costs associated with the provision of such services by us.
Our Market
Historically, our client base consisted primarily of multi-national direct sales enterprises to whom we provide white-labeled, client-branded versions of our products. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our client base expanded to include large enterprises in the life sciences sector, professional sports franchises, educational institutions, and not-for-profit organizations, as well as clients in the entertainment industry, and the burgeoning CBD industry, among other business sectors. As of December 31, 2021, we provided subscription-based application services to approximately 150 enterprise clients for use in over 100 countries, in over 48 languages, which collectively account for a user base generated through more than 3.1 million downloads of our verbCRM application. Among the new business sectors targeted for this year are medical equipment and pharmaceutical sales, armed services and government institutions, small businesses and individual entrepreneurs.
Revenue Generation
A description of our principal revenue generating activities is as follows:
1. Digital Revenue which is divided into two main categories:
a. SaaS recurring digital revenue based on contract-based subscriptions to our verb app products and platform services which include verbCRM, verbLEARN, verbLIVE, verbPULSE, and verbTeams. The revenue is recognized over the subscription period.
b. Non-SaaS, non-recurring digital revenue, which is revenue generated by the use of our app products and in-app purchases, such as sampling and other services obtained through the app. The revenue for samples is recognized upon completion and shipment, while the design fees are recognized when the service has been rendered and the app is delivered to the customer.
2. Non-digital revenue, which is revenue we generate from non-app, non-digital sources through ancillary services we provide as an accommodation to our clients and customers. These services, which we now outsource to a strategic partner as part of a cost reduction plan we instituted in 2020, include design, printing services, fulfillment and shipping services. The revenue is recognized upon completion and shipment of products or fulfillment to customers.
Recent Developments
SoloFire Acquisition
In September 2020 we completed the acquisition of Ascend Certification, LLC, dba SoloFire (“SoloFire”), which develops and markets leading SaaS-based sales enablement applications for sales representatives of medical device, diagnostics and life sciences companies. SoloFire’s platform empowers sales and marketing teams by allowing them to efficiently find, show, share and track regulatory and industry compliant, accurate and up-to-date content. With SoloFire, content can be locally stored, making it accessible without Wi-fi or mobile data, which is often a challenge in hospital environments. The sales tools can be tailored to a company’s unique medical products, while creating personalized sales conversations with physicians and other stakeholders. In addition, insights from in-depth analytics capabilities enable sales and marketing teams to identify and replicate the content that most resonates with clients, driving higher conversion rates. We have begun combining Verb’s sales enablement solutions, including our interactive video and interactive livestream ecommerce features, with the SoloFire mobile and desktop applications to provide even more powerful tools for this exciting new target market.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business and Industry
Governments and businesses around the world continue to take actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and its variants, including, but not limited to, shelter-in-place orders, quarantines, significant restrictions on travel, as well as restrictions that prohibit many employees from going to work. Uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic has introduced significant volatility in the financial markets.
Despite increased vaccine distribution programs and loosening of COVID-19-related restrictions in the regions in which we operate during the year ended December 31, 2021, both the pandemic and ongoing containment and mitigation measures have had, and are likely to continue to have, an adverse impact on the global and U.S. economies, the severity and duration of which are uncertain. As such, our business, operations and financial condition has been, and we anticipate will continue to be, adversely impacted by reduced demand for our applications and non-digital services, as well as reduced access to capital. To mitigate the adverse impact COVID-19 may have on our business and operations, we implemented a number of measures to strengthen our financial position, including eliminating, reducing, or deferring non-essential expenditures. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, financial conditions, and results of operations in the future remains uncertain and will be affected by a number of factors, including the duration and extent of the pandemic, the emergence of variants to COVID-19 the duration and extent of imposed or recommended containment and mitigation measures, the extent, duration, and effective execution of government stabilization and recovery efforts, including those from the successful distribution of effective vaccines.
The COVID-19 pandemic may have long-term effects on the nature of the office environment and remote working. This may present operational and workplace culture challenges that may adversely affect our business. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 and through the filing of this Annual Report, we have encouraged safe practices designed to stem the infection and spread of COVID-19 within our workforce and beyond and to maintain the mental health and well-being of our employees.
We began the year ended December 31, 2021 with healthy demand for our products, including our SaaS products, many of which are designed to enable our customers to manage their businesses virtually. Our non-digital business was negatively impacted in the year ended December 31, 2021 as events and sales opportunities were cancelled or shifted to a virtual environment due to the pandemic. Although the impact has not been material to date, a prolonged downturn in economic conditions could have a material adverse effect on our customers and demand for our services.
We continue to actively communicate with and listen to our customers to ensure we are responding to their needs in the current environment with innovative solutions that will not only be beneficial now but also over the long-term. We monitor developments related to COVID-19 and remain flexible in our response to the challenges presented by the pandemic.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following is a comparison of the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
We continue to experience meaningful growth in our total digital revenue and SaaS subscription revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total digital revenue was 78% of total revenue compared with 65% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.2 million, an increase of 26% compared to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven from SaaS recurring subscription-based revenue associated with our verbCRM, verbLEARN, verbTEAMS, verbLIVE, and verbPULSE applications totaling $6.8 million, an increase of 34% compared to $5.1 million reported for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.3 million, compared to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
SaaS recurring subscription revenue as a percentage of total digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 84%, compared with 79% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our SaaS recurring subscription revenues continue to grow year over year, which is a reflection of our systematic investment in our digital business.
We executed 55 new client contracts during the year ended December 31, 2021 with a guaranteed base value of $3.3 million. We expect to generate annual recurring revenue of approximately $1.5 million from these engagements, which is in addition to revenue that we anticipate recognizing from new and existing clients launching verbLIVE with Attribution, Pulse, and Learn, as well as revenue we expect from MARKET, verbTV, verbMAIL, and other as yet unannounced initiatives.
Total non-digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.3 million, compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which, is consistent with our strategy to focus on higher margin digital revenue versus our lower margin design, printing, fulfillment, and shipping legacy business.
The table below sets forth our quarterly revenues from the quarter ended December 31, 2019 through the quarter ended December 31, 2021, which reflects the trend of revenue over the past nine fiscal quarters:
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.5 million, compared to $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cost of revenue is primarily attributed to a decrease in non-digital costs offset by increased digital costs to support additional enterprise customers on the platform, increased users within our existing customer base, and free trials associated with verbLIVE and verbMAIL.
Gross Margin
Total gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $6.0 million, compared to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross margin increased to 57% for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus 52% in 2020. We continue to earn higher margins due to a systematic focus on our SaaS and digital business, which has a higher margin than our non-digital business.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses were $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Research and development expenses primarily consisted of fees paid to employees and vendors contracted to perform research projects and develop technology. The increase in research and development is attributed to the development of verbLIVE, our attribution feature, PULSE, enhancements to verbCRM, our verbMail integration with Microsoft Outlook, and our new MARKET platform.
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to a full year of amortization of SoloFire intangible assets as compared to only four months in 2020.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $25.7 million, as compared to $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in spending was to support growth, anticipated product launches, implementation of NetSuite ERP system, ongoing compliance with Sarbanes Oxley, and an additional eight months of SoloFire operations. The notable increases versus the year ended December 31, 2020, were increases in labor of $2.8 million, marketing and promotion of $1.1 million, professional services of $0.9 million, SoloFire of $0.5 million, and external software of $0.3 million, all offset by a decrease in share-based compensation of ($0.5) million.
Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was ($0.8) million, which was attributed to interest expense of ($2.6) million, offset by a net gain on extinguishment of a note payable of $1.1 million, change in the fair value of derivative liability of $0.6 million, and other income of $0.1 million. Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($0.2) million, which was attributed to interest expense of ($0.9) million, offset by a change in the fair value of derivative liability of $0.6 million and other income (expense), net of $0.1 million.
Use of Non-GAAP Measures - Modified EBITDA
In addition to our results under generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we present Modified EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. However, Modified EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income, income from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We define Modified EBITDA as net income (loss), plus interest expense, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, financing costs and changes in fair value of derivative liability.
Management considers our core operating performance to be that which our managers can affect in any particular period through their management of the resources that affect our underlying revenue and profit generating operations that period. Non-GAAP adjustments to our results prepared in accordance with GAAP are itemized below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Modified EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Modified EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
The $9.3 million decrease in Modified EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, resulted from increased research and development costs, higher labor related costs to support growth, increased spending for marketing and promotion, and professional services.
We present Modified EBITDA because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Modified EBITDA in developing our internal budgets, forecasts and strategic plan; in analyzing the effectiveness of our business strategies in evaluating potential acquisitions; and in making compensation decisions and in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Modified EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, which includes, among others, the following:
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect future interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts; and
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Modified EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. We incurred a net loss of $34,486,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. We also utilized cash in operations of $25,862,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing until we can generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet our obligations. We intend to continue to seek additional debt or equity financing to continue our operations. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we entered into the following financing agreements:
Equity financing:
On January 12, 2022, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement (the “Common Stock Purchase Agreement”) with Tumim Stone Capital LLC (the “Investor”). Pursuant to the agreement, we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to the Investor, and the Investor is obligated to purchase, up to $50,000,000 of newly issued shares (the “Total Commitment”) of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”) from time to time during the term of the agreement, subject to certain limitations and conditions. The Total Commitment is inclusive of 607,287 shares of common stock, valued at $750,000 at the time of issuance (the “Commitment Shares”), issued to the Investor as consideration for its commitment to purchase shares of common stock under the common stock purchase agreement.
The common stock purchase agreement initially precludes us from issuing and selling more than 14,747,065 shares of its common stock, including the Commitment Shares, which number of shares equals 19.99% of the common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the agreement, unless we obtain stockholder approval to issue additional shares, or unless certain exceptions apply.
Debt financing:
On January 12, 2022, we also entered into a securities purchase agreement with three institutional investors (collectively, the “Note Holders”) providing for the sale and issuance of an aggregate original principal amount of $6,300,000 in convertible notes due 2023 (each, a “Note,” and, collectively, the “Notes,” and such financing, the “Note Offering”). We and the Note Holders also entered into a security agreement, dated January 12, 2022, in connection with the Note Offering, pursuant to which we granted a security interest to the Note Holders in substantially all of its assets.
We received $6,000,000 in gross proceeds from the sale of the Notes. The Note Offering closed on January 12, 2022. The Notes bear interest of 6.0% per annum, have an original issue discount of 5.0%, mature 12 months from the closing date, and have an initial conversion price of $3.00, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances as set forth in the Notes.
Beginning on May 12, 2022, we are required to make nine monthly principal payments of $333,333, plus accrued interest, to the Note Holders, with the remaining principal amount of $3,300,000, plus accrued interest, due on the maturity date.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies we may not continue to meet our obligations and continue our operations for the next twelve months. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to obtain necessary debt or equity financing to continue operations until we begin generating positive cash flow. In addition, our independent registered public accounting firm, in its report on our December 31, 2021 consolidated financial statements, has raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
There is no assurance that we will ever be profitable or that debt or equity financing will be available to us in the amounts, on terms, and at times deemed acceptable to us, if at all. The issuance of additional equity securities by us would result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. If we are unable to obtain financing in the amounts and on terms deemed acceptable to us, we may be unable to continue our business, as planned, and as a result may be required to scale back or cease operations for our business, the results of which would be that our stockholders would lose some or all of their investment. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $937,000. We estimate our operating expenses for the next twelve months may continue to exceed any revenue we generate, and we may need to raise capital through either debt or equity offerings to continue operations. Due to market conditions and the early stage of our operations, there is considerable risk that we will not be able to raise such financings at all, or on terms that are not dilutive to our existing stockholders. We can offer no assurance that we will be able to raise such funds. If we are unable to raise the funds we require for all of our planned operations, we may be forced to reallocate funds from other planned uses and may suffer a significant negative effect on our business plan and operations, including our ability to develop new products and continue our current operations. As a result, our business may suffer, and we may be forced to reduce or discontinue operations.
On February 5, 2020, we initiated our private placement, which is for the sale and issuance of up to five million shares of our common stock at a per-share price of $1.20, which amount represents a 20% discount to the $1.50 closing price of our common stock on that day, and is memorialized by a subscription agreement.
On March 31, 2020 we closed our private placement. In total we issued 4,237,833 shares of common stock and netted $4.4 million after fees and expenses.
On April 17, 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $1,218,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable after eight weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 the entire note and accrued interest was forgiven.
On July 24, 2020, we concluded our public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-239055) and issued and sold 12,545,453 shares of common stock (which included 1,636,363 shares of common stock sold pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of an overallotment option). The net proceeds to us, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and direct offering expenses was $12,337,000.
On March 15, 2021 we completed a registered direct offering with institutional investors for the purchase and sale of 9,375,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.60 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $14,129,000.
In August 2021 and November 2021, we entered into two separate at-the-market issuance sales agreements (the “August 2021 ATM” and the “November 2021 ATM”, respectively) with Truist Securities, Inc., pursuant to our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252167). The August 2021 ATM was terminated in October 2021. In January 2022, the aggregate offering price of the shares of our common stock that may be sold under the November 2021 ATM was reduced from $30,000,000 to $7,300,000. The August 2021 and November 2021 ATM offerings are a follow-on offering of securities utilized by us in order to raise capital over a period of time. In an ATM offering, we sell newly issued shares into the trading market through our designated sales agent at prevailing market prices. Net proceeds were approximately $7,937,000.
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows - Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our cash flows used in operating activities amounted to $25.9 million, compared to cash used for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $16.3 million. The change is attributed to investment in future growth of the business, product development, inclusion of a full year of SoloFire operating expenses, professional services, a change in accounts receivable of ($1.2) million, a change in deferred incentive compensation of ($0.5) million, a change in other assets of ($0.2) million, and a change in operating lease liability of ($0.2) million. These were offset by changes in deferred revenue and customer deposits of $0.9 million, a change in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued interest of $0.4 million and a change in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.4 million, compared to December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows - Investing
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our cash flows used from investing activities amounted to $2,263,000, which was primarily attributed to capitalized software development costs of $2,248,000. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash flows used from investing activities were $88,000, which was primarily attributed to property and equipment purchases of $317,000, offset by $229,000 of cash acquired from the acquisition of SoloFire.
Cash Flows - Financing
Our cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $27.2 million, which represented $22.1 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock, proceeds from warrant exercises of $2.8 million, advances, net of repayments, on future receipts of $1.6 million, and proceeds from option exercises of $0.8 million, all offset by a ($15,000) payment for debt issuance costs. Our cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $17.2 million, which represented $16.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock, proceeds from warrant exercises of $2.2 million, a paycheck protection program loan of $1.2 million, advances on future receipts of $728,000, and an economic injury disaster loan of $150,000, all offset by ($1.9) million of an acquisition note payable for SoloFire, ($1.8) million of payments against advances on future receipts, a ($100,000) principal payment on related party debt.
Notes Payable - Related Parties
We had the following related parties notes payable as of December 31, 2021:
(A) On December 1, 2015, we issued a convertible note payable to Mr. Rory J. Cutaia, our majority stockholder and Chief Executive Officer, to consolidate all loans and advances made by Mr. Cutaia to the Company as of that date. The note bears interest at a rate of 12% per annum, secured by the Company’s assets, and matured on February 8, 2021, as amended. A total of 30% of the original note balance or $375,000 was convertible to common stock and was converted in 2018 while the remaining note balance of $825,000 is not convertible. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made payments of $100,000. On February 25, 2021, we extended the note to February 8, 2023 with no changes to the other terms of the note agreement. On May 19, 2021, the Board approved the ability to convert the note into equity at the discretion of the holder. The conversion price is the fair market value of our common stock on the day of conversion. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of the note amounted to $725,000.
(B) On December 1, 2015, we issued a note payable to a former member of our board of directors, in the amount of $112,000 representing unpaid consulting fees as of November 30, 2015. The note is unsecured, bears interest rate of 12% per annum, and matured in April 2017. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding principal balance of the note was $0.
(C) On April 4, 2016, we issued a convertible note to Mr. Cutaia, in the amount of $343,000, to consolidate all advances made by Mr. Cutaia to the Company during the period December 2015 through March 2016. A total of 30% of the original note balance or $103,000 was convertible to common stock and was converted in 2018 while the remaining note balance of $240,000 is not convertible. The note, as amended, bears interest at a rate of 12% per annum, is secured by our assets, and matured on June 4, 2021. On May 19, 2021, the Board approved the ability to convert the note into equity at the discretion of the holder. The conversion price is the fair market value of the Company’s common stock on the day of conversion. On May 19, 2021, $200,000 was converted into 194,175 shares of common stock. The conversion price was $1.03 that was the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the day of conversion. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of the note amounted to $40,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded total interest expense of $111,000 pursuant to the terms of the notes, paid $312,000 of principal on notes (B) and (C), and paid $135,000 of interest.
Deferred Incentive Compensation
(A) On December 23, 2019, we awarded Rory Cutaia, our Chief Executive Officer and Jeff Clayborne, our former Chief Financial Officer annual incentive compensation of $430,000 and $125,000, respectively, for services rendered. We have determined that it is in our best interest and in the best interest of our stockholders to defer payments to Messrs. Cutaia and Clayborne. 50% of the annual incentive compensation was paid on January 10, 2021, and the remaining 50% on January 20, 2022. See Note 22 in the consolidated financial statements for subsequent events.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $278,000 of the outstanding balance. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance amounted to $278,000.
(B) On December 23, 2019, we awarded Rory Cutaia, our Chief Executive Officer and Jeff Clayborne, our former Chief Financial Officer a bonus for the successful up-listing to The Nasdaq Capital Market and the acquisition of Verb Direct totaling $324,000 and $163,000, respectively. We have determined that it is in our best interest and in the best interest of our stockholders to defer payments to Messrs. Cutaia and Clayborne. 50% of the annual incentive compensation was paid on January 10, 2021, and the remaining 50% on January 20, 2022. See Note 22 in the consolidated financial statements for subsequent events.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid $243,000 of the outstanding balance. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance amounted to $243,000.
Advances on Future Receipts
We had the following advances on future receipts as of December 31, 2021:
(A)
On October 29, 2021, the Company received secured advances from an unaffiliated third party totaling $2,015,000 for the purchase of future receipts/revenues of $2,120,000. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement the unaffiliated third-party will auto withdraw an average of $353,000 from the Company’s operating account each month. The term of the agreement extends until the advances are paid in full. The notes did not bear any interest, however, the interest was imputed at a rate of 5% based on the face value of the notes and the proceeds received. As a result, the Company recorded a liability of $2,120,000 to account for the future receipts sold and a debt discount of $105,000 to account for the difference between the future receipts sold and the cash received. The debt discount was amortized over the term of the agreement.
(B) On October 29, 2021, the Company received secured advances from an unaffiliated third party totaling $2,744,000 for the purchase of future receipts/revenues of 3,808,000. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement the unaffiliated third-party will auto withdraw an aggregate of $19,040 from the Company’s operating account each banking day. The term of the agreement extends until the advances are paid in full. The notes did not bear any interest, however, the interest was imputed at a rate of 28% based on the face value of the note and the proceeds received. These advances are secured by the Company’s tangible and intangible assets. As a result, the Company recorded a liability of $3,808,000 to account for the future receipts sold and a debt discount of $1,064,000 to account for the difference between the future receipts sold and the cash received. The debt discount is being amortized over the term of the agreement using the effective interest rate method.
(C) On December 23, 2021, the Company received secured advances from an unaffiliated third party totaling $651,000 for the purchase of future receipts/revenues of $689,000. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement the unaffiliated third-party will auto withdraw an average of $115,000 from the Company’s operating account each month. The term of the agreement extends until the advances are paid in full. The notes did not bear any interest, however, the interest was imputed at a rate of 5% based on the face value of the notes and the proceeds received. As a result, the Company recorded a liability of $689,000 to account for the future receipts sold and a debt discount of $38,000 to account for the difference between the future receipts sold and the cash received. The debt discount is being amortized over the term of the agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require that we make certain assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net revenue and expenses during each reporting period.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. Significant estimates include assumptions made for reserves of uncollectible accounts receivable, assumptions made in valuing assets acquired in business combinations, impairment testing of goodwill and other long-lived assets, the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, assumptions used in valuing derivative liabilities, assumptions used in valuing share-based compensation, and accruals for potential liabilities. Amounts could materially change in the future.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its revenue primarily from providing application services through the SaaS application, digital marketing and sales support services. The Company also derives revenue from the sale of customized print products and training materials, branded apparel, and digital tools, as demanded by its customers.
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). ASC 606 creates a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes (1) identifying the contract(s) or agreement(s) with a customer, (2) identifying our performance obligations in the contract or agreement, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
A description of our principal revenue generating activities is as follows:
1. Digital Revenue, which is divided into two main categories:
a. SaaS recurring digital revenue based on contract-based subscriptions to our verb app products and platform services which include verbCRM, verbLEARN, verbLIVE, verbTEAMS, and verbPULSE. The revenue is recognized straight-line over the subscription period.
b. Non-SaaS, non-recurring digital revenue, which is revenue generated by the use of our app products and in-app purchases, such as sampling and other services obtained through the app. The revenue for samples is recognized upon completion and shipment, while the design fees are recognized when the service has been rendered and the app is delivered to the customer.
2. Non-digital revenue, which is revenue we generate from non-app, non-digital sources through ancillary services we provide as an accommodation to our clients and customers. These services, which we now outsource to a strategic partner as part of a cost reduction plan we instituted in 2020, includes design, printing services, fulfillment and shipping services. The revenue is recognized upon completion and shipment of products or fulfillment to the customer.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
We use Level 2 inputs for our valuation methodology for the derivative liabilities as their fair values were determined by using a Binomial pricing model. Our derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as adjustments to fair value of derivatives.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company issues stock options and warrants, shares of common stock and restricted stock units as share-based compensation to employees and non-employees. The Company accounts for its share-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Share-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common stock and is recognized as expense over the service period. Recognition of compensation expense for non-employees is in the same period and manner as if the Company had paid cash for services.
Goodwill
In accordance with FASB ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, we review goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate a potential impairment. Our impairment testing is performed annually at December 31 (our fiscal year end). Impairment of goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets is determined by comparing the fair value of our reporting units to the carrying value of the underlying net assets in the reporting units. If the fair value of a reporting unit is determined to be less than the carrying value of its net assets, goodwill is deemed impaired and an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying value of goodwill exceeds the difference between the fair value of the reporting unit and the fair value of its other assets and liabilities.
Intangible Assets
We have certain intangible assets that were initially recorded at their fair value at the time of acquisition. The finite-lived intangible assets consist of developed technology and customer contracts. Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of domain names. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful life of five years.
We review all finite lived intangible assets for impairment when circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable. If the carrying value of an asset group is not recoverable, we recognize an impairment loss for the excess carrying value over the fair value in our consolidated statements of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of our recent accounting policies, please refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Supplemental Disclosures, of the Notes to Financial Statements commencing on page of this Annual Report for management’s discussion as to the impact of recent accounting pronouncements.