Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page ii and Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a provider of AI solutions, powered by our proprietary AI operating system, aiWARE™, to deliver differentiated products and solutions to our Commercial Enterprise and Government & Regulated Industries customers.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated revenue of $115.3 million as compared to $57.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our Software Products & Services grew 429% year over year, and represented 51% and 24% of our consolidated revenue in December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and our Managed Services grew 27% year over and year, and represented 49% and 76% of our consolidated revenue in December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our largest customer represented 30% and 8% of our consolidated revenue, respectively.
Significant Transactions
In September 2021, we completed the acquisition of PandoLogic, a company incorporated under the laws of the state of Israel for total consideration of $122.5 million (the “Merger Consideration”). The Merger Consideration consisted of upfront payments of $58.7 million in cash and $31.5 million in common stock (1.7 million shares), up to $65.0 million payable based on earnouts tied to financial performance of PandoLogic in fiscal years 2021 and 2022, and a net working capital adjustment of $5.8 million. At the acquisition date, the earnout was valued at $30.0 million to be paid in a combination of cash and common stock, of which $26.4 million was deemed to be consideration.
In November 2021, we completed an offering of our convertible senior notes in which we issued, at par value, $201.25 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”). In exchange for the Convertible Notes, we received net proceeds of approximately $194.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of approximately $6.3 million, with $18.6 million of those net proceeds used to purchase the capped call transactions related to the Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes are our senior, unsecured obligations and will bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year. Interest will accrue from November 19, 2021 and will be payable semiannually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on May 15, 2022. The Convertible Notes will mature on November 15, 2026, unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes are convertible at $36.76 per share, and $48.55 per share assuming the capped call provisions are met.
Opportunities, Challenges and Risks
In 2021 and 2020, we derived our revenue primarily through our Commercial Enterprise customers, and secondarily through our Government & Regulated Industries customers. Beginning in the second half of 2020 and continuing into 2021, we began to experience significant growth in revenue across our Commercial Enterprise business, which increased 100% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The year-over-year growth in Commercial Enterprise revenue was driven largely by the acquisition of PandoLogic in September 2021, as well as expanded services to existing and new customers in the media and entertainment markets. As we are at the early stages of new product introductions in various markets, including within the U.S. government and energy markets, we expect that both our Commercial Enterprise and Government & Regulated Industries revenues will continue to increase in the near and long term, both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of our total revenue.
We are a leader in AI-based Software Products & Services. Our proprietary AI operating system, aiWARE, uses machine learning algorithms, or AI models, together with a suite of powerful applications, to reveal valuable insights from vast amounts of structured and unstructured data. In addition to the year-over-year growth of 429% in our Software Products
& Services during the year ended December 31, 2021, we have also demonstrated our ability to grow our AI-based Managed Services, with our revenue from these Managed Services increasing 27% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. Historically, we have derived a large portion of our Software Product & Services revenue from applications we internally developed from our aiWARE platform and actively sold across various customers. Beginning in the second half of 2021, we realigned our organization to also focus on enterprise sales and opportunities across existing and newer markets. While management believes there is a substantial opportunity to increase revenue longer term, there is no certainty that any future investments, which could be significant and include future potential acquisitions, will result in significant enterprise revenue realization or revenue growth when compared with historical revenue. We also continue to see significant opportunities for growth in cross-selling PandoLogic and aiWARE to existing and newly acquired customers, and where our AI solutions could add tremendous value in content creation and distribution, including in the news, television and film industries.
We believe there will be significant near and long-term opportunities for revenue growth from Government & Regulated Industries markets due to customer adoption of our products and services related to AI technologies and more recently with our official Authorization to Operate, or ATO, of our aiWARE platform across the entire U.S. Department of Justice and progress with the Joint Artificial Intelligence Commission (“JAIC”) and Department of Defense (“DOD”). However, many enterprise-level opportunities with GRI customers can involve long sales cycles, during which we must invest significant time and resources without a guarantee of success. We may seek to acquire businesses with deep relationships and greater scale within the U.S. government and within regulated industries such as energy to further accelerate our pursuit of the growth opportunities we see in this market.
During the second half of 2020, we launched our Veritone energy solutions as part of our Government & Regulated Industries division to help utilities increase profitability and improve grid reliability as they make the transition to renewables. We believe that our patented technology is uniquely suited to solving some of the most difficult challenges facing utilities today, and we see significant near and long-term opportunities to grow our revenue within this market. Our aiWARE platform is in the early stages of deployment in the energy market, and we expect to continue making significant investments in product, sales and engineering over the next 12 to 24 months to further develop our current and future solutions to address the opportunities in this market.
At the end of the fourth quarter of 2021, we reported 529 Software Product & Services customers, which grew 47% from December 31, 2020 on a pro forma basis (including customers from PandoLogic as if owned by Veritone, Inc. since January 1, 2020). To continue to grow our Software Product & Services customer base, and drive increased sales within our existing customer base, we will need to continue to increase our sales and marketing spending throughout 2022 as compared with prior periods.
We believe our Software Products & Services will extend the capabilities of many third-party software platforms and products that are widely used today. For example, we recently acquired PandoLogic, a company with technology that utilizes machine-learning and AI to accelerate the hiring process for large enterprises. We believe that, when integrated with aiWARE, PandoLogic users will be given greater visibility and transparency in their hiring processes. In addition, we have historically integrated aiWARE across many platforms, including Alteryx and the NVIDIA® CUDA® GPU-based platform, enabling dramatic increases in aiWARE’s processing speed and providing a wide range of new use cases for our technology. We are in the process of developing and marketing more specific use cases for these and future integrations, which we believe will open up new markets for our products and accelerate our near and long term revenue growth opportunities. We plan to hire additional engineers and business development resources in the near term to further accelerate our pursuit of these potential opportunities, as well as other third-party technology integrations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our non-GAAP gross margin (calculated as described in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below) improved to 81%, compared with 73% for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by growth of new customers across our Software Products & Services and the addition of PandoLogic in late 2021, which generated incremental non-GAAP gross margins in excess of 80% during the three months ended December 31, 2021. Our non-GAAP gross margin is impacted significantly by the mix of our Software Products & Services and our Managed Services revenue in any given period because our Managed Services revenue typically has a lower overall non-GAAP gross margin than our Software Products & Services revenue. With the acquisition of PandoLogic in September 2021, we expect our consolidated non-GAAP gross margin and related non-GAAP gross profit to improve to no less than 80% starting in quarter ended March 31, 2022 and improving each subsequent quarter in 2022 as the mix of PandoLogic revenue becomes seasonally larger throughout 2022. Our non-GAAP gross profit (see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below) is also dependent upon our ability to grow our revenue by expanding our customer base and increasing business with existing customers, and to manage our costs by negotiating favorable economic terms with cloud computing providers such as AWS and Microsoft Azure. While we are focused on continuing to improve our non-GAAP gross profit, our ability to attract and retain customers to
grow our revenue will be highly dependent on our ability to implement and continually improve upon our technology and services and improve our technology infrastructure and operations as we experience increased network capacity constraints due to our growth.
We believe our operating results and performance are, and will continue to be, driven by various factors that affect our industry. Our ability to attract, grow and retain customers for our aiWARE platform is highly sensitive to rapidly changing technology and is dependent on our ability to maintain the attractiveness of our platform, content and services to our customers. Moreover, we have historically reported GAAP operating losses, driven by certain non-cash and non-recurring items such as stock-based compensation and purchase accounting; however, we expect to report substantial improvements in our consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2022 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by the growth in our software offerings and customers and the growth of PandoLogic. Our future revenue and operating growth will rely heavily on our ability to grow and retain our Software Products & Services customer base, continue to develop and deploy quality and innovative AI-driven applications and enterprise-level offerings, provide unique and attractive content and advertising services to our customers, continue to grow in newer markets such as Government & Regulated Industries, expand aiWARE into larger and more expansive enterprise engagements and manage our corporate overhead costs. While we believe we will be successful in these endeavors, we cannot guarantee that we will succeed in generating substantial long term operating growth and profitability.
We expect to pursue a strategy of acquiring companies to help accelerate our organic growth. We believe there are strategic acquisition targets that can accelerate our entry into key strategic markets, as well as our ability to grow our business. As a result, we are continuing to prioritize corporate development efforts throughout 2022. Our acquisition strategy is threefold: (i) to increase the scale of our business in markets we are in today, (ii) to accelerate growth in new markets and product categories, including expanding our existing engineering and sales resources, and (iii) to accelerate the adoption of aiWARE as the universal AI operating system through venture or market-driven opportunities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported positive non-GAAP net income for the first time of $6.8 million as compared to a reported non-GAAP net loss of $20.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. While we forecast our full year 2022 to also be profitable on a non-GAAP net income basis and do not expect to show non-GAAP net losses during the quarter ended March 31, 2022, we do expect seasonality in our revenue and operating performance throughout the quarters ended March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 from our PandoLogic acquisition. Moreover, and to continue to grow our revenue in 2022, we will need to make substantial investments in people, namely software engineers and sales personnel. Our growth and ultimate profitability could be accelerated or delayed if we cannot hire or retain people in a timely manner.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, substantially all of our revenue was derived from customers located in the United States. We believe that there is a substantial opportunity over time for us to significantly expand our service offerings and customer base in countries outside of the United States. In the long term, we plan to expand our business further internationally in places such as Europe, Asia Pacific and Latin America, and as a result, we expect to continue to incur significant incremental upfront expenses associated with these expansion opportunities.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 outbreak emerged in late 2019 and was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic, and the actions being taken by governments worldwide to mitigate the public health consequences of the pandemic, significantly impacted the global economy. Beginning in March 2020, we began to experience fluctuations in demand for certain services, particularly our Managed Services, a significant amount of revenue from which is typically driven by major live sporting events that were cancelled or postponed in the United States due to COVID-19. While many major sporting events have resumed, future cancellations of live sporting events could have a material adverse impact on our revenue generated from our Managed Services in future quarters.
The pandemic has affected and may continue to affect some of our customers, which may further reduce the demand and/or delay purchase decisions for our products and services and may additionally impact the creditworthiness of our customers. We have assessed the potential credit deterioration of our customers due to changes in the macroeconomic environment and have determined that no additional allowance for doubtful accounts was necessary due to credit deterioration as of December 31, 2021.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the related macroeconomic conditions may continue to affect our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. The severity and duration of the pandemic and the resulting macroeconomic conditions are difficult to predict, and our revenue and operating results may be adversely impacted in future periods. Due to the nature of our business, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in its results of operations until future periods. The most significant risks to our business and results of operations arising from the COVID-19 pandemic are discussed in Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first half of 2020, we took actions to control expenses, including temporarily discontinuing non-essential services and instituting controls on travel, entertainment and other expenses. In addition, in compliance with government mandates, we have initiated a remote work from home policy. We expect to continue to enforce these and other actions we deem appropriate until or when the COVID-19 pandemic is officially no longer declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In evaluating our cash flows and financial performance, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures, including “non-GAAP gross profit,” “non-GAAP gross margin,” “non-GAAP net income (loss),” and “non-GAAP net income (loss) per share.” Non-GAAP gross profit is the Company’s revenue less its cost of revenue. Non-GAAP net income (loss) and non-GAAP net income (loss) per share is the Company’s net income (loss) and net income (loss) per share, adjusted to exclude interest expense, provision for income taxes, depreciation expense, amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, changes in fair value of warrant liability, changes in fair value of contingent consideration, a reserve for state sales taxes, charges related to a facility sublease, gain on sale of asset, warrant expense, acquisition and due diligence costs, and severance and executive search costs. The results for non-GAAP net income (loss), are presented below for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The items excluded from these non-GAAP financial measures, as well as a breakdown of GAAP net loss, non-GAAP net income (loss) and these excluded items between our Core Operations and Corporate, are detailed in the reconciliation below.
In addition, we have provided additional supplemental non-GAAP measures of gross profit, operating expenses, loss from operations, other (expense) income, net, and loss before income taxes, excluding the items excluded from non-GAAP net loss as noted above, and reconciling such non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
We present these non-GAAP financial measures because management believes such information to be important supplemental measures of performance that are commonly used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in our industry. Management also uses this information internally for forecasting and budgeting.
These non-GAAP financial measures are not calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), operating income (loss) or any other financial measures so calculated and presented, nor as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. Other companies (including our competitors) may define these non-GAAP financial measures differently. These non-GAAP measures may not be indicative of our historical operating results or predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider this supplemental non-GAAP financial information in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported in accordance with GAAP.
(3)Lease exit charges consists of charges related to a sublease in 2021 and lease termination charges in 2020.
(4)Business realignment, severance and executive search costs consists of severance and executive search costs in 2021 and business realignment and officer severance costs in 2020.
The following tables set forth the calculation of our non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin, followed by a reconciliation of non-GAAP to GAAP financial information presented in our consolidated financial statements for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(1)
Adjustments are comprised of the adjustments to GAAP cost of revenue, sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses and other (expense) income, net (where applicable) listed above.
Supplemental Financial Information
We are providing the following unaudited supplemental financial information regarding our Software Products & Services and Managed Services as a lookback of the prior year to explain our recent historical and year-over-year performance. The Software Products & Services supplemental financial information is presented on a pro forma basis, as further described below.
The supplemental financial information for our Software Products & Services include: (i) Software Revenue - Pro Forma, (ii) Ending Customers, (iii) Average Annual Revenue (AAR), (iv) Total New Bookings, and (iv) Gross Revenue Retention, in each case as defined in the footnotes to the table below. The supplemental financial information for our Managed Services includes: (i) average gross billings per active agency client, and (ii) revenue.
Software Products & Services Supplemental Financial Information
The following table sets forth the results for each of the key performance indicators (“KPI’s”) for our Software Products & Services.
(1)
“Software Revenue - Pro Forma” includes historical Software Products & Services revenue from the past six (6) fiscal quarters of each of Veritone, Inc. and PandoLogic Ltd. (unaudited) and presents such revenue on a combined pro forma basis treating PandoLogic Ltd. as owned by Veritone, Inc. since January 1, 2020.
(2)
“Ending Customers” includes Software Products & Services customers as of the end of each respective quarter set forth above with trailing twelve-month revenues in excess of $2,400 for both Veritone, Inc. and PandoLogic Ltd.
(3)
“Average Annual Revenue (AAR)” is calculated as the aggregate of trailing twelve-month Software Products & Services revenue divided by the average number of customers over the same period for both Veritone, Inc. and PandoLogic Ltd.
(4)
“Total New Bookings” represents the total fees payable during the full contract term for new contracts received in the quarter (including fees payable during any cancellable portion and an estimate of license fees that may fluctuate over the term), excluding any variable fees under the contract (e.g., fees for cognitive processing, storage, professional services and other variable services). This also excludes PandoLogic new bookings for the third and fourth quarter of fiscal year 2020 as those periods were deemed immaterial and data was not readily available.
(5)
“Gross Revenue Retention”: We calculate our dollar-based gross retention rate as of the period end by starting with the revenue from Ending Customers for Software Products & Services as of the 3 months in the prior year quarter to such period, or Prior Year Quarter Revenue. We then deduct from the Prior Year Quarter Revenue any revenue from Ending Customers who are no longer customers as of the current period end, or Current Period Ending Customer Revenue. We then divide the total Current Period Ending Customer Revenue by the total Prior Year Quarter Revenue to arrive at our dollar-based gross retention rate, which is the percentage of revenue from all Ending Customers from our Software Products & Services as of the year prior that is not lost to customer churn.
As we grow our business for our Software Products & Services, we expect that our supplemental financial information will be impacted in different ways based on our customer profiles and the nature of target markets. For example, the PandoLogic business has significant revenue concentration in a single customer which has a material impact on the average contract value and gross retention. As a result, we have shown the supplemental financial information on a proforma basis for comparability.
Managed Services Supplemental Financial Information
The following table sets forth the results for each of the KPIs for our Managed Services.
(6)
Avg billings per active Managed Services customer for each quarter reflects the average quarterly billings per active Managed Services customer over the twelve-month period through the end of such quarter for Managed Services clients that are active during such quarter.
(7)
Managed Services revenue and metrics exclude content licensing & media services.
We have experienced and may continue to experience volatility in revenue from our Managed Services due to a number of factors, including: (i) the timing of new large customer wins; (ii) loss of customers who choose to replace our services with new providers or by bringing their advertising placement in-house; (iii) customers who experience reductions in their advertising budgets due to issues with their own businesses; and (iv) the seasonality of the campaigns for certain large customers. We have historically generated a significant portion of our revenue from a few major customers. As we continue to grow and diversify our customer base, we expect that our dependency on a limited number of large customers will be minimized.
Net Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state income tax net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) totaling approximately $217.8 million and $135.1 million, respectively. The U.S. federal and state NOLs are projected to expire beginning in 2034 and 2022, respectively, unless previously utilized. NOLs generated after January 1, 2018 may be carried forward indefinitely, subject to an 80% taxable income limitation on the utilization of the carryforwards.
In general, under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), a corporation that undergoes an “ownership change” (generally defined as a cumulative change (by value) of more than 50% in the equity ownership of certain stockholders over a rolling three-year period) is subject to limitations on its ability to utilize its pre-change NOLs to offset post-change taxable income. Our existing NOLs may be subject to limitations arising from previous ownership changes, and our ability to utilize NOLs could be further limited by Section 382 of the Code. In addition, future changes in our stock ownership, some of which may be outside of our control, could result in an ownership change under Section 382 of the Code. The amount of such limitations, if any, has not been determined.
There is also a risk that due to other future regulatory changes, such as suspensions on the use of NOLs, or other unforeseen reasons, our existing NOLs could expire or otherwise be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities. For these reasons, we may not be able to realize a tax benefit from the use of our NOLs, even if we attain profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between expected and actual experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. More information on these critical accounting policies and our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounting for Business Combinations
As part of the purchase accounting for acquisitions, we estimate the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. In the context of purchase accounting, the determination of fair value often involves significant judgments and estimates by management, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The fair values reflected in the purchase accounting rely on management’s judgment and the expertise of a third-party valuation firm engaged to assist in concluding on the fair value measurements.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but instead is tested at least annually for impairment, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. Our annual impairment test is performed during the second quarter. In assessing goodwill impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Our qualitative assessment of the recoverability of goodwill considers various macro-economic, industry-specific and company-specific factors. These factors include: (i) severe adverse industry or economic trends; (ii) significant company-specific actions, including exiting an activity in conjunction with restructuring of operations; (iii) current, historical or projected deterioration of our financial performance; or (iv) a sustained decrease in our market capitalization below its net book value. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is unlikely that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative analysis is unnecessary. However, if we conclude otherwise, or if we elect to bypass the qualitative analysis, then we are required to perform a quantitative analysis that compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is not considered impaired; otherwise, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized for the lesser of: (a) the amount that the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value; or (b) the amount of the goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We review long-lived assets to be held and used, other than goodwill, for impairment at least annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If an evaluation of recoverability is required, the estimated undiscounted future cash flows directly associated with the asset are compared with the asset’s carrying amount. If the estimated future cash flows from the use of the asset are less than the carrying value, an impairment charge would be recorded to write down the asset to its estimated fair value.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We record stock-based compensation expense associated with restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options granted under our stock incentive plans, and purchase rights granted under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We have granted stock options with time-based vesting conditions, as well as performance-based stock options, the vesting of which is conditioned upon the achievement of specified target stock prices for our common stock (“Performance Options”). All Performance Options become exercisable in three equal tranches based on the achievement of specific market price targets for our common stock. For each tranche to become exercisable, the closing price per share of our common stock must meet or exceed the applicable stock price target for a period of 30 consecutive trading days. All stock options have terms of ten years following the grant date, subject to earlier termination in the case of cessation of the awardee’s continued service with us.
Stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. Prior to our initial public offering (“IPO”) in May 2017, the fair values of restricted stock awards were estimated at the date of grant by using both the option-pricing method and the probability-weighted expected return method. All restricted stock awards granted prior to our IPO were fully vested as of the fourth quarter of 2020. Following our IPO, the fair values of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards are based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair values of stock options having time-based vesting conditions, as well as purchase rights under our ESPP, using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. We estimate the fair values of Performance Options utilizing a Monte Carlo simulation model to estimate when the stock price targets will be achieved and the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. A fair value is estimated for each tranche of such Performance Options that is tied to a particular stock price target.
Determining the appropriate fair values of stock options and ESPP purchase rights at the grant date requires significant judgment, including estimating the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of awards, and the derived service periods for each tranche of Performance Options. In determining fair values, we estimate volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock along with the volatility of the peer group. In calculating estimated volatility, as the number of years of trading history for our common stock has increased, the volatility of our common stock has been given a weighting ranging from 25% to 50%, and the volatility of the peer group companies has been given a weighting ranging from 75% to 50%, with each peer company weighted equally. We will continue utilizing this combination and will periodically adjust the weightings as additional historical volatility data for our own shares of common stock becomes available.
The expected term for stock options other than Performance Options represents the period of time that stock options are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method. Under the simplified method, the expected term is calculated as the midpoint between the weighted average vesting date and the contractual term of the options. The expected term for Performance Options considers the remaining term of the option after the attainment date and the ratio of the stock price at the attainment date to the option exercise price.
The risk-free rate is based on the implied yield of U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with a remaining term approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
The fair value of stock-based awards (other than Performance Options) is amortized using the straight-line attribution method over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting period. For Performance Options, expense is recognized over a graded-vesting attribution basis over the period from the grant date to the estimated attainment date, which is the derived service period of each tranche of the award.
We engaged a third-party valuation specialist to assist us in determining the fair values and derived service periods of Performance Options awarded, and to assist us in determining the fair values and new derived service periods of Performance Options in connection with a modification that occurred in August 2020 as a result of certain amendments to the Performance Options outstanding at that time. The valuation specialist used a Monte Carlo simulation model which incorporated three key assumptions: dividend yield, risk-free interest rate; and estimated volatility. The estimated volatility required the most judgment of those three assumptions, and it was based on the historical volatility of our common stock along with the historical volatility of the peer group. The estimated volatility used in valuing Performance Options granted in 2020 and 2019 was 85% and 65%, respectively, and the estimated volatility used in valuing the modified Performance Options in 2020 was 80%.
We recognize actual forfeitures as they occur and do not estimate forfeitures in determining our stock-based compensation expense.
If Performance Options are modified, the fair values and the new derived service periods of the modified awards as of the date of modification and the fair values of the original awards immediately before the modification are determined. The amount of incremental compensation expense resulting from the modification of each award is equal to the excess of the fair value of the modified award on the date of modification over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification. The incremental compensation expense is recognized over the new derived service period of the modified award.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of our assets and liabilities using statutory tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to reverse.
We assess the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, if recovery is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. Realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent on us generating sufficient taxable income in future years to obtain a benefit from the reversal of temporary differences and from net operating losses. Due to uncertainties related to the ability to utilize certain historical U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets in future periods, we have recorded a valuation allowance against these net deferred tax assets in the amount of $81.8 million, as of December 31, 2021. These assets consist primarily of net operating loss and tax credit carryovers and non-deductible stock-based compensation. No valuation allowance is recorded against the acquired PandoLogic deferred tax assets as we have determined it is more likely than not they will be utilized.
In connection with the acquisition of PandoLogic, a deferred tax liability is established for the future consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of the acquired non-goodwill intangible assets and their respective tax basis. No deferred tax asset or liability is recorded on PandoLogic goodwill, $25,141 of which is not deductible for tax purposes. No valuation allowance is recorded on the acquired PandoLogic deferred tax assets attributable to US based entities that are presented separately from net deferred tax liabilities associated with our Israeli subsidiary.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and our valuation allowance. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management has considered both the positive and negative evidence available, including but not limited to, our prior history of net losses, projected future outcomes, industry and market trends and the nature of existing deferred tax assets. In management’s judgment, any positive indicators are outweighed by the uncertainties surrounding our estimates and judgments of potential future taxable income, due primarily to uncertainties surrounding the timing of realization of future taxable income. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates or we adjust these estimates should we believe we would be able to realize these deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, in dollars and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the periods presented were comprised of the following:
(1)
Software Products & Services consists of aiWARE SaaS Solutions revenues of $21.2 million and $13.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, as well as PandoLogic revenues of $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021
Commercial Enterprise
CE Software Products & Services revenue increased $44.8 million, or 419%, in the year ended December 31, 2021compared to the corresponding prior year period due primarily due to the acquisition of PandoLogic in September 2021 coupled with expanded services to existing customers in media and entertainment. CE Managed Services increased $11.9 million, or 27%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the corresponding prior year period due to growth in new and existing advertising customers and increases in content licensing revenues in part due to resumption of sporting events in the first quarter of 2021 following the cancellation or postponement of substantially all major sporting events in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Government & Regulated Industries
GRI Software Products & Services revenue increased $0.9 million or 28% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the corresponding prior year period primarily due to growth in the government division, offset by timing of early stage energy deliverables. GRI Software Products & Services revenue from customers in certain markets, particularly government and energy customers, is often project-based and is impacted by the timing of projects. As such, we expect that our revenue from these markets could fluctuate significantly from period to period.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit
As noted above, our non-GAAP gross profit is calculated as our revenue less our cost of revenue, as follows:
The increase in non-GAAP gross profit and non-GAAP gross margin in 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to growth in Software Products & Services revenue, including the September 2021 acquisition of PandoLogic, which collectively generated incremental non-GAAP gross margins in excess of 80% during the three months ended December 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue. The increase in cost of revenue in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to our higher revenue level, as discussed above. Cost of revenue increased at a lower rate than the increase in revenues due to the introduction of new products with higher non-GAAP gross margin contribution in 2021, including the addition of PandoLogic.
Sales and Marketing. The increase in sales and marketing expenses of $9.1 million or 46% in 2021 compared with 2020 was primarily due to the acquisition of PandoLogic, coupled with a $2.1 million increase in personnel-related costs from the addition of new sales and marketing resources and a $0.8 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses decreased to 25% in 2021 from 34% in 2020.
Research and Development. The increase in research and development expenses of $10.7 million or 74% in 2021 compared with 2020 was primarily due to an increase of $3.6 million in personnel-related costs from the addition of new engineering resources, the September 2021 acquisition of PandoLogic, and a $2.1 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation attributable primarily to equity awards for new engineering resources and additional expense related to the accelerated vesting of certain Performance Options in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. As a percentage of revenue, research and development expenses declined to 22% in 2021 from 25% in 2020.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased $47.8 million or 96% in 2021 compared to 2020 principally due to $41.8 million increases in non-recurring and non-cash expenses of (i) $18.3 million change in the fair value of contingent consideration associated with the PandoLogic transaction, (ii) $17.4 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, attributable primarily to additional expense related to the accelerated vesting of Performance Options in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, (iii) $3.4 million in one-time charges related to the sublease of our former Costa Mesa corporate office space in the first quarter of 2021 and (iv) $2.7 million in transaction costs primarily related to the acquisition of PandoLogic. In addition, general and administrative expenses increased $5.3 million associated with higher personnel-related costs and the addition of PandoLogic in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses declined to 85% in 2021 from 87% in 2020.
Amortization. Amortization expense increased in 2021 compared with 2020 due to certain intangible assets that were acquired in 2017 being fully amortized during 2020, offset by the addition of PandoLogic amortization expense in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net for 2021 was comprised primarily of interest expense of $0.5 million. In 2020, other expense, net was comprised primarily of warrant expense of $0.2 million, offset in part by interest income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our business through the sale of equity and debt securities. Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $254.7 million as of December 31, 2021, compared with total cash and cash equivalents of $114.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in our cash and cash equivalents in 2021 was primarily due to the issuance of the Convertible Notes in November 2021. The Convertible Notes, issued at par value, provided $201.3 million in gross proceeds, $18.6 million of which were used to fund the capped call transactions related to the Convertible Notes and $6.3 million of which were used to pay debt issuance costs for the Convertible Notes. Our largest use of cash in 2021 was $52.8 million paid in connection with the acquisition of PandoLogic. We also generated cash through proceeds from issuances of stock under employee stock plans of $7.9 million and proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $2.3 million.
Cash Flows
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Our operating activities provided cash of $7.2 million in 2021, primarily due to a net increase of $31.0 million in cash received from advertising customers for future payments to vendors, offset by the effect of our net loss of $70.6 million, adjusted by $70.7 million in non-cash expenses, including $40.1 million in stock-based compensation expense and $18.3 million in change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Our business strategy includes streamlining operational costs while investing in the development of our AI capabilities and enhancement of our Software Products & Services to grow our business and future revenue. We gauge the amount of cash utilized in these efforts using the Non-GAAP net income (loss) measure, as presented under the heading “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above. Our provision or usage of cash as measured by Non-GAAP net income (loss) increased to a provision of $6.8 million in 2021 from a use of $20.6 million in 2020, due primarily to an increase in non-GAAP expenses.
Our operating activities provided cash of $1.4 million in 2020, primarily due to a net increase of $25.0 million in cash received from advertising customers for future payments to vendors, offset in part by the effect of our net loss of $47.9 million, adjusted by $26.3 million in non-cash expenses, including $19.5 million in stock-based compensation expense.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
In 2021, our investing activities used cash of $53.8 million, primarily to fund a portion of the consideration for the acquisition of PandoLogic.
In 2020, our investing activities used $0.2 million in cash for capital expenditures, which was offset in part by minimal amounts received from the sale of equipment.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Our financing activities provided cash of $186.5 million in 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $201.3 million in gross proceeds from the sale of the Convertible Notes, $7.9 million received from the exercise of stock options and purchases of shares under our ESPP and $2.3 million in proceeds received from the exercise of stock warrants, partially offset by a use of $18.6 million to fund the capped call transactions related to the Convertible Notes and a use of $6.3 million in debt issuance costs for the Convertible Notes.
Our financing activities provided cash of $69.4 million in 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $66.3 million in net proceeds received from our sales of common stock, $2.1 million in proceeds received from the exercise of stock warrants and $1.1 million received from the exercise of stock options and purchases of shares under our ESPP. Proceeds received from loans that we received under the Paycheck Protection Program in April 2020 were repaid in full in May 2020.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our only debt obligations were the Convertible Notes issued in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021. We have no present agreements or commitments with respect to any material acquisitions of businesses or technologies or any other material capital expenditures.
We have generated significant losses since inception; however, we do expect to begin generating profits in the foreseeable future. With the acquisition of PandoLogic, we believe we have an opportunity to significantly improve our operating income/(loss) in 2022 as compared to 2021. We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents balance will be sufficient to fund our operations in the ordinary course of business for at least the next twelve months from the date of this filing. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements.