ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 7, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region for purposes of consummating an initial business combination, we intend to focus on businesses that have their primary operations located in North America in the healthcare industry. We intend to utilize cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering in effecting our initial business combination.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of our investors in this offering who would not have pre-emption rights in respect of any such issuance;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after our Initial Business Combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On January 12, 2022, we entered into a merger agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) withVHAC Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), and Suneva Medical, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Suneva”). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, a business combination between the Company and Suneva will be effected through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Suneva, with Suneva surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). The board of directors of the Company has (i) approved and declared advisable the Merger Agreement, the Merger and the other transactions contemplated thereby and (ii) resolved to recommend approval of the Merger Agreement and related transactions by the stockholders of the Company.
The Merger Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of the Company and Suneva. We intend to effectuate our proposed initial business combination with Suneva using a combination of cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (and the concurrent private placement of shares to our sponsor, as described in “Part I, Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report), the proceeds of the sale of our shares to private investors in connection with our initial business combination and shares issued to the owners of Suneva.
For further information regarding the Merger Agreement and our proposed initial business combination with Suneva, please refer to “Part I, Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report and the Form 8-K announcing the proposed business combination, which was filed with the SEC on January 12, 2022.
On March 18, 2022, we held our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders for the purpose of approving: (i) a proposal to approve an amendment to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to (i) extend the date by which the Company has to consummate a business combination for three months, from March 28, 2022 (the “Original Termination Date”) to June 28, 2022 (the “Extended Date”), and (ii) allow us, without another stockholder vote, to elect to extend the date to consummate a business combination on a monthly basis for up to six times by an additional one month each time after the Extended Date, upon five days’ advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, for a total of up to nine months after the Original Termination Date, unless the closing of the proposed business combination with Suneva or any potential alternative initial business combination shall have occurred (the “Extension Proposal”); (ii) a proposal to re-elect five current directors to our Board of Directors (the “Director Election Proposal”); and (iii) a proposal to ratify the appointment of Marcum LLP as our independent registered certified public accountants for fiscal year 2020 (the “Auditor Ratification Proposal”). Stockholders voted to approve the Extension Proposal, Director Election Proposal and Auditor Ratification Proposal.
On March 18, 2022, stockholders elected to redeem 15,092,126 shares of our Class A common stock, resulting in redemption payments out of the trust account totaling approximately $152,451,819. Subsequent to the redemptions, 5,032,874 shares of common stock remained in the trust account.
On March 21, 2022, we entered into subscription agreements with several lenders for a loan of up to $4,000,000, in the aggregate (the “Subscription Agreements”). Pursuant to the Subscription Agreement, we issued a series of unsecured senior promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of up to $4,000,000 (the “Notes”) to the subscribers. The subscribers for the Notes are affiliated with our sponsor, Viveon Health LLC.
The Notes do not bear interest and mature upon the earlier of (i) the closing of our initial business combination, and (ii) December 31, 2022 (the “Maturity Date”). The Notes provide for a credit line up to the maximum amount of $4,000,000. We will not have the right to re-borrow any portion of any loans made under the Notes once repaid. A commitment fee in the amount of $400,000, equal to 10% of the maximum principal amount of the Note, shall be paid to the subscribers, on a pro rata basis, by us promptly following the initial funding. In the event that we do not consummate a business combination by the Maturity Date, the Notes will be repaid only from amounts remaining outside of our trust account, if any.
Pursuant to the terms of the Subscription Agreements, the subscribers shall receive warrants to purchase one share of our common stock for every $2.00 of the funded principal amount of the Notes up to 2,000,000 shares of the our common stock, in the aggregate, at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (the “Subscription Warrants”). The Subscription Warrant term commences on the Exercise Date (as hereinafter defined) for a period of 49 months. The Subscription Warrants are exercisable commencing on the date of the initial business combination (the “Exercise Date”) and have a cashless exercise feature that is available at any time on or after the Exercise Date. Commencing on the date 13 months following the Exercise Date, the subscribers have the right, but not the obligation, to put the Subscription Warrants to us at a purchase price of $5.00 per share. We have agreed to file, within thirty (30) calendar days after the consummation of an initial business combination, a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to register for resale the shares of common stock underlying the Subscription Warrants.
On March 21, 2022, an initial amount of $2,700,000 was drawn down from the Notes. $720,000 of the loan proceeds was deposited into our trust account in connection with extending the business combination completion window from March 28, 2022 until the Extended Date. After the Extended Date, if we elect to continue to extend such date until December 28, 2022 (the “Final Extension Date”), we shall make a monthly deposit of $240,000 into the trust account each month for each monthly period, or portion thereof, until the Final Extension Date.
The entry into the Subscription Agreement and the terms of the Notes and Subscription Warrants was approved by the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company at a meeting held on March 21, 2022.
On March 23, 2022, we filed an amendment to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State (the “Amendment”) The Amendment (i) extends the date by which we have to consummate a business combination for three months, from the Original Termination Date to the Extended Date and (ii) allows us, without another stockholder vote, to elect to extend the date to consummate a business combination on a monthly basis for up to six times by an additional one month each time after the Extended Date, upon five days’ advance notice and the deposit of $240,000 prior to the applicable deadline, for a total of up to nine months after the Original Termination Date, unless the closing of the proposed business combination with Suneva Medical, Inc. or any potential alternative initial business combination shall have occurred. As disclosed in the Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 18, 2022, the Amendment was approved by our stockholders at our Annual Meeting of Stockholders held on March 18, 2022.
Restatement of Previously Issued Financial Statements
On March 15, 2022, our audit committee concluded, after consultation with management, that our previously issued financial statements for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A, as filed with the SEC on December 17, 2021, and our previously issued unaudited financial statements for the periods ended March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, and September 30, 2021, included in the Company’s Quarterly Reports of Form 10-Q as filed with the SEC on July 2, 2021, August 16, 2021 and November 17, 2021, respectively, should no longer be relied upon as a result of errors in the accounting for complex financial instruments and errors in the process of recording accounts payable and accrued expenses as described below.
We concluded that a portion of the proceeds from its initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) and exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option was not correctly allocated to the rights that are included as part of the units sold.
In addition, on December 23, 2020, the Sponsor transferred 81,000 of its shares of common stock (the “Founder Shares) to three directors (“the Transferees”) (27,000 Founder Shares to each Transferee) for a nominal fee. The Company did not recognize stock-based compensation associated with the transfer of the Founder Shares in its financial statements as of and for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. On April 30, 2021 the Sponsor transferred 27,000 Founder Shares to a fourth director (the “Additional Transferee”) for a nominal fee. We did not recognize stock-based compensation associated with the transfer of the Founder Shares to the Additional Transferee in quarterly filings for June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021.
We have since determined that the transfer of the Founder Shares to the Transferees and Additional Transferees constitutes stock awards granted to members of the board of directors on December 23, 2020 and April 30, 2021, respectively, as compensation for each of the Transferees’ and Additional Transferee’s services as a member of the board of directors. These awards are subject to ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). The Founder Shares vested immediately, and, as such, in accordance with ASC 718, we must recognize compensation expense in an amount equal to the number of Founders Shares transferred times the grant date fair value per share less the amount initially received for the purchase of the Founders Shares.
We also determined that we were incorrectly recognizing and accruing formation and operating costs in connection with our administrative support agreement with the Sponsor, resulting in an overstatement of formation and operating costs and accrued costs and other expenses in quarterly filings for March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, and September 30, 2021.
We also determined that we inappropriately recognized a payment made on behalf of a related entity as an expense in our quarterly filing for September 30, 2021. The payment should have been recorded as an amount due from a related party.
We also failed to recognize and accrue legal and consulting expenses in connection with the Business Combination, resulting in an understatement of formation and operating costs and accrued costs and other expenses in our quarterly filings for March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, and September 30, 2021.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, and, after our initial public offering, identifying target companies for a business combination, conducting due diligence on such target companies and negotiating the Business Combination Agreement with Suneva, which will give effect to our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,489,829, which consisted of a change in fair value of warrant liability of $6,575,140, interest income on investments held in Trust Account of $20,329 and interest income on the operating bank account of $147, partially offset by formation and operating costs of $1,050,016, professional fees of $2,701,431, franchise tax expense of $197,200, and stock compensation expense of $157,140. The gains on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities was due in large part to the decrease in the public traded price of the public warrants.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $2,238,593, which consisted of a change in fair value of warrant liability of $1,132,164, a loss of $631,197 related to receiving less proceeds than the fair value of the private warrants, stock compensation expense of $424,440, formation and operating costs of $26,032, and warrant transaction costs of $24,973, partially offset by interest income on investments held in Trust Account of $160 and interest income on the operating bank account of $53.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $2,082,334, which was due to the change in fair value of warrant liability of $6,575,140 and interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $20,329, offset in part by net income of $2,489,829, changes in working capital of $1,866,166, and stock compensation expense of $157,140.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 net cash provided by operating activities was $642,304, which was due to the change in fair value of warrant liability of $1,132,164, changes in working capital of $668,283, loss of $631,197 related to receiving less proceeds than the fair value of the private warrants, stock compensation expense of $424,440 and warrant transaction costs of $24,973, offset in part by net loss of $2,238,593, and interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $160.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 net cash used in investing activities was $203,262,500 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the initial public offering and the private placement sale of shares being deposited to the Trust Account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $619,387, which was due to payment of other payable - related party of $364,880, payment of the promissory note - related party of $228,758 and offering costs paid of $25,749.
For the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities was $205,717,152, which was due to the proceeds from the sale of the units, net of underwriting fees, of $197,225,000, proceeds from the issuance of private warrants of $9,000,000, proceeds from the promissory note - related party of $228,758, and proceeds from the sale of common stock to initial stockholders of $25,000, partially offset by offering costs paid of $761,606.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities in the trust account of $203,282,989 (including approximately $20,329 of interest income). We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination with Suneva. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any of interest income from the Trust Account to pay for franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $395,235 outside of the Trust Account and a working capital deficit of $1,774,334.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. We plan to address this uncertainty through the Merger as discussed above. There is no assurance that our plans to consummate the Merger will be successful or successful within the combination period. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on December 22, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $7,043,750. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In addition, subject to certain conditions, we granted Chardan Capital Markets, LLC, for a period of 12 months after the date of the consummation of a Business Combination, a right of first refusal to act as book-running managing underwriter or placement agent, with at least 30% of the economics, for any and all future public and private equity, convertible and debt offerings. In accordance with FINRA Rule 5110(f)(2)(E)(i), such right of first refusal shall not have a duration of more than three years from the effective date of the registration statement related to the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 20,125,000 public shares sold as part of the units in our initial public offering and subsequent full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such redeemable common stock in connection with our liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with our initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”), redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all redeemable common stock have been classified outside of permanent equity.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. The calculation of diluted income (loss) per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) initial public offering, (ii) exercise of over-allotment and (iii) Private Placement since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 19,062,500 shares of common stock in the aggregate.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The Company’s derivative instruments are recorded at fair value and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. The Company has determined the private warrants are a derivative instrument. As the private warrants meet the definition of a derivative the private warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change. In accordance with ASC Topic 825, Financial Instruments, the Company has concluded that a portion of the transaction costs which directly related to the initial public offering and the private placement, should be allocated to the private warrants based on their relative fair value against total proceeds, and recognized as transaction costs in the statement of operations.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. For smaller reporting companies, ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 using the full retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from August 7, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.