ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources during the period ended July 2, 2022. Unless otherwise noted, all references herein for the years 2022, 2021, and 2020 represent the fiscal years ended July 2, 2022, July 3, 2021, and June 27, 2020, respectively. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
We are a global provider of network test, monitoring, and assurance solutions for communications service providers (CSPs), enterprises, network equipment manufacturers (NEMs), original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), government and avionics. We help these customers harness the power of instruments, automation, intelligence, and virtualization. VIAVI is also a leader in light management solutions for the anti-counterfeiting, consumer electronics, industrial, government, and automotive markets.
To serve our markets, we operate in the following business segments:
•Network Enablement (NE);
•Service Enablement (SE); and
•Optical Security and Performance Products (OSP).
During fiscal 2022, we experienced global supply chain disruptions, increased raw material costs, higher shipping-related charges, and inflationary pressures. Nevertheless, our ability to secure critical components, build inventory and meet customer demands has helped enable us to grow revenue and market share. We saw strong revenue growth in our NE business segment driven by fiber and wireless, as North American service providers upgraded and expanded their networks with fiber optic, and wireless demand increased in fiscal 2022. Our SE business segment also experienced an increase in revenue year over year as we saw strong growth in assurance solutions and data center products, in part due to increased market demand for 5G and growth in network traffic. Revenue from our OSP business segment did decrease, primarily driven by a decrease in demand for our consumer electronics and industrial products.
However, any prolonged disruption of manufacturing of our products, commerce and related activity caused by the pandemic or significant decrease in demand for our products could materially and adversely affect our results of business, operations, and financial conditions. It may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks such as those relating to our quarterly revenue and operating results as well as on our liquidity and on our ability to satisfy our indebtedness obligations, including the compliance with the covenants that apply to our indebtedness.
Our financial results and long-term growth model will continue to be driven by revenue growth, non-GAAP operating profit, non-GAAP diluted earnings per share (EPS) and cash flow from operations. We believe these key operating metrics are useful to investors because management uses these metrics to assess the growth of our business and the effectiveness of our marketing and operational strategies.
We continue to make strategic investments to support our three-year strategic plan highlighted during our September 2019 Analyst Day Event such as:
•Continued to invest in R&D to revamp product portfolio and enable the business to leverage secular trends in 5G, Fiber and 3D Sensing.
•Enhanced the sales team to continue expanding Total Addressable Market (TAM), gain market share and execute successfully against our competitors.
•Successfully completed four acquisitions, consistent with our acquisition strategy.
Looking Ahead to 2023
As we look forward to the year ahead, our focus remains on executing against our strategic priorities to drive revenue and earnings growth, capture market share and continue to optimize our capital structure. Our emphasis is to continue to execute successfully despite supply chain shortages. Our ability to secure critical components, build inventory and meet customer demands has been a great differentiator and enabled us to grow revenue and market share. We plan to improve profitably driven by operating leverage in the business model as we grow both organically and inorganically.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Our fiscal 2022 results included the following notable items:
•Net revenues of $1.3 billion, up $93.5 million or 7.8% year-over-year
•GAAP operating margin of 14.3%, up 240 bps year-over-year
•Non-GAAP operating margin of 22.2%, up 110 bps year-over-year
•GAAP Diluted EPS of $0.07, down $0.22 or 75.9% year-over-year
•Non-GAAP Diluted EPS of $0.95, up $0.12 or 14.5% year-over-year
In fiscal 2022, VIAVI achieved new highs despite the COVID-19 related supply chain issues and inflationary pressures. Net revenue of $1.3 billion, up $93.5 million or 7.8%, was led by our NSE segment, which reached a record revenue of $949.1 million, up 13.3% year-over-year.
VIAVI's fiscal 2022 GAAP operating margin of 14.3% was up 240bps over fiscal 2021 due to leverage on revenue growth. Non-GAAP operating margin of 22.2% expanded 110 basis points largely due to revenue growth and a lower intangible amortization.
GAAP Diluted EPS of $0.07 decreased 75.9%, or $0.22, from fiscal 2021 largely due to the loss incurred in connection with the repurchase of certain 1.00% and 1.75% Senior Convertible Notes (the Original Senior Convertible Notes). Non-GAAP Diluted EPS of $0.95 increased 14.5% or $0.12 from $0.83 in fiscal 2021 as a result of the operating performance and an improved tax rate.
In fiscal 2022, we generated $178.1 million in operating cash flow and deployed $72.5 million or 5.6% of revenues towards capital expenditures. We completed a $400.0 million high-yield 2029 notes offering at an attractive rate of 3.75% interest which allowed us to retire about 40% of the Original Senior Convertible Notes during Q1, and subsequent redemption transactions the remainder of the year allowed for additional retirements of approximately 17% of the Original Senior Convertible Notes. At the end of fiscal 2022, 43% of the original principal value of the Original Senior Convertible Notes remain outstanding. Also during fiscal 2022 we repurchased 14.8 million shares of our common stock for $235.5 million.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures is provided below (in millions, except EPS amounts):
(1) Other items include charges unrelated to core operating performance primarily consisting of acquisition and integration related charges, transformational initiatives such as site consolidations, and reorganization, loss on sale of investments and loss on disposal of long-lived assets.
Use of Non-GAAP (Adjusted) Financial Measures
The Company provides non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share financial measures as supplemental information regarding the Company’s operational performance. The Company uses the measures disclosed in this Report to evaluate the Company’s historical and prospective financial performance, as well as its performance relative to its competitors. Specifically, management uses these items to further its own understanding of the Company’s core operating performance, which the Company believes represent its performance in the ordinary, ongoing and customary course of its operations. Accordingly, management excludes from core operating performance items such as those relating to certain purchase price accounting adjustments, amortization of acquisition-related intangibles and inventory step-up, stock-based compensation, restructuring, separation costs, changes in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and certain investing expenses and non-cash activities that management believes are not reflective of such ordinary, ongoing and core operating activities.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not in accordance with, preferable to, or an alternative for, generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The Company believes providing this additional information allows investors to see Company results through the eyes of management and that providing non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with GAAP measures provides valuable supplemental information regarding the Company’s overall performance. The Company further believes that providing this information allows investors to better understand the Company’s financial performance and, importantly, to evaluate the efficacy of the methodology and information used by management to evaluate and measure such performance.
The non-GAAP adjustments described in this Report are excluded by the Company from its GAAP financial measures. The non-GAAP adjustments are outlined below.
Cost of revenues, costs of research and development and costs of selling, general and administrative: The Company’s GAAP presentation operating expenses may include (i) additional depreciation and amortization from changes in estimated useful life and the write-down of certain property, equipment and intangibles that have been identified for disposal but remained in use until the date of disposal, (ii) workforce related charges such as severance, retention bonuses and employee relocation costs related to formal restructuring plans, (iii) costs for facilities not required for ongoing operations, and costs related to the relocation of certain equipment from these facilities and/or contract manufacturer facilities, (iv) stock-based compensation, (v) changes in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and (vi) other charges unrelated to our core operating performance comprising mainly of acquisition related transaction costs, amortization of acquisition related inventory step-up, integration costs related to acquired entities, litigation and other costs and contingencies unrelated to current and future operations, including transformational initiatives such as the implementation of simplified automated processes, site consolidations, and reorganizations. The Company excludes these items in calculating non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share. The Company believes excluding these items enables investors to evaluate more clearly and consistently the Company’s core operational performance.
Amortization of intangibles: The Company includes amortization expense related to intangibles in its GAAP presentation of cost of revenues and operating expense. The Company excludes these significant non-cash items in calculating non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share.
Non-cash interest expense and other expense: The Company incurred a loss of $101.8M for fiscal 2022 in connection with the repurchase of certain 1.00% and 1.75% Senior Convertible Notes. The Company eliminates this in calculating non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share, because it believes that in so doing, it can provide investors a clearer and more consistent view of the Company’s core operating performance.
Income tax expense or benefit: The Company excludes certain non-cash tax expense or benefit items, such as the utilization of net operating losses where valuation allowances were released, intra-period tax allocation benefit and the tax effect for amortization of non-tax deductible intangible assets, in calculating non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP net income per share.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses the results of operations for the fiscal year ended July 2, 2022 and July 3, 2021 and year to-year comparisons between such fiscal years. Discussions of the year to-year comparisons between the fiscal year ended July 3, 2021 and June 27, 2020, that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended July 3, 2021.
The results of operations for the current period are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for future periods. The following table summarizes selected Consolidated Statements of Operations items as a percentage of net revenue:
Financial Data for Fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes selected Consolidated Statement of Operations items (in millions, except for percentages):
Foreign Currency Impact on Results of Operations
While the majority of our net revenue and operating expenses are denominated in U.S. dollar, a portion of our international operations are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Changes in foreign exchange rates may significantly affect revenue and expenses. While we use foreign currency hedging contracts to mitigate some foreign currency exchange risk, these activities are limited in the protection that they provide us and can themselves result in losses. We have presented below “constant dollar” comparisons of our net sales and operating expenses which exclude the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations. Constant dollar net revenue and operating expenses are non-GAAP financial measures, which is information derived from consolidated financial information but not presented in our financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our management believes these non-GAAP measures, when considered in conjunction with the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures, may facilitate a better understanding of changes in net revenue and operating expenses.
Fiscal 2022 and 2021
If currency exchange rates had been constant in fiscal 2022 and 2021, our consolidated net revenue in “constant dollars” would have increased by approximately $10.8 million, or 0.8% of net revenue, which primarily impacted our NE and SE segments. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations on net revenue was not indicative of the impact on net income due to the offsetting foreign currency impact on operating costs and expenses. If currency exchange rates had been constant in fiscal 2022 and 2021, our consolidated operating expenses in “constant dollars” would have increased by approximately $4.8 million, or 0.4% of net revenue.
The Results of Operations are presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and not using constant dollars. Refer to