ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” as set forth in this report. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “Vincerx”, the “Company”, “we”, “us” and “our” refer to the business and operations of Vincerx prior to and following the closing of the Business Combination.
On December 23, 2020, LSAC consummated the Business Combination with Legacy Vincera Pharma pursuant to the Merger Agreement. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP. Under this method of accounting, LSAC was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Except as otherwise provided herein, our financial statement presentation includes (1) the results of Legacy Vincera Pharma as our accounting predecessor for periods prior to the completion of the Business Combination, and (2) the results of the Company for periods after the completion of the Business Combination.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on leveraging our extensive development and oncology expertise to advance new therapies intended to address unmet medical needs for the treatment of cancer. Our current pipeline is entirely derived from the Bayer License Agreement, pursuant to which we have been granted an exclusive, royalty-bearing, worldwide license under certain Bayer patents and know-how to
develop, use, manufacture, commercialize, sublicense and distribute (i) a clinical-stage and follow-on small
molecule drug program and (ii) a preclinical stage bioconjugation platform, which includes next-generation antibody-drug conjugates and small molecule drug conjugates. We intend to use these product candidates to treat various cancers in a patient-specific, targeted approach. We believe that these product candidates are differentiated from current programs targeting similar cancer biology, and, if approved, may improve clinical outcomes of patients with cancer.
Despite several decades of advances in targeted therapies, cancer continues to be the second leading cause of death in the United States population per the National Center for Health Statistics. Cancer is not a single disease but rather a constellation of maladies with each requiring a unique approach to vanquish it. Our vision is to address the unmet medical needs of patients with cancer with a diverse pipeline of targeted medicines. The small molecule drug program includes VIP152 (formerly known as BAY 1251152), which is a highly selective, clinical-stage PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitor. Our ADC platform includes VIP943 (formerly known as BAY-943) and
VIP924 (formerly known as BAY-924), which
are next-generation ADC compounds addressing known and novel oncology targets that we believe could deliver a greater safety and efficacy profile than current ADC compounds. The bioconjugation program also includes VIP236, an SMDC for solid tumors. In addition to our lead products, we acquired the rights to additional product candidates that are still in the preclinical stage (e.g., VIP217, an oral PTEFb/CDK9 inhibitor).
License Agreement with Bayer
Following the closing of the Business Combination, we paid Bayer a $5.0 million upfront license fee under the Bayer License Agreement. In addition, we will be responsible for significant development and commercial milestone payments to Bayer as well as ongoing royalties on commercial sales. See “Business-Bayer License Agreement” and the discussion below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Basis of Presentation
We currently conduct our business through one operating segment. As a pre-revenue company
with no commercial operations, our activities to date have been limited and were conducted primarily in the United States. Our historical results are reported under GAAP and in U.S. dollars.
Components of Results of Operations
We are a research and development stage company and our historical results may not be indicative of our future results for reasons that may be difficult to anticipate. Accordingly, the drivers of our future financial results, as well as the components of such results, may not be comparable to our historical results of operations.
Revenue
To date, we have not recognized any revenue from any sources, including from product sales, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. However, there can be no assurance as to when we will generate such revenue, if at all.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses consist or will consist of preclinical development of our product candidates and discovery efforts (including conducting preclinical studies), manufacturing development efforts, preparing for and conducting clinical trials and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. Costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses through asset acquisitions are charged to research and development expense if the licensed technology has not reached technological feasibility and has no alternative future use. Research and development expenses include or could include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation and other related costs for those employees involved in research and development efforts;
•
external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations, investigative sites and consultants to conduct our preclinical studies;
•
costs related to manufacturing material for preclinical studies and clinical trials, including fees paid to contract manufacturing organizations;
•
laboratory supplies and research materials;
•
costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of facilities, insurance and equipment.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We do not currently intend to track our research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis
as such costs will be deployed across multiple projects under development. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we develop our product candidates and manufacturing processes and conduct discovery and research activities for our preclinical and clinical programs. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and
clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. Our clinical development costs are expected to increase significantly as we commence, continue and expand our clinical trials. Our future expenses may vary significantly each period based on factors such as:
•
expenses incurred to conduct preclinical development and studies required to advance our product candidates into clinical trials;
•
per patient clinical trial costs, including based on the number of doses that patients receive;
•
the number of patients who enroll in each clinical trial;
•
the number of clinical trials required for approval;
•
the number of sites included in the clinical trials;
•
the countries in which the clinical trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the drop-out or
discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the clinical trials and follow-up;
•
the phase of development of the product candidate;
•
third party contractors failing to comply with regulatory requirements or meet their contractual obligations to us in a timely manner, or at all;
•
the cost of insurance, including product liability insurance, in connection with clinical trials;
•
regulators or institutional review boards requiring that we or our investigators suspend or terminate clinical development for various reasons, including noncompliance with regulatory requirements or a finding that the participants are being exposed to unacceptable health risks; and
•
the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist or will consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive and administrative functions, including stock-based compensation, travel expenses and recruiting expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for legal, accounting and tax-related services and
insurance costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our expanded operations and infrastructure, as well as the initiation, continuation and expansion of our preclinical development and studies and clinical trials for our product candidates. We also anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of payments for accounting, audit, legal and consulting services, as well as costs associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, director and officer liability insurance, investor and public relations activities and other expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Certain of our private warrants are classified as liabilities pursuant to ASC 815-40,
Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity. The change in fair value of warrant liabilities consists of the change in fair value of these private warrants.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands):
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to increases in stock-based compensation expense of approximately $12.9 million, new employee salaries and third party preclinical, clinical and manufacturing services in connection with our preclinical studies and clinical trials of approximately $12.8 million.
Research and Development-License Acquired
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $5.0 million of research and development cost related to the Bayer License Agreement.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $19.0 million for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to increases in legal (both general and patent protection and filings), insurance and accounting and other professional services in support of our operations as a public company of approximately $9.8 million, stock-based compensation expense of approximately $6.0 million and new employee salaries.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the decrease in the closing price of our common stock from $20.91 as of December 31, 2020 to $10.19 as of December 31, 2021.
Financing costs-derivative warrant liabilities
Financing costs of warrant liabilities reflect an allocation of total financing costs associated with the Business Combination, on the basis of the fair value of the warrant liabilities as compared to the total proceeds received by the Company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have not generated any revenue from any source, including the commercial sale of approved drug products, and we do not expect to generate revenue in the foreseeable future. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or fail to obtain their regulatory approval, our ability to generate future revenue will be adversely affected. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from our product candidates, and we do not expect to generate revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of, and commercialize, our product candidates.
Net working capital increased from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021 by $72.6 million (to $97.9 million from $25.3 million) primarily due to our September 2021 private placement of 3.5 million shares of common stock, at a price of $14.50 per share. We received net proceeds from this private placement of approximately $47.4 million, after deducting transaction costs of approximately $3.3 million. Our quarterly cash usage increased quickly subsequent to the completion of the Business Combination in December 2020 due to the initiation of our research and development and clinical trial activities. We anticipate that our cash needs will likely continue to increase relative to prior periods as we increase our research and development and clinical trial activities.
We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue preclinical development and studies of, initiate, continue and expand clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We will also be responsible for significant payments to Bayer under the Bayer License Agreement. We paid Bayer an upfront license fee of $5.0 million following the closing of the Business Combination and the receipt of the Initial Qualified Financing. In addition, we will also be responsible to Bayer for significant future contingent payments under the Bayer License Agreement upon the achievement of certain development and commercial sales milestones as well as ongoing royalties on net commercial sales. The size and timing of these milestone payments will vary greatly depending on factors such as the particular licensed product, whether it involves a PTEFb licensed product or a bioconjugation licensed product (and which bioconjugation program), the number of distinct disease indications, the number of different countries with respect to which the milestone is achieved and the level of net commercial sales, and it is therefore difficult to estimate the total payments that could become payable to Bayer and when those payments would be due. If we achieve all of the milestones for each of the countries and disease indications, we would be obligated to pay development and commercial milestone payments that range from $110.0 million to up to $318.0 million per licensed product, and upon successful commercialization of at least five licensed products, we could be required to pay aggregate milestone payments in excess of $1.0 billion. We will be required to pay certain of these milestone payments prior to the time at which we are able to generate sufficient revenue, if any, from commercial sales of any of our product candidates. In addition to milestone payments, we are also required to pay Bayer under the Bayer License Agreement ongoing royalties in the single digit to low double-digit percentage range on net commercial sales of licensed products.
We therefore anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $111.5 million in cash. We intend to use our existing cash to advance and expand our preclinical and clinical programs, including to fund additional monotherapy and combination clinical studies for our product candidates, to fund certain of the milestone payments under the Bayer License Agreement and our public company compliance costs, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes. Based on our current business plans and assumptions, we believe that our existing cash will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital requirements through 2023. Our estimate as to how long we expect our existing cash to be able to fund our operating expenses and capital requirements is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Changing circumstances, some of which may be beyond our control, could result in less cash available to us or cause us to consume capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need or choose to seek additional funds sooner than planned.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical drug products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the extent to which we develop, in-license or
acquire other product candidates and technologies in our product candidate pipeline;
•
the costs and timing of process development and manufacturing scale-up activities
associated with our product candidates and other programs as we advance them through preclinical and clinical development;
•
the number and development requirements of product candidates that we may pursue;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the timing and amount of our milestone payments to Bayer under the Bayer License Agreement;
•
our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development capabilities and establish and expand our commercial infrastructure and operations;
•
the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
royalty payments to Bayer under the Bayer License Agreement;
•
the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•
the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval; and
•
the costs of operating as a public company.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical development and studies and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes many years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of product candidates that we do not expect to be commercially available in the near term, if at all.
Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our
stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders, and the terms of these equity securities or this debt may restrict our ability to operate. Any future debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve covenants limiting and restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, entering into profit-sharing or other arrangements or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may be required to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
The COVID-19 pandemic
continues to evolve, and as a result, we are continuing to assess the effect that it could have on our business and operations. The extent to which COVID-19 may
impact our business and operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as duration of the pandemic, the emergence and severity of new variants of the virus, additional or modified government actions, new information concerning the severity and impact of the virus, the timing, availability, efficacy, adoption and distribution of vaccines or other preventative treatments, travel restrictions, quarantines, social distancing requirements and business closures, and other actions taken to contain the virus or address its impact. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business and operations, our clinical trials, our research programs, healthcare systems or the global economy. While the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of, COVID-19 may
be difficult to assess or predict, it could result in significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could
materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Leases
On December 23, 2020, the Company entered into a 5-year
term lease agreement which commenced on January 1, 2021. In April and May 2021, the lease was amended to include additional space. The annual rent payments are approximately $1.2 million.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of our cash flow data for the periods indicated (amounts in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows used in operating activities to date have been primarily comprised of payroll and professional service fees related to preclinical development and studies, clinical trials and general and administrative activities. As we continue to ramp up hiring and continue and expand clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates, we expect our cash used in operating activities to increase significantly before we start to generate any material cash flows from our business.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant components of our cash used in operating activities consist primarily of payroll costs and third-party professional services as we build our public company infrastructure, engage in preclinical development and studies and prepare for and conduct our clinical trials. Our net loss during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $39.3 million, which included approximately $23.3 million related to stock-based compensation and offset by approximately $23.4 million income related to the change in fair value of warrant liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was approximately $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of the payment to Bayer for the license fee and approximately $0.3 million for the purchase of furniture and fixtures for our facilities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $88.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $64.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists of $47.4 million in net proceeds received from the issuance of common stock in a private placement and $40.7 million in proceeds received from the exercise of our public warrants and certain of our private warrants. We received approximately $64.1 million in net proceeds from the Business Combination on December 23, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $0.3 million from the issuance of shares to certain founders and issuance of a note to a related party. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also made a $0.3 million payment of the note payable to this same related party, which repaid such note in full.
Off-Balance Sheet
Arrangements
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet
arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In the preparation of these consolidated financial statements, the management is required to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods.
We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or assumption is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to its audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have the critical accounting policies and estimates which are described below.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses may consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs and expenses, including stock-based compensation, in connection with preclinical development of our product candidates and discovery efforts (including conducting preclinical studies), manufacturing development efforts, preparing for and conducting clinical trials and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. In addition, research and development expenses may include payments to Bayer and other third parties for the development of our product candidates and the estimated fair value for the issuance of equity for the license
rights to products in development (prior to marketing approval). Expenses related to clinical trials may be primarily related to activities at contract research organizations that design, gain approval for and conduct clinical trials on our behalf. Such amounts are then recognized as an expense as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Contingent Milestone Payments
As described above, we will be responsible for significant payments to Bayer under the Bayer License Agreement. We will be responsible to Bayer for significant future contingent payments under the Bayer License Agreement upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial sales milestones. The size and timing of these milestone payments will vary greatly depending on numerous factors outlined above.
The transactions provided for under the Bayer License Agreement will be accounted for as an asset acquisition. Contingent consideration in an asset acquisition is generally recognized when it is probable that a liability has been incurred, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. None of the milestone payments are probable, and no liability had been incurred as of the date of this filing.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, or ASC 740, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse, and net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards. Valuation allowances are provided if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have recorded a full valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred income tax assets to zero. In the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize some or all of our deferred income tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred income tax asset valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of share-based awards granted to employees, non-employees
and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We reverse previously recognized costs for unvested options in the period that forfeitures occur. We determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
•
Expected Term
-We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data.
•
Expected Volatility
-Given the limited market trading history of our common stock, volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the biopharmaceutical industry.
•
Expected Dividend Yield
-We have never paid any cash dividends on common stock and do not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate
-The interest rates used are based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues
with an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Private Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
As of December 31, 2021, there were 3,295,000 private warrants to purchase common stock outstanding. Each unit consisted of one share of common stock and one public warrant exercisable for one-half
of one share of common stock.
Each public warrant entitled the registered holder to purchase one-half
(1/2) of a share of common stock at a price of $11.50 per whole share of common stock, subject to adjustment as discussed below, at any time commencing on the later of one year after the closing of the initial public offering of LSAC or the consummation of a business combination.
The private warrants are identical to the warrants underlying the units except that (i) each private warrant is exercisable for one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share and (ii) such private warrants will be exercisable for cash (even if a registration statement covering the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of such private warrants is not effective) or on a cashless basis, at the holder’s option (except with respect to 500,000 of the private warrants held by Rosedale Park, LLC and 500,000 of the private warrants held by LifeSci Holdings LLC, which were amended to remove the cashless exercise provision), and will not be redeemable by us (except with respect to 500,000 of the private warrants held by Rosedale Park, LLC and 500,000 of the private warrants held by LifeSci Holdings LLC, which were amended to include a redemption provision substantially identical to that of the public warrants; provided, however, that such redemption rights may not be exercised during the first 12 months following the closing of the Business Combination unless the last sales price of our common stock has been equal to or greater than $20.00 per share for any 20 trading days within a 30 trading day period ending on the third business day prior to the date on which notice of redemption is given), in each case so long as they are still held by the initial purchasers or their affiliates. The private warrants purchased by Rosedale Park, LLC, will expire on March 5, 2025, provided that once the private warrants are not beneficially owned by Chardan Capital Markets, LLC or any of its related persons anymore, the private warrants may not be exercised five years following the completion of our business combination.
We evaluated the public and private warrants under ASC 815-40,
Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, and concluded that certain of the private warrants do not meet the criteria to be classified in stockholders’ equity. Because post Business Combination, these private warrants could be transferred to a non-permitted
transferee and become public warrants (i.e., become subject to redemption and no longer have a cashless exercise feature), the settlement value of the private warrants is dependent, in part, on the holder of these private warrants at the time of settlement. Because the holder of an instrument is not an input into the pricing of a fixed-for-fixed
option on our common stock, these private warrants fail the indexation guidance in ASC 815-40.
This conclusion excludes the 500,000 private warrants held by LifeSci Holdings LLC, which had been amended in connection with the Business Combination to remove the cashless exercise provision and include a redemption provision, as described above.
Since these private warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815, we recorded these warrants as liabilities on the balance sheet at fair value, with subsequent changes in their respective fair values recognized in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss at each reporting date. The estimated fair value of the private warrants is determined with Level 3 inputs using Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo simulations. The private warrants were valued as of December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 23, 2020 (the Business Combination closing date). See Note 5.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth
companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable.
The Company is an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act and has elected to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards. The Company expects to remain an emerging growth company at least through the end of the 2021 fiscal year and expects to continue to take advantage of the benefits of the extended transition period, although it may decide to early adopt such new or revised accounting standards to the extent permitted by such standards. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the audited consolidated financial statements in this report for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our, to the extent it has made one, review of their potential impact on our financial condition and results of operations and cash flows.