ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes to those statements as included elsewhere in this prospect Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in Part I “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Fresh Vine Wine, Inc. is a premier producer of low carb, low calorie, premium wines in the United States. Founded in 2019, Fresh Vine Wine brings an innovative “better-for-you” solution to the wine market. We currently sell five varietals: Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot Noir, Chardonnay, and Rosé, and a limited Reserve Napa Cabernet Sauvignon,. All varietals are produced and bottled in Napa, California.
Our wines are distributed across the United States and Puerto Rico through wholesale, retail, and direct-to-consumer (DTC) channels. We are able to conduct wholesale distribution of our wines in all 50 states and Puerto Rico, and we are licensed to sell through DTC channels in 42 states. We hold active relationships with wholesale distributors in 32 states and are actively working with leading distributors, including Southern Glazer’s Wine & Spirits (SGWS), Johnson Brothers, and Republic National Distributing Company (RNDC), to expand our presence across the contiguous United States.
Our wines are priced strategically to appeal to mass markets and sell at a list price between $15 and $22 per bottle. Given the Fresh Vine Wine brand’s celebrity backing, “better-for-you” appeal, and overall product quality, we believe that it presents today’s consumers with a unique value proposition within this price category. Additionally, Fresh Vine Wine is one of very few products available at this price point that includes a named winemaker, Jamey Whetstone.
Our marketing activities focus primarily on consumers in the 21-to-34 year old demographic with moderate to affluent income and on those with a desire to pursue a healthy and active lifestyles, which is reinforced through our sports marketing partnerships across all four major United States professional sports leagues.
Our asset-light operating model allows us to utilize third-party assets, including land and production facilities. This approach helps us mitigate many of the risks associated with agribusiness, such as isolated droughts or fires. Because we source product inputs from multiple geographically dispersed vendors, we reduce reliance on any one vendor and benefit from broad availability/optionality of product inputs. This is particularly important as a Napa-based wine producer where droughts or fires can have an extremely detrimental impact to a company’s supply chain if not diversified.
Key Financial Metrics
We use net revenue, gross profit (loss), net income (loss) and EBITDA to evaluate the performance of Fresh Vine Wine. These metrics are useful in helping us to identify trends in our business, prepare financial forecasts and make capital allocation decisions, and assess the comparable health of our business relative to our direct competitors.
Net revenue
Net revenue represents all revenues less discounts, promotions, and excise taxes. Net revenue is driven through wine sales, merchandise sales, and wine club membership dues.
Gross profit (loss)
Gross profit (loss) is equal to our net revenue less cost of revenues (or cost of goods sold). Cost of revenues is comprised of all direct product costs such as juice, bottles, caps, corks, labels, and capsules. Additionally, we also categorize boxes and quality assurance testing within our cost of revenues.
EBITDA
EBITDA is a financial measure that we calculate as operating profits before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We use this metric to evaluate business performance in comparison to budgets, forecasts, and prior year financial results, providing a measure that management believes reflects the Company’s core operating performance and overall health.
We believe the presentation of EBITDA is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to assess the Company’s operating performance and makes it easier to compare our results with other similar companies, despite the potential impacts of varying financial or capital structures, depreciation benefits, or tax strategies. In addition, we believe this measure is among the measures used by investors, analysts and peers in our industry for purposes of evaluating and comparing our operating performance to other companies.
The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA to the most comparable financial measure reported under U.S. GAAP, net loss, for the periods presented:
Components of Results of Operations and Trends That May Impact Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Our net revenue consist primarily of wine sales to distributors and retailers, which together comprise our wholesale channel, and directly to individual consumers through our DTC channel. Net revenues generally represent wine sales and shipping, when applicable, and to a lesser extent branded merchandise and wine club memberships. For wine and merchandise sales, revenues are generally recognized at time of shipment. For Wine Club memberships, revenues are recognized quarterly at the time of fulfilment and only after the club member has made three consecutive (monthly) payments.
We refer to the volume of wine we sell in terms of cases. Each case contains 12 standard bottles, in which each bottle has a volume of 750 milliliters. Cases are sold through Wholesale/Retail or DTC channels.
The following factors and trends in our business have driven net revenue growth since January 1, 2021, and are expected to be key drivers of our net revenue for the foreseeable future:
Brand recognition: As we expand our marketing presence and drive visibility through traditional and modern marketing methods, we expect to build awareness and name recognition for Fresh Vine Wine in consumers’ minds. Brand awareness will be built substantially through social media channels, where we are able to immediately access more than 30 million potential consumers through our celebrities’ Instagram and Facebook platforms. Additionally, it will be built through complementary sports marketing partnerships across the National Football League, National Hockey League, National Basketball Association, and Major League Baseball.
Portfolio evolution: As a relatively new, high-growth brand, we expect and seek to learn from our consumers. We will continuously evolve and refine our products to meet our consumers’ specific needs and wants, adapting our offering to maximize value for our consumers and stakeholders. Our growth mindset, coupled with our differentiated production and distribution platform, will enable us to accelerate growth and deliver on our value proposition over time.
One way in which we will evolve our portfolio is through product extensions. Fresh Vine Wine currently has four varietals (Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot Noir, Chardonnay, and Rosé) within its product portfolio, and we can use the same knowledge and supplier networks to launch new varietals with much greater efficiency than we were previously able to achieve.
Distribution expansion and acceleration: Purchasing by distributors and loyal accounts that continue to feature our wines are key drivers of net revenue. We plan to continue broadening our distributor network, adding new geographies, and increasing each distributor’s average order size as we accelerate growth.
Opportunistic evaluation of strategic acquisitions: With strong internal knowledge and a depth of experience in private equity and the broader financial services industry, we intend to maintain a strategic and opportunistic approach to evaluating acquisitions and growing through acquisition. We will also remain open to other inorganic growth activities, including joint ventures and strategic alliances, as we seek to accelerate this business to market. While we have not identified any prospective targets to date, we consider this a core competency of our leadership team and believe that this presents us with a viable growth alternative as we move forward.
Seasonality: In line with industry norms, we anticipate our net revenue to peak during the quarter spanning from October through December due to increased consumer demand around the major holidays. This is particularly true in our DTC revenue channel, where marketing programs will often be aligned with the holiday season and product promotions will be prevalent.
Revenue Channels
Our sales and distribution platform is built upon a highly developed network of distributor accounts. Within this network, we have signed agreements in place with several of the nation’s largest distributors including Southern Glazer’s Wine & Spirits and RNDC, among others. While we are actively working with these distributors in certain markets, they operate across the United States and we intend to grow our geographic/market presence through these relationships. The development of these relationships and impacts to our related product mix will impact our financial results as our channel mix shifts.
● Wholesale channel: Consistent with sales practices in the wine industry, sales to retailers and distributors occur below SRP (Suggested Retail Price). We work closely with distributors to increase wine volumes and the number of products sold by their retail accounts in their respective territories.
● DTC channel: Wines sold through our DTC channels are generally sold at SRP, although we do periodically offer various promotions. Our DTC channel continues to grow as a result of a number of factors, including expanded e-commerce sites and social media capabilities.
● Related party services: We have entered into service agreements with related parties in the wine industry to provide representation and distribution services.
Wholesale channel sales made on credit terms generally require payment within 30 days of delivery; however our credit terms with Southern Glazer’s Wine & Spirits requires payment within 60 days of delivery. During periods in which our net revenue channel mix reflects a greater concentration of wholesale sales, we typically experience an increase in accounts receivable for the period to reflect the change in sales mix; payment collections in the subsequent period generally reduce our accounts receivable balance and have a positive impact on cash flows.
While we seek to increase revenue across all channels, we expect the majority of our future revenue to be driven through the wholesale channel. We intend to maintain and expand relationships with existing distributors and form relationships with new distributors as we work to grow the company. With multiple varietals within the Fresh Vine Wine portfolio, we consider ourselves to be a ‘one-stop shop’ for better-for-you wines. We continue to innovate with new products at competitive price points and strive to enhance the experience as we increase revenue with new and existing consumers.
In the DTC channel, our comprehensive approach to consumer engagement in both online and traditional forums is supported by an integrated e-commerce platform. Our marketing efforts target consumers who have an interest in healthy and active lifestyles. We make every attempt to motivate consumers toward a simple and easy purchasing decision using a combination of defined marketing programs and a modernized technology stack.
Increasing customer engagement is a key driver of our business and results of operations. We continue to invest in our DTC channel and in performance marketing to drive customer engagement. In addition to developing new product offerings and cross-selling wines in our product portfolio, we focus on increasing customer conversion and retention. As we continue to invest in our DTC channel, we expect to increase customer engagement and subsequently deliver greater satisfaction. We also plan to expand via other wine e-commerce sites such as Wine.com and Go-Puff.
Net Revenue Percentage by Channel
We calculate net revenue percentage by channel as net revenue made through our wholesale channel to distributors, through our wholesale channel directly to retail accounts, and through our DTC channel, respectively, as a percentage of our total net revenue. We monitor net revenue percentage across revenue channels to understand the effectiveness of our distribution model and to ensure we are employing resources effectively as we engage customers.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues (or cost of goods sold). Cost of revenues is comprised of all direct product costs such as juice, bottles, caps, corks, labels, and capsules. Additionally, we also categorize boxes and quality assurance testing within our cost of revenues. We expect that our cost of revenues will increase as our net revenue increases. As the volume of our product inputs increase, we intend to work to renegotiate vendor contracts with key suppliers to reduce overall product input costs as a percentage of net revenue.
Additionally, the Company includes shipping fees in all DTC revenues. These fees are paid by end consumers at time of order and subsequently itemized within the cost of each individual sale.
As a commodity product, the cost of wine fluctuates due to annual harvest yields and the availability of juice. This macroeconomic consideration is not unique to Fresh Vine Wine, although we are conscious of its potential impact to our product cost structure.
Gross Profit (Loss)
Gross profit (loss) is equal to our net revenue less cost of revenues. As we grow our business in the future, we expect gross profit to increase as our revenue grows and as we optimize our cost of revenues.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist of selling expenses, marketing expenses, and general and administrative expenses. Selling expenses consist primarily of direct selling expenses in our wholesale and DTC channels, including payroll and related costs, product samples, processing fees, and other outside service fees or consulting fees. Marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising costs to promote brand awareness, contract fees incurred as a result of significant sports marketing agreements, customer retention costs, payroll, and related costs. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs.
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity-based compensation consists of the accounting expense resulting from our issuance of equity or equity-based grants issued in exchange for employee or non-employee services. We measure equity-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize the compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We recognize any forfeitures as they occur.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Fiscal Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue, Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
We had net revenue in fiscal 2020 of $217,074. Net revenue in fiscal 2021 was $1,700,207. The increase in net revenue was attributable to our increasing presence in the wholesale market, the launch of our wine club, and the introduction of service revenues. We generated net revenue of $772,711 during fiscal 2021 from our wholesale distribution channel, $774,421 of net revenue from our direct-to-consumer sales channel, and $153,075 from our services channel. This revenue distribution represents 45%, 46% and 9% , respectively, of our net revenue during the period.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $3,463,415, or 260%, to approximately $4.8 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.3 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expense increases were largely driven by increases in selling expenses, from $223,938 for the period ended December 31, 2020 to $364,204 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, marketing expenses, from approximately $161,387 for the period ended December 31, 2020 to $1,612,648 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, and general and administrative expenses, from approximately $944,704 for the period ended December 31, 2020 to $2,816,593 for the comparable fiscal 2021 period. The year-over-year increase in marketing expenses primarily resulted from our sponsorship agreements in the sports and entertainment industry. The year-over-year increase in general and administrative expenses is the result of increased salaries and wages as operational activity increased from 2020 to 2021 relating to the sales activity beginning in 2021. We typically expect selling expenses to follow our sales volume growth as the activities are intended to generate revenues.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities was ($5,789,943) and ($247,042) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Cash used in operating activities increased in the 2021 period primarily because of increased staffing as operations increased and advertising expenses due to increased sponsorships and marketing agreements during 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $250 and $4,313 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities in the 2021 and 2020 periods was from the purchase of intangible assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $21,849,648 and $250,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The cash provided in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to proceeds from the initial public offering.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash needs are for working capital purposes, such as producing or purchasing inventory and funding operating and capital expenditures. Prior to our December 2021 initial public offering, we funded our operational cash requirements primarily with funds advanced from Damian Novak, our Executive Chairman and co-founder, and entities affiliated with Mr. Novak. We also received proceeds from the sale of Class W Units representing membership interests in the Company, which converted into common stock upon the LLC Conversion, and we received short term loans in the form of promissory notes from two of our equity holders, which supplement the loans from Mr. Novak and his affiliates as sources of operating capital, along with limited cash flows from our operating activities. See “Financing Transactions” below.
We used a portion of the net proceeds we received from our initial public offering to repay the net outstanding related party payables that we owed to Mr. Novak and his affiliates and the promissory notes held by our equity holders. We are currently funding our operational cash requirements with net proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our initial public offering, supplemented by cash flows from our operating activities.
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception in May 2019, including net losses of approximately $9.97 million and $1.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $617,000 and a total stockholders’ equity of approximately $17.1 million. We expect to incur losses in future periods as we continue to increase our expenses in order to position us to grow our business and incur expenses associated with being a public company.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $16.1 million in cash, accounts receivable (including receivables with recourse) of approximately $508,000, inventory of approximately $159,000, prepaid expenses of approximately $2.1 million of which $1.2 million is current prepaid expenses. At December 31, 2021, current assets amounted to approximately $18.3 million and current liabilities were approximately $2.2 million resulting in a working capital surplus (with working capital defined as current assets minus current liabilities) of approximately $16.1 million.
We believe that our capital resources are sufficient to support our operations for at least the next twelve months. Our ability to continue as a going concern in the future will be determined by our ability to generate sufficient cash flow to sustain our operations and/or raise additional capital in the form of debt or equity financing. We currently do not have any committed sources of additional capital. Our forecast of cash resources is forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties, and the actual amount of our expenses could vary materially as a result of a number of factors. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and our revenue could prove to be less and our expenses higher than we currently anticipate. Management does not know whether additional financing will be on terms favorable or acceptable to us when needed, if at all. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow to fund our operations and adequate additional funds are not available when required, management may need to curtail its sales and marketing efforts, which would adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations.
Financing Transactions
We have funded our operations through a combination of debt and equity financings.
Since the Company’s inception in May 2019, Damian Novak, our Executive Chairman and co-founder, and affiliates of Mr. Novak have incurred expenses on our behalf or advanced funds to us from time to time as needed to satisfy our working capital requirements and expenses. The reimbursable expenses and advances were reflected as related party payables on our balance sheet and were not evidenced promissory notes or other written documentation. On December 17, 2021, we used a portion of the proceeds from our initial public offering to repay $2.0 million, representing the outstanding amount of these related party payables, net of related party receivables that Mr. Novak and his affiliates owed to us at that time.
In November 2020, we sold 50,000 Class W Units representing membership interests in the Company to an investor at a price of $5.00 per unit, for gross proceeds of $250,000. Such Class W Units converted into an aggregate of 309,672 shares of our common stock upon the LLC Conversion.
In January 2021, we sold 40,000 Class W Units representing membership interests in the Company to an investor at a price of $5.00 per unit, for gross proceeds of $200,000. Such Class W Units converted into an aggregate of 247,738 shares of our common stock upon the LLC Conversion.
During the period from April 2021 through September 2021, we sold an aggregate of 60,388 Class W Units representing membership interests in the Company to investors at a price of $34.94 per unit, for gross proceeds of $2,109,945. Such Class W Units converted into an aggregate of 374,017 shares of our common stock upon the LLC Conversion.
In September 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with an unrelated party to pledge certain eligible accounts receivable for a cash advance at a percentage of the outstanding amount, with the remaining balance due upon collection from the customer. The agreement has an initial term of one year which will automatically renew for successive one year terms unless the Company provides a notice of termination at least 60 days prior to the termination date. The receivables are pledged with full recourse, which means we bear the risk of non-payment. The amounts advanced to the Company are classified as a secured loan on our balance sheet and any fees computed on the outstanding amounts are treated as interest expense on our statement of operations. The Company had pledged approximately $146,000 of customer accounts which is recorded as receivables with recourse, and has secured borrowings of approximately $171,000 as of December 31, 2021.
In September 2021, we issued a $216,000 promissory note to a stockholder of the Company that became due and payable upon the December 17, 2021 closing of our initial public offering. In October 2021, we issued another $216,000 promissory note to a different stockholder of the Company that became due and payable upon the December 17, 2021 closing of our initial public offering. Collectively, the stockholders holding these notes owned approximately 3.63% of our outstanding shares immediately prior to our initial public offering.
In December 2021, we completed an initial public of our common stock, in which we sold 2,200,000 shares. The shares began trading on the NYSE American on December 14, 2021. The shares were sold at an initial public offering price of $10.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $19.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management uses estimates and assumptions in preparing these financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Those estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported revenues and expenses. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
While all significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies) to our audited financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are critical to our business operations and understanding of our financial results.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable consists of amounts owed to us for sales of our products on credit and are reported at net realizable value. Credit terms are extended to customers in the normal course of business. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial conditions. We estimate allowances for future returns and doubtful accounts based upon historical experience and its evaluation of the current status of receivables. Accounts considered uncollectible are written off against the allowance. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 there was no allowance for doubtful accounts.
Allowance for Inventory Obsolescence
Inventories primarily include bottled wine which is carried at the lower of cost (calculated using the first-in-first-out (“FIFO”) method) or net realizable value. We reduce the carrying value of inventories that are obsolete or for which market conditions indicate cost will not be recovered to estimated net realizable value. Our estimate of net realizable value is based on analysis and assumptions including, but not limited to, historical experience, future demand and market requirements. Reductions to the carrying value of inventories are recorded in cost of revenues. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 there was no allowance for inventory obsolescence.
Useful Lives of Intangible Assets
We assess intangible assets with finite useful lives which are amortized on a systematic basis over their estimated useful lives. The amortization period and amortization method for an intangible asset with a finite useful life reflects the pattern in which the assets’ future economic benefits are expected to be consumed. Where the pattern cannot be reliably determined, the straight-line method is used. The amortization period and method are reviewed at least at each financial year-end. Amortization of intangible assets with fixed determinable lives is recorded on a straight-line basis over 10 years for trademarks.
Equity-Based Compensation
We measure equity-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize the compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We recognize any forfeitures as they occur.
We measure equity-based compensation when the service date precedes the grant date based on the fair value of the award as an accrual of equity-based compensation and adjusts the cost to fair value at each reporting date prior to the grant date. In the period in which the grant occurs, the cumulative compensation cost is adjusted to the fair value at the date of the grant.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not engaged in any off-balance sheet activities as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Accounting Standards and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies) to our audited financial statement for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, a company constituting an “emerging growth company” is, among other things, entitled to rely upon certain reduced reporting requirements and is eligible to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We are an emerging growth company and have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. Our financial statements may, therefore, not be comparable to those of other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.